
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01014/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 22 December 2015                  |On 24 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                    Ms ZM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Daykin, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Sols.
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1     This is an appeal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      dated  25  June  2015  (Judge  of  the  first-tier  Tribunal  Morron),
      dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of   the
      Respondent of 5 January 2015 refusing to very her leave to remain, and
      refusing her application for asylum.

2     The Appellant is national of Iran aged  52  at  the  date  of  hearing
      before the judge. The Appellant has visited the United  Kingdom  on  a
      number of occasions, and has an adult son present in the UK with leave
      to remain. The Appellant also has a daughter, married  and  living  in
      Iran. The Appellant entered the UK on 19 May 2014, and her husband was
      also then present in the United Kingdom. He assaulted her on  20  June
      2014. The Appellant travelled with her  daughter  to  Turkey  for  two
      weeks, and returned to the UK on 14 July 2014,  that  being  her  last
      entry to the UK. Her husband was convicted in the United  Kingdom  for
      assault by beating and was fined. He returned to Iran.

3     On or around 15 October 2014,  the  Appellant  claimed  asylum.  In  a
      witness statement dated  14  October  2014  (to  which  the  Appellant
      subsequently made minor amendments), and in her  SEF  interview  dated
      18th of December  2014,  the  Appellant  set  out  her  account  of  a
      prolonged history of violence from her husband, starting from the very
      outset of her  marriage.  This  account  included  many  incidents  of
      beatings, swearing, humiliation, and rape. She had made complaints  to
      the police on a number of occasions, but had been repeatedly dissuaded
      by them from making any formal complaint against her husband. Violence
      against both of the children was also described.  The  Appellant  also
      asserted that her cousin in Iran had informed  her  that  her  husband
      had, since returning to  Iran,  made  threats  that  as  soon  as  the
      Appellant returned to Iran, he would destroy  her  passport  and  kill
      her. The husband also threatened in a formal legal document  (sent  to
      the Appellant by a friend of her husband's - Annex K1) that unless the
      Appellant returned to her marital home, he would  issue  formal  civil
      proceedings against the Appellant for abandoning the marital home. The
      Appellant's  daughter  had  heard  from  someone  in  Iran  that   the
      Appellant's husband had arranged for the Appellant to be  banned  from
      leaving Iran if she returned, although the  daughter  had  also  heard
      information to suggest that there was no such ban.

4     It was also part of the Appellant's account  that  in  2002,  she  had
      applied  to  the  family  courts  in  Iran,  seeking  separation   and
      'mehriyeh' (alimony). The Appellant said that in  the  course  of  her
      application to that court, the judge dealing with the matter suggested
      that she could apply for a divorce  from  her  husband.  She  did  not
      ultimately persist with her application for  'mehriyeh',  as  she  was
      encouraged by friends to return to the marital home.

5     In her decision  of  5  January  2015,  the  Respondent  accepted  the
      Appellant's identity and nationality (para 14), that she  formed  part
      of the particular social group of 'women in Iran' (para 12), and  that
      the Appellant had been a victim of domestic violence  by  her  husband
      (para 19). It was also accepted that according to the law on Iran,  it
      is possible for a husband to prevent his wife from leaving Iran  (para
      34).  However, the Respondent held that the  Appellant  had  not  been
      prevented from applying for a divorce from her husband whilst in  Iran
      (para 30), and it was not accepted that her husband had threatened  to
      issue civil proceedings against the Appellant requiring her return  to
      the marital home (paras 35-36).

6     The Respondent held that there was a  sufficiency  of  protection  for
      the Appellant against any further harm from her husband, and that  she
      could internally relocate within Iran (paras 44-62).

7     At the hearing before the judge on 19 May  2015,  the  Appellant  gave
      evidence. Also before judge was an expert  report  from  Anna  Enayat,
      independent consultant on a Iranian affairs, dated 11 October 2014.

8     The judge made the following findings of fact:

           "23. I accept the Appellant's evidence regarding  her  marriage.
           There is clear documentary evidence of the  assault  which  took
           place in London in June 2014 and her evidence regarding  earlier
           incidents - indeed throughout 33 years of marriage - is detailed
           and supported by her adult children.
           ...
           25. I, therefore, find that the Appellant  has  been  physically
           and emotionally abused by her  husband  for  the  whole  of  her
           marriage, and she has more than once sought to  live  separately
           from him, but that she has never sought a divorce. I also accept
           that her understanding of the law in Iran is that she  would  be
           unable to obtain one. "

9     The judge made reference to the report of Ms Enayat, finding  that  it
      contained 'much useful material' and stated that there  was  consensus
      amongst commentators, including UNHCR, that the Iranian  state  offers
      little or no effective protection against a violent husband, except in
      extremis when the situation is proving to  be  life-threatening  (para
      26).

10    The  judge  held  that  the  expert  report  and  country  information
      supported the Appellant's claim that Iran  continues  to  discriminate
      against women (para 27), and the judge sets out certain other passages
      of  country  information  at  paragraphs  28  to  31,  including   the
      following:

           "31. The home of  his  country  of  origin  information  service
           (2013) also quotes a New York Times report of  6  December  2010
           suggesting that the number of  divorces  in  Iran  has  troubled
           between 2000 and 2010 and now equated to one in seven marriages.
           In Teheran it is approximately one in four. It goes on to state:
                 "While the changing divorce rates is remarkable, even  more
                 surprising is the major  force  behind  it:  the  increased
                 willingness of Iranian  women  to  manipulate  the  Iranian
                 legal system to escape unwanted marriages".

11    The judge's reasoning for dismissing the appeal  is  contained  within
      the section in the determination 'Determination  on  Refugee  Status'.
      The Appellant challenges the judge's analysis in this section, and  so
      I set it out in full here:

           '32. Taking all the  objective  evidence  submitted  to  me  and
           looking at it in the round, I find the ability of men and  women
           to obtain divorce in Iran is unequal and  discriminates  against
           women. Whilst a woman may seek a divorce on the grounds that her
           husband is guilty of physical abuse against her, this has to  be
           proved; and under Iranian law if the allegations are  denied  by
           the husband, the wife will require male witnesses to corroborate
           her allegations (even of serious sexual assaults or rape) as the
           evidence of a woman is said to be equal to half that of a man.

           33. The Appellant would not, therefore, find it swift or easy to
           obtain a divorce. Both the court and her own family, as well  as
           her husband, would put pressure on her to become reconciled  and
           returned to live together.

           34. Notwithstanding that finding,  I  note  that  the  Appellant
           herself had intended in 2002 to seek mehriyeh (which  the  judge
           had previously described at para 14 as  alimony)   in  order  to
           live apart from her husband, taking  her  12-year-old  son  with
           her.  She  now  does  not  require  the  mehriyeh  as  she   has
           independent means. She also no longer  has  dependent  children.
           She could, therefore, seek to live separately from her  husband.
           When she returned on earlier occasions after leaving him it  was
           either because he made promises or because members of her family
           persuaded her to return. She need not do so again.

           35. I also give some weight to the Appellant's own evidence that
           she has never sought to obtain a divorce but that the  judge  in
           2002 had suggested that  she  should.  The  country  information
           indicates that the ability of a woman to obtain  a  divorce  was
           almost certainly more restricted in 2002 than it is now; if  the
           judge himself suggested it this suggests  that  that  court,  at
           least, considered that she had the grounds to do so.

           36. I  take  into  account  the  Appellant's  husband's  violent
           behaviour, and his continued threats to harm her if she  returns
           and to seek to prevent her from leaving around if she does so.

           37. I also bear in mind  that  the  decisions  required  of  the
           Tribunal in this case call for the  most  anxious  scrutiny  and
           whilst the burden of proof is upon the Appellant the standard of
           proof is what is sometimes known as  a  lower  standard,  namely
           that there is a reasonable likelihood of persecution if she were
           to return.

           38. The Respondent accepts that the  Appellant,  as  an  Iranian
           woman, is a member of a particular social group. She is  also  a
           victim of domestic abuse by her husband.

           39. In the Appellant's skeleton argument it is acknowledged that
           the Appellant's marriage  contract  'does  contain  a  right  to
           divorce under specified conditions' as well as an entitlement to
           claim mehriyeh. I find that notwithstanding  the  discriminatory
           legal system in Iran and the undoubted difficulty any  woman  in
           Iran faces in seeking a divorce against  her  husband's  wishes,
           the presence of appropriate wording  in  the  marriage  contract
           together with the evidence of physical violence which she  would
           be able to produce  (including  course  documentation  from  the
           incident in the UK in 2014) means that the Appellant would, as a
           judge suggested in 2002, have the grounds to seek a divorce.  In
           the meantime, I also find that she could  live  separately  from
           her husband as she would no longer be dependent on  mehriyeh  to
           maintain herself as had been her intention in 2002. She  changed
           her mind at that time and stayed because  she  still  had  young
           children. It was principally her concern about what might happen
           in relation to those children which made her decide to stay with
           her husband. That would no longer  be  an  issue.  I  take  full
           account of all the objective evidence as well  is  a  subjective
           evidence of the part herself but I do not find that there  is  a
           reasonable risk of persecution in this  case.  Whilst  I  accept
           that the Appellant has been in an abusive marriage over 30 years
           she has not, on her own evidence, actually attempted to obtain a
           divorce despite a judge suggesting that you  do  so.  Similarly,
           while I accept that the Appellant's husband would not agree to a
           separation, the  Appellant  could  apply  to  the  court  for  a
           separation and on the facts of this case I considered  that  she
           would be like to obtain consent."

12    The judge thereafter dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

13    Grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal were made initially on 9  July
      2015, resulting in a refusal of permission  dated  22  July  2015.  In
      slightly varied (but sometwhat repetitive) grounds of appeal dated  13
      August 2015 the Appellant argued, in summary, that the judge erred  in
      law:

      (i) in failing to determine adequately or at all whether there  was  a
      risk of serious harm to the Appellant, and to make a relevant  factual
      findings in relation to such risk; there were no adequate findings  at
      paragraph 36 or 39 as to whether or not the Appellant's husband  would
      seek to harm her in the future,  noting the judge's acceptance that he
      had done so in the past, and had made threats of further harm  to  her
      in the future;

      (ii)  in failing to make adequate findings as to  whether  there  were
      effective mechanisms for the Appellant  to  effect  a  separation  and
      divorce from her husband, in the particular circumstances of her case;
      there was no adequate analysis of whether she would be able to  effect
      such divorce, as opposed to whether she had grounds  for  divorce;  it
      was argued that particular passages within the  expert  report  of  Ms
      Enayat had not been taken into account, and findings were inadequately
      reasoned;

      (iii) in failing to make adequate findings as to the  availability  of
      effective protection for the Appellant in Iran.

14    Permission to appeal  on  those  grounds  was  granted  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal on 1 October 2015.

15    Before me, Ms Dakin relied on the Appellant's grounds of  appeal,  and
      Mr Tarlow relied upon  the  Respondent's  rule  24  response  dated  5
      November 2015, which argues in short form that  the  findings  of  the
      judge were open to him on the evidence and the judge directed  himself
      properly in law.

      Discussion

16    I find that the judge errs in  law  as  argued  by  the  Appellant  by
      failing  to  make  sufficiently  clear  findings  as  to  whether  the
      Appellant is at risk of further serious harm in Iran.  Notwithstanding
      the judge's overall assessment at [39] that the Appellant had 'grounds
      to seek' a divorce in Iran (to which conclusion I turn, below),  there
      needed to be an assessment of what risk of harm  existed  of  for  the
      Appellant, if any, on return to Iran. Whilst the  Judge  indicates  at
      [36] that he took into account the husband's  violent  behaviour,  his
      continued threats of harm to her  if  she  returns,  and  to  seek  to
      prevent her from leaving, there is no conclusion in  that  passage  or
      elsewhere as to what level  of  harm  existed  for  the  Appellant  on
      return, or whether there would be effective  protection  available  to
      her  in relation to such harm.

17    Similarly, I find  that  there  is  no  adequate  assessment  of  what
      protection there may be for the Appellant against such risk. There  is
      no analysis in the decision of that issue.

18    Further, in  relation  to  the  judge's  findings  at  [39]  that  the
      Appellant had grounds to seek a divorce, and would  likely  to  obtain
      consent (from the courts) to separate from her husband,  I  find  that
      that the judge errs in failing to make a sufficiently clear finding as
      to how such a ground to seek a divorce would  be  established  by  the
      Appellant, or to consider, in the light of country information  before
      him, whether there was a realistic prospect of the Appellant  actually
      being able to secure a divorce or separation. There has been, I  find,
      a failure to have adequate  regard  to  the  country  expert  evidence
      before him.
19    The judge appears at [34], [35] and [39] to  treat  the  following  as
      particularly relevant in support of his finding that the Appellant had
      grounds to seek divorce:

      (i) her children were no longer minors,  and  the  Appellant  now  had
      independent means; there would be  less  pressure  to  return  to  the
      family home [34] and [39];

      (ii) women's ability to obtain a divorce  was  almost  certainly  more
      restricted in 2002 than it is now [35];

      (iii) the appellant's  marriage  contract  does  contain  a  right  to
      divorce under specified conditions; that, together  with  evidence  of
      physical violence meant that the apparent would have grounds to seek a
      divorce.

20    I find that these apparent findings fail to take adequate  account  of
      expert  country  evidence  before  the  Judge.  Although   the   judge
      purpoprted to find the  material  'useful',  I  find  that  inadequate
      regard has been given to it. The Appellant's skeleton argument  before
      the judge made reference to a number of passages  within  Ms  Enayat's
      expert report. Those passages, and others  that  were  brought  to  my
      attention, include the following, which I find useful to  set  out  in
      extenso. Some passages are Ms Enayat's view; others  are  of  evidence
      which she quotes. None  of  it  is  controverted  by  the  Respondent.
      (Emphasis added.)

           "...there is  a  consensus  among  commentators,  including  the
           UNHCR, that the Iranian state  offers  little  or  no  effective
           protection  against  a  violent  husband  or  father  except  in
           extremis when the situation is proving to  be  life-threatening"
           [5]

           "A woman also faces serious obstacles to proving  that  she  has
           been subjected to violence. Where a woman has been subjected  to
           violence, she can only prove her  claim  by  presenting  several
           male witnesses. For example,  while  rape  is  illegal,  a  rape
           victim must present four male eyewitnesses or three male and two
           female witnesses in order to prove the crime.  Given  that  most
           violence against women takes place in the private sphere, it  is
           extremely difficult for women to provide  such  eyewitnesses  to
           acts of violence." [5].

           "... laws continue to explicitly allow for non-consensual sexual
           relations in marriage. There are insufficient  safe  houses  for
           women in need of refuge. A woman wishing  to  leave  an  abusive
           situation must also first prove that there is a significant risk
           of bodily harm or a threat to her life and safety  in  order  to
           reside apart from her husband. Likewise, under the  civil  code,
           women seeking to obtain  a  divorce  as  a  result  of  domestic
           violence must first prove that the abuse was intolerable (osr va-
           haraj)."[6]

            "By the Iranian Civil Code  (article  1114),  except  by  mutual
           agreement or a court order, women  are  obliged  to  live  in  a
           dwelling of their husbands choice. If a woman leaves the marital
           home to stay, say with her parents, her husband can apply to the
           court order her return.

           Again the decision is at the discretion of the  judge  who  must
           decide whether, given the social context, her physical condition
           etc the woman can,  or  cannot,  be  expected  to  tolerate  the
           violence she claims.

           There is little material and the public domain of  the  practice
           of the courts on  the  subject  of  separation  what  exists  is
           indicative of the difficulties.


           One of the judges interviewed by Tizro told her:

                 'According to article 15, if a woman claims that  her  life
                 is in danger, or experiences financial  hardship,  she  may
                 obtain a separation.  However,  Judge  Y  stated  that,  in
                 practice, a woman's evidence does  not  provide  sufficient
                 grounds for enforcement of the rulings." [7]

           "Tizro goes on to describe how other judges she spoke to dismiss
           beatings by the husband as something distinct from real violence
           as these were the chastisement of a disobedient  wife  permitted
           by the Koran and the Koran's injunction is that they  should  be
           restrained (i.e. avoid injuring or bruising her body).

           ..

           A sympathetic female consultant of the family  Court  in  Gilan,
           however, explained that unless  there  was  a  certification  of
           visible injury there was little that could be done in law:


                 'Normally they [women who apply for  separation]  are  sent
                 home to submit to their husbands because they  can't  prove
                 their cases. If we have strong evidence that the husband is
                 is addicted  to  drugs,  we  can  do  something  about  it.
                 Otherwise, getting beaten to a certain level is a  cultural
                 norm, and a woman is expected to tolerate it" [8].

           "Divorce
           ...
           Reports that the divorce rate  in  the  country  has,  from  the
           second half of the 2000s been high and rising might mislead  the
           court into believing that divorce is always easy, and has become
           culturally  acceptable.  But  in  fact  the  specific  situation
           described by the client's solicitor it is not.

           A brief review of the current framework of  divorce  might  help
           untangle the apparent paradox:


                 -men retain the right to divorce their wives without citing
                 specific  grounds.  However,  this  right   is   restrained
                 somewhat by the requirement, by a law introduced  in  1992,
                 that they apply to the courts for a certificate of  - adam-
                 e emkan-e  sazesh/inability  to  cohabit,  and  by  various
                 financial obligations due if the woman is not at  fault  in
                 the breakdown of the marriage.

                 - women have the right to apply to the courts  for  divorce
                 on the number of specified grounds set  out  in  the  model
                 marriage contract issued by the government in 1982 and  now
                 partially  incorporated  into  civil  war.  These   grounds
                 include beatings or other forms of violent behaviour  which
                 is habitual/sustained (motaref) and which  is  unacceptable
                 in social custom and intolerable to the woman  taking  into
                 consideration her personal circumstances (article  1130  of
                 the civil code as amended in 2002)

                 - if a man divorces his wife the woman  has  the  right  to
                 half the property accumulated since marriage  (as  long  as
                 the stipulations of the 1982  contract  have  been  signed)
                 and, by the law  of  1992,  to  compensation  for  services
                 rendered during the marriage over and above those laid down
                 in the sharia, as long as the divorce is not'by  reason  of
                 her failure  to  carry  out  her  marital  duties'  or  her
                 'immoral behaviour'.

                 - if a woman initiates a divorce on the  basis  of  article
                 1130 of the civil code, or on one of the  grounds  included
                 in the 1982 model marriage contract, she forgoes all rights
                 to a share in the property accumulated by the husband since
                 the marriage,  or  to  compensation  under  the  1992  law.
                 Theoretically she retains a right to the  mehriah,  but  in
                 practice, according to a number of sources  (see  3.2)  she
                 may be forced to forego all or any proportion of that to.

           The provisions for financial compensation, intended  to  prevent
           men from embarking on a divorce impulsively and to  protect  the
           innocent wife, have in practice backfired as  the  president  of
           the Tehran family courts explained to the  newspaper  Hamshahri,
           10 October 2003:

                 80 per cent of divorces are on the woman's  petition.  This
                 is not because women are running away from their  marriages
                 but because divorce for a  man  carries  a  huge  financial
                 burden. In such circumstances men usually put  pressure  on
                 their wife so that she will apply to the court and give  up
                 all her financial rights in order to free herself of a life
                 full of beatings, rows and other forms of stress...'

           -the institution of khul' allows a woman to initiate divorce and
           on specified grounds, if her husband  consents,  in  return  for
           forgoing or repaying the mehriah which can be a substantial sum.
           There are no rights to a share  in  marital  property  or  other
           forms of compensation in a khul' divorce.

           Khul' is the most common form of divorce in Iran accounting  for
           roughly two-thirds of divorces in 2003/2004 (the last  year  for
           which statistics are available - see 3.1.2 for detail).

           Divorce in Iran is a relatively simple matter  if  initiated  by
           the husband, or if the husband consents to a khul' divorce.  The
           difficulties described in part 3.2 of this report  (and  by  the
           client), arise when the husband does not consent and  the  woman
           applies to the court for  a  divorce  on  the  specific  grounds
           allowed in 1130, or by the terms of her marriage  contract.  The
           violence of the husband, addiction  or  desertion  of  the  most
           common.

           Part 3.2 provides detail of  the  procedure  a  woman  must,  in
           practice, follow in an application for divorce on the grounds of
           her husband's violence. According to lawyers  quoted  there  she
           must show that the violence is habitual/sustained (motaref)  and
           which is unacceptable in social custom and  intolerable  to  the
           woman taking into consideration her personal circumstances while
           the phrase is open to interpretation, and there are no protocols
           stipulating the procedures  and  criteria  that  must  be  used,
           lawyers say that the most common practice courts is  to  require
           that the woman obtain a conviction  for  violence  and  a  court
           order for financial compensation (diyeh) against her husband  on
           at least three separate occasions.

           To obtain such convictions she must, as described above, on each
           occasion: obtain a certificate confirming her injuries from  the
           Department of legal medicine and present three or four witnesses
           to the violence from neighbours family. Even then, the  decision
           to grant a divorce is at the judge's discretion and many  judges
           have   a   restricted    conception    of    what    constitutes
           habitual/sustained violence." [9]-[10].

           "1.4 Relocation
            A married woman,  as  already  explained,  cannot  legally  live
           separately from her husband except by his consent or the consent
           of the court [by articles  1114  -  1116  of  the  civil  code].
           Therefore, if her husband discovers her whereabouts he may apply
           to the court and compel her to return to the family home.

           Whether as a married woman a strange from her husband (who would
           have to pose as divorced or widowed) or as a divorced woman,  it
           is difficult to impossible for a woman to live  alone  in  Iran,
           and  it  is  especially  difficult  for  a  divorced  woman  who
           simultaneously faces prejudices arising from the assumption that
           she is 'fair game' and somehow prone to immoral behaviour." [12]

           "To make matters worse,  in  January  2011  the  Iranian  police
           imposed special regulations on estate agents designed to control
           property lets to singles" [13].

           "Regarding the issuance of restraining orders by ringing courts,
           the professor said that there was no such thing as a restraining
           order against husband in the case where the wife is living  with
           the husband." [21].

           "If the court accepts  a  claim,  she  is  entitled  to  receive
           economic support (nafaqa) until the couple reaches an  agreement
           or the marriage. However, despite these provisions, it  is  very
           difficult for women to convince the court  they  are  in  danger
           from their  husbands.  Prior  history  of  abuse  is  considered
           evidence of danger only if the battery has caused major  injury;
           this suggests that the battery is permitted as long as  it  does
           not result in permanent harm or handicap." [21].

           "3.2 Divorce: the practice of the courts
           The specialist literature and position of women  in  Iran  where
           divorce is concerned are unanimous in its  contention  that  the
           practice of the family courts, where all judges are  men,  means
           that where a husband actively  refuses  to  consent,  it  is  an
           extremely difficult and lengthy process for a woman to  initiate
           a divorce petition and bring it  to  a  successful  conclusion."
           [33]

21    Also referred to at para 24(7) of the Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal
      is the following passage in the Amnesty International Report 2015 'You
      shall procreate: Attacks on women's sexual and reproductive rights  in
      Iran', 113.15, which discusses  two  proposed  Bills  in  the  Iranian
      legislature:

           "Bill 315 contains several provisions that act as a  barrier  to
           divorce, with a  discriminatory  impact  on  women.  Article  19
           provides  for  lawyers  to  be  promoted  and   given   positive
           performance reviews based on how  many  of  their  family  cases
           result in marital reconciliation. Similarly, Article 20 proposes
           that judges receive special bonuses in divorce cases that end in
           marital reconciliation. While  equally  applicable  to  men  and
           women on paper, these provisions will disproportionately  affect
           women, given that men and women are subject to different grounds
           for divorce in Iran"

22    In summary, the above evidence appears to indicate  that  without  the
      husband's consent to divorce, the relevant ground for divorce that the
      Appellant would have to establish would be under Article 1130  of  the
      civil code, which reflects the terms of the Appellant's  own  marriage
      contract. This appears to require that  beatings  or  other  forms  of
      violent behaviour which is habitual/sustained (motaref) and  which  is
      unacceptable in social custom and intolerable to the Appellant, is  to
      be established by securing at  least  three  convictions  against  her
      husband, which may be  achieved  by  obtaining  in  relation  to  each
      incident of violence, a certificate confirming her injuries  from  the
      Department of legal medicine, and by presenting 3-4 witnesses  to  the
      violence.

23    The judge's acceptance at [33] that it would not be  'swift  or  easy'
      for the Appellant to obtain  a  divorce  does,  not,  I  find,  engage
      sufficiently with the country information before him.

24    Further, I find that there the judge's apparent finding  that  it  has
      become easier to obtain a divorce in Iran since 2002 is not  supported
      by the evidence before him. The judge quoted at [31] the extract  from
      the New York Times dated 6.12.10 (see paragraph  10  above).  However,
      the 'paradox' of the increased numbers of  divorces  taking  place  in
      Iran is explained in detail in Ms Enayat's report (such  detail  being
      absent from the  New  York  Times  report);  observers  including  the
      President of the  Tehran  family  court  express  the  view  that  the
      increase of divorces at the application of women is explained  by  men
      usually putting pressure on their wives to apply to the  court  for  a
      Khul' divorce, with the man's consent, so that she loses all  property
      and financial rights in the  divorce.  The  increase  in  divorces  by
      consent does not seem very relevant to  the  Appellant's  case  (where
      there is no consent) and the judge fails  to  take  into  account  the
      reason for the increase;  the  'backfiring'  of  the  divorce  system,
      against women.

25    For the above reasons, I  find  that  the  judge's  decision  contains
      material errors of law, and I set it aside. I announced that  decision
      at the hearing. I retain the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  judge
      regarding the Appellant's account, which are not,  Mr  Tarlow  agreed,
      vitiated by any error of law.

      Re-making

26    The Appellant did not seek to adduce any  further  oral  evidence  and
      the Appellant was content that the matter proceed by  way  of  further
      submissions  as  to  re-making  the  decision.   Mr  Tarlow  initially
      indicated that he was not in a position to make submissions as to  re-
      making as he  was  not  very  familiar  with  the  Appellant's  expert
      evidence. I queried why he was not, given  that  paragraph  3  of  the
      directions made at the time of  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal
      contemplated that if the Tribunal set the decision aside, it would  be
      likely to proceed to re-hear the appeal and to  decide  it,  where  no
      further oral evidence was required. Mr Tarlow agreed that  those  were
      the terms of the directions, and that he had read  sufficient  of  the
      expert evidence to make submissions upon it.

27    The parties made submissions on the appeal, and referred  to  passages
      with the country information, which I recorded.

28    I reserved by decision.

      Serious harm

29    I find that there is  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the
      Appellant will suffer further serious harm from her husband if she  is
      returned to Iran, even if she is not living in the former  matrimonial
      home. It is likely that he will find out where she is  living  if  she
      returns. The Appellant appears to  be  in  contact  with  friends  and
      relatives in Iran. Her married daughter spends part of her time living
      with her own husband's family, and  part  living  at  the  Appellant's
      former matrimonial home. It would be  unreasonable,  in  my  view,  to
      expect the Appellant  to  keep  her  whereabouts  a  secret  from  her
      daughter and other relatives and friends. The Appellant's  account  is
      that her husband has put pressure on friends and relatives in the past
      to bring about the return of the Appellant to the family home  on  the
      occasions when she attempted to separate from him. It is inevitable, I
      find, that the husband will hear that the Appellant  has  returned  to
      Iran, and that he will put pressure on those around  him  to  disclose
      the Appellant's whereabouts.

30    In any event, this is not a case where the Respondent has argued  that
      the Appellant should return to Iran and live  secretly,  distant  from
      her husband. The  Respondent's  position  is  that  the  Appellant  is
      entitled and able to apply  to  the  court  for  a  divorce  from  her
      husband. Such an application necessarily brings about  the  likelihood
      that the Appellant's husband will come to know her whereabouts.

31    If he does so, his intentions are clear; to seriously  harm  her,  and
      to take other measures; potentially  to apply to the court for her  to
      be banned from leaving Iran, and to require her return to  the  family
      home, it not being in dispute that both of these remedies is available
      to him in Iranian law. His ability  to  seriously  harm  her  is  also
      established by his past behaviour.

32    The evidence of the availability of effective protection from harm  is
      intrinsically tied with the evidence about a woman's ability to obtain
      divorce. I find, contrary  to  the  judge,  that  there  has  been  no
      material improvement since 2002 in the ability of women, in  contested
      divorces, to obtain  a  divorce.  I  take  into  account  Ms  Enayat's
      explanation for the paradox  of  the  increased  numbers  of  divorces
      taking place in Iran. Evidence cited  at  [21]  above  indicates  that
      measures are currently proposed to make it more difficult to obtain  a
      divorce, and to introduce incentives to lawyers and  judges  to  bring
      about  reconciliation.  In  January  2011   Police   imposed   special
      regulations on estate agents designed  to  control  property  lets  to
      singles.  The  evidence  in  Ms  Enayat's  report  chimes   with   the
      Appellant's own  experiences,  that  Police  often  seek  to  dissuade
      complainant women from bringing complaints of violence  against  their
      husbands. It is very difficult for women to convince  the  court  they
      are  in  danger  from  their  husbands;  prior  history  of  abuse  is
      considered evidence of danger only if the  battery  has  caused  major
      injury.  Allegations  of  assault  are  to  be  supported  by  4  male
      witnesses.

33    Even if it could be said that the Iranian legal system  makes  violent
      attacks by a  persecutor punishable in law, it is questionable, to say
      the least, whether there is a reasonable willingness to  enforce  that
      law on the part of the law enforcement agencies:  Horvath [2001] 1  AC
      489. I also consider para 55  of  Bagdanavicius  &  Anor,  R  (On  the
      Application of) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2003]
      EWCA Civ 1605:

           "5) The effectiveness of the system provided  is  to  be  judged
           normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or to prevent  the
           form  of  persecution  of  which  there  is  a  risk,  not  just
           punishment of it after the event; Horvath;  Banomova.  McPherson
           and Kinuthia.

           6) Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state  protection  in
           the receiving state, a claimant may still  have  a  well-founded
           fear of persecution if he can show that its authorities know  or
           ought to know of circumstances particular  to  his  case  giving
           rise to his fear, but are unlikely  to  provide  the  additional
           protection  his  particular  circumstances  reasonably  require;
           Osman."


34    For the present Appellant, there is ample  reason  to  find  that  the
      Police in Iran know or ought to know of  circumstances  particular  to
      the Appellant's case giving rise to her fear. I find, on the  evidence
      before me, that the Police and Courts  are  unlikely  to  provide  the
      additional protection her particular circumstances reasonably require.
      There will be no effective protection for the Appellant.

      Separation and Divorce

35    I find that it is reasonably likely that the  Appellant  will  not  be
      able to secure a legal separation or a divorce  from  her  husband.  I
      refer to the evidence set out at  [20]-[21]  above  and  I  repeat  my
      observations at [22]. I find  that  the  evidential  hurdle  that  the
      Appellant would have to overcome in  an  application  for  divorce  to
      which her husband would not consent, would be almost unsurmountable.

36    Even in relation to the conviction obtained  in  the  United  Kingdom,
      there is no evidence to indicate that such a conviction would count in
      the  Iranian  legal  system  towards  one  of  the  three  convictions
      seemingly required to obtain a divorce. Even if it did, the  Appellant
      would apparently be required to secure an additional  two  convictions
      against her husband in relation to the  violence  he  has  perpetrated
      against her. He was not convicted of any offences against  her  whilst
      they lived together in  Iran.  Given  the  passage  of  time  and  the
      difficulty in securing adequate  evidence  for  the  purposes  of  the
      Iranian legal system, I find that the prospects of the Appellant being
      able to secure convictions against her husband  in  relation  to  past
      abuse is very remote.

37    Clearly it would not reasonable to require the Appellant to return  to
      Iran, to wait for further abuses to be inflicted upon her, and for her
      to then rely on those matters to bring about convictions  against  her
      husband for the purposes of securing a divorce against him.

38    In relation to a separation on the grounds of  violence  (as  distinct
      from a divorce), I find, having regard to the evidence  at  pages  [7]
      (separation) and [8]-[10] (divorce) of Ms Enayat's report, that  there
      is  equal  reluctance  by  the  Iranian  courts  to  find  proven  the
      appropriate level of violence to warrant the relief sought by a  woman
      in either case.

39    Necessarily, if the Appellant is unable to secure a  legally  endorsed
      separation from her husband, who would otherwise have   the  power  to
      secure an order requiring her return to the home, this would entail  a
      high degree of risk of serious further harm to her at  his  hands,  if
      living in the same household. This crosses the threshold of harm so as
      to amount to persecution.

40    I find that the serious harm likely to experienced  by  the  Appellant
      will be for reason of her membership of  a  particular  social  group;
      women in Iran, a  PSG  that  the  Respondent  accepted  existed,  with
      reference to TB (PSG, women) Iran [2005] UKIAT 00065 (refusal  letter,
      para 11).

41     Whether  the  question  of  an  inability  to   divorce,   considered
      separately (and distinct from a risk  of  further  physical  harm)  is
      sufficiently  prejudicial  to  the  Appellant  so  as  to  amount   to
      persecution is more  difficult  to  answer.  As  per  the  Appellant's
      skeleton argument, Council Directive  2004/83/EC  ('the  Qualification
      Directive') provides as follows at Article 9 'Acts of persecution':

           "1 Acts of persecution within the meaning of article 1 A of  the
           Geneva Convention must:

           (a) be sufficiently serious by their nature or repetition as  to
           constitute  a  severe  violation  of  basic  human  rights,   in
           particular the rights from which derogation cannot be made under
           Article 15(2) of the European Convention for the  Protection  of
           Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or

           (b) be an accumulation of various measures, including violations
           of human rights which is sufficiently severe  as  to  affect  an
           individual in a similar manner as mentioned in (a).

           2.   Acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph 1, can, inter
           alia, take the form of:


                 (a) acts of physical or mental violence, including acts  of
                 sexual violence;


                 (b) legal, administrative, police, and/or judicial measures
                 which  are  in  themselves  discriminatory  or  which   are
                 implemented in a discriminatory manner; ..."

42    Is the inability to divorce  a  severe  violation  of  a  basic  human
      right? The right to marry is recognised at Article 12 of the ECHR. The
      Convention does not discuss the right to divorce.  One  could  perhaps
      observe that the right to re-marry is being  interfered  with  by  the
      existence  of  obstacles  to  divorce.   There  are  clearly  judicial
      measures  which  are  discriminatory  against  women  in  relation  to
      divorce.

43    There is no authority shown to me  to  support  the  proposition  that
      mere inability to divorce amounts to persecution. The  Appellant  does
      not appear to be in a new relationship and I am not told of any desire
      to re-marry.

44    I leave  the  question  as  to  whether  the  discreet  issue  of  the
      Appellant's inability (or very  low  probability  of  being  able)  to
      divorce crosses the threshold into persecution, undecided.

45    However given my previous findings that:

      (i)   the there is a real risk of further serious physical harm to the
           Appellant from her husband, in relation to which there  will  be
           no effective protection;

      (ii)  the likely inability  of  the  Appellant  to  secure  a  legally
           sanctioned separation from her husband, brings with  it  a  real
           risk that she may be required to return to her family home, thus
           increasing further the real risk of serious harm in  (i)  above;
           and

      (iii) the risk to the Appellant is for a Refugee Convention reason,

      the appeal is allowed under the Refugee Convention.

      Article 8 ECHR.

46    The Appellant's skeleton argument before the First  tier  argued  that
      extent of discriminatory measures likely  to  be  experienced  by  the
      Appellant upon return would amount to a disproportionate  interference
      with the development of her private and family life  as  protected  by
      Art 8 ECHR. Given my findings above, it is not  necessary  for  me  to
      decide this.

      Decision

      The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.


            I set aside the decision.


            I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing the appeal  on
 Refugee Grounds.


      Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these  proceedings
      or any form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
      identify the original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst
      others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
      give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Date: 21.10.16

                 [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
