
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01673/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th September 2014                       |On 22nd Oct 2014              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                        mr Adedamola Usman Oduborisha
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mohammed, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on  1st  March  1978.   The
    Appellant travelled to the UK by plane using his own passport and visit
    visa.  He arrived on 16th June 2013 and claimed asylum  on  22nd  June
    2013.  That application was refused by Notice  of  Refusal  dated  19th
    July 2013.  The Appellant made further submissions to the Secretary  of
    State on both 20th September 2013 and  21st  February  2014  and  those
    submissions were considered as a fresh application for asylum and/or  a
    fresh  human  rights  claim.   That  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in a detailed reasons for refusal letter dated  25th
    February 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Lever sitting at Manchester on 14th  April  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 24th  April  2014  the  Appellant's  claim
    under the Refugee Convention was certified as unfounded giving no right
    of appeal and the Appellant was found not to be in need of humanitarian
    protection.  Further the Appellant's appeal under the Human Rights  Act
    was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant had appeared in person before the First-tier Tribunal and
    lodged Grounds of Appeal personally to the Upper Tribunal on  13th  May
    2014.  On 20th June 2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ievins
    granted permission to appeal.  On granting permission to  appeal  Judge
    Ievins noted that the Appellant suffers from kidney failure and  is  on
    dialysis three times a week.  His application for permission to  appeal
    was late but the Appellant explained this by  saying  he  had  been  in
    hospital  and  that  his  health  was  deteriorating.    Judge   Ievins
    considered this to be a reasonable explanation and permission to appeal
    is granted as to the timeliness.  So far as the substantive merits were
    concerned Judge Ievins noted that the  Appellant  had  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor and promptly claimed asylum  which  was  on
    the basis that  the  Appellant  had  had  problems  with  criminals  in
    Nigeria.  He noted that that application was refused as  unfounded  but
    that it was then considered on Article 8 private  life  grounds  within
    the Immigration Rules and that the Secretary of State  found  that  any
    interference with the Appellant's right of  respect  for  private  life
    would be in pursuit of a legitimate aim and that  his  kidney  problems
    did not bring him within the ambit of Article 3.

 4. Judge Ievins  noted  that  Judge  Lever  dealt  with  the  question  of
    certification  relatively  swiftly  and  that   he   had   upheld   the
    certificate, but that he had then  turned  to  Articles  3  and  8  and
    considered that in paragraph 10 the judge had misstated the standard of
    proof.  In relation to Article 3 he pointed  out  that  the  burden  of
    proof was upon the Appellant and the standard was not  the  balance  of
    probabilities but a serious possibility, reasonable likelihood or  real
    risk.  Judge Lever had concluded that the Appellant  had  come  to  the
    United Kingdom to obtain treatment for his kidney complaint.   Although
    the Appellant needed dialysis he could receive that in  Nigeria  albeit
    at some expense.  Judge Ievins considered that whilst it  may  be  that
    such factual findings did not bring the Appellant within Article 3,  in
    approaching his determination with the wrong standard of proof  it  was
    arguable that the judge had erred in  law  and  that  in  view  of  the
    potential consequences to the Appellant, were  he  to  be  returned  to
    Nigeria, it was arguable that there should be a further  assessment  of
    the Appellant's position in the light of  Article  3  and  consequently
    granted permission to appeal in respect of all issues.

 5. The Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24
    and in summary the Respondent submitted that the Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately.  It is on that basis this
    matter appears before me  to  determine  whether  or  not  there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     The Appellant is legally represented appearing by Mr Mohammed  of  the
    International Immigration Advisory Service.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Harrison starts by advising that the file before me does  not  fully
    explain the chronology of events and that prior to  the  appeal  before
    Judge Lever the Appellant had lodged judicial  review  proceedings  and
    that by consent in June 2014  the  removal  directions  served  on  the
    Appellant  were  cancelled  and  as  a  result  the   judicial   review
    proceedings were withdrawn.  Consequently, by consent  on  that  basis,
    the appeal  against  the  decision  of  Judge  Lever  proceeded.   Such
    additions to the chronology, he acknowledges, do not  add  anything  to
    the information herein and the position remains as set out above.

 7. Mr Mohammed addresses me initially by stating that the  Appellant  only
    discovered in August 2013, i.e. when he was  in  the  UK  that  he  was
    suffering from kidney problems.  He acknowledges that  the  Appellant's
    position is that his  requirement  for  kidney  dialysis  is  addressed
    within the second Notice  of  Refusal  and  that  he  has  advised  the
    authorities that he is unemployed in  Nigeria  and  that  it  would  be
    extremely costly for him to have  dialysis  over  there  and  that  his
    financial circumstances make it impossible for him probably  to  afford
    dialysis or to even contemplate having a transplant.  He states that it
    was not the Appellant's original intention to seek leave to  remain  in
    the UK on the basis of his medical condition  and  that  he  originally
    came to the United Kingdom on a visit visa to see a friend albeit  that
    he acknowledges that  thereafter  he  promptly  (some  six  days  after
    arrival) claimed asylum within the UK.

 8. He refers me to paragraph 10  of  Judge  Lever's  determination.   That
    paragraph is the predominant basis  upon  which  Judge  Ievins  granted
    permission to appeal.  It states:-

    In terms of Immigration Rules or human rights the burden  lies  on  the
    Appellant and the standard of proof is a balance of probability.

    He submits that Judge Lever has not addressed the standard of proof and
    that what the judge seems to have done is to have picked up on findings
    within the Notice of Refusal.  He states that this case is  exceptional
    and that whilst the hurdle is very high it  has  to  be  accepted  that
    there are exceptions which reach that high threshold.

 9. Mr Harrison submits that the sentence  used  above  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge refers to Article 8 and not to Article 3  and  that  the
    judge has considered carefully the evidence that  is  before  him.   He
    points out that the Appellant has previously had representatives albeit
    he was not represented at the First-tier Tribunal hearing and  that  he
    has had the benefit of legal advice and that the judge  has  considered
    carefully all that he has been told  with  regard  to  the  Appellant's
    health and has considered N [2005] UKHL 31 and other relevant case law.
     He submits that he has weighed everything in the balance and has  made
    findings that  he  was  entitled  to  and  that  the  judge  cannot  be
    criticised for his determination.  He asked me to find that there is no
    material error of law of the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Mohammed asked me
    to find that there is and either to remake the decision or to remit the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. The Secretary of State gave extremely  detailed  consideration  to  the
    Appellant's health  in  his  reasons  for  refusal  letter  dated  25th
    February 2014.  It was against this background that  Judge  Lever  gave
    due and proper consideration to the Appellant's  claim.   It  is  worth
    mentioning the Notice of Refusal albeit that this is an appeal from the
    judge because  the  judge  gave  full  consideration  of  the  relevant
    paragraphs which from paragraph 24 to 32 set out in detail the  medical
    evidence lodged on the  Appellant's  behalf,  objective  evidence  with
    regard to  healthcare  systems  and  kidney  dialysis  in  Nigeria  and
    thereafter gave due  consideration  to  the  relevant  case  law.   The
    Secretary of State found that on the information provided the Secretary
    of State was satisfied that suitable medical treatment was available in
    Nigeria and that the Appellant had not provided any  evidence  that  he
    would be denied medical treatment nor that he  would  not  be  able  to
    travel to obtain such treatment and that therefore it was not  accepted
    that the Appellant's removal reached the high threshold of severity  to
    breach Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

13. Judge Lever has fully addressed these issues.  Efforts are made by both
    legal representatives to comment on/explain paragraph 10, Judge Lever's
    determination, set out above with regard to the burden of proof.  It is
    correct of course that the burden of proof under Article 8 is a balance
    of probabilities and that the burden of proof under Article 3 is as set
    out  by  Judge  Ievins,  namely  a  serious   possibility,   reasonable
    likelihood  or  real  risk.   However  whilst  paragraph  10   of   the
    determination may be an error in that it does not specifically set  out
    the correct test, it is not I find material because the judge has  gone
    on to apply the correct test  when  giving  due  consideration  to  the
    Appellant's appeal as set out within his determination.  He  has  noted
    at paragraph 12 the Appellant's medical condition  and  has  considered
    the relevant case law at paragraphs 15 and 16.  At paragraph 17 he  has
    given due consideration to the fact the Appellant's  medical  condition
    is unquestionably serious and has taken fully into account  the  letter
    of 8th April from the hospital.  At paragraphs 18 and 19 he  has  given
    due  consideration  to  the  objective  evidence  with  regard  to  the
    availability of medical care in Nigeria and has made findings  of  fact
    at paragraph 21 with regard to the treatment that is available.  He has
    acknowledged the difficulties but has gone on to give  due  and  proper
    consideration to all issues and made findings at paragraphs 22  and  23
    that he is entitled to.

14. Mr Mohammed submits  that  the  Appellant's  position  is  exceptional.
    Judge Lever was of the view that it was not and based on  the  detailed
    analysis he has carried out there was no reason for suggesting that  he
    has erred in law in coming to that conclusion.  There is no doubt  that
    the Appellant has a very serious medical condition but he is not  alone
    and that there are many people within Nigeria who sadly need  dialysis.
    The judge concluded that he does does not meet any legal  threshold  to
    show that it would be exceptional and the judge  cannot  be  criticised
    for the approach that he has adopted towards this  case.   Judge  Lever
    has considered very carefully all the evidence before him and has  made
    findings of fact he was entitled to, but ultimately, whilst  eloquently
    put, the  submissions  of  Mr  Mohammed  amount  to  little  more  than
    disagreement with the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    For all the  above  reasons  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not
    materially err in law and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  does  not  disclose  any
    material error of law and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make an order  pursuant  to  Rule
    45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
     No application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           30th September 2014
