
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01179/2015
                                                               AA/01180/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22nd February 2016                |on 14th April 2016                   |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                   [N Ma]
                                   [A Ma]
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms C. Bexson, Counsel instructed by Abbey Law
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of  Algeria;  they  are  respectively  the
    mother - 'the appellant' - and her son, born on [ ] 1986 and [ ]  2014.
    They appeal with permission against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge who dismissed their  appeals  against  the  respondent's
    decision dated 12 January 2015, to refuse to grant them asylum  and  to
    give directions for their removal.  Their  second  names  were  spelled
    ['Me']  in  the  Judge's  decision.  However,  I  have  relied  on  the
    documentation  including  that  used  by  the  respondent  and  by  the
    appellant in her witness  statement,  where  their  names  are  spelled
    ['Ma'].

 2. The appellant came to the UK on 19 January 2014 and claimed  asylum  on
    19 July 2014.

 3. The appellant claimed that she was of Berber origin. Her  father  is  a
    strict disciplinarian, demanding that his children  live  according  to
    strict moral codes. She was educated to college level and  completed  a
    certificate in  accounting.  She  obtained  employment  in  2012  as  a
    commercial representative.

 4. She came to the UK on a visitor's visa. During her  plane  journey  she
    met the father of her child, [H]. They arranged to meet in the UK. They
    commenced a sexual relationship after  their  arrival.  On  discovering
    that she was pregnant she moved to  stay  with  a  female  friend.  She
    claimed that her father has not spoken to her since he discovered  that
    she was pregnant. There is regular contact with her sister  and  mother
    in Algeria.

 5. She was currently staying with a  friend  of  the  child's  father.  He
    visits her from time to time. She fears that if returned to Algeria her
    father will kill her.

 6. The Judge summarised the respondent's reasons for refusal at  [3].  The
    respondent did not accept that she belonged to the Berber ethnic group.
    Nor was it accepted that her family, and in particular her father,  was
    strict as she was growing up. It is inconsistent with her  having  been
    granted permission to travel to the UK alone. Moreover, she was allowed
    out of the house with female friends and attended colleges  and  worked
    in Algeria.

 7. Her credibility was undermined  as  although  she  knew  that  she  was
    pregnant in February 2014, she did not  apply  for  asylum  until  July
    2014. It is not accepted that she would not have known what  procedures
    to follow with regard to asylum.

 8. She will in any event be able to relocate  to  a  place  of  safety  in
    Algeria and would be beyond the reach of her father.  The  prospect  of
    employment would be good. There are 15 women's centres in Algeria which
    would assist her as a single mother in relocating  and  re-establishing
    herself.

 9. The background evidence showed that women do have freedom  of  movement
    in Algeria. She is 28 years old and has  transferable  skills  and  she
    would be able to re-establish herself in a place of  safety  away  from
    the reach of her father with the assistance  of  the  voluntary  return
    programme.

10. The Judge set out the appellant's oral evidence at [4]. She stated that
    the decision to claim asylum was on the advice  of  her  son's  father.
    They went together to make the claim. He did not attend the hearing  of
    the appeal. She did not ask him to do so. She does not  know  where  he
    lives in the UK and is not aware of his immigration status.

11. It was her mother and sister who informed her of her  father's  threats
    against her. She has  not  spoken  to  her  father  directly  on  these
    matters.

12. The Judge was satisfied having regard to the evidence in  its  totality
    that the appellant's claim that she would be at risk  of  serious  harm
    from her father for the reasons she stated, did not merit belief [5].

13. He set out his reasons at  paragraph  [5].   He  noted  that  when  the
    appellant realised she was pregnant in February 2014,  she  learned  of
    her father's stance and the danger he would pose to  her  if  she  were
    returned. She did not however take any action to claim asylum which was
    a factor undermining her credibility.

14. Moreover, her claim rested largely on the evidence that her father is a
    strict disciplinarian who would bring harm to her solely for the reason
    that she has had a child out of wedlock with a person who  is  married.
    She had not made any  attempt  at  any  stage  to  contact  her  father
    directly to speak to him about her predicament. She said that  all  she
    had done was hear from her mother  and  sister  of  her  father's  '...
    annoyance and threats of harm that would befall her at his hands if she
    were to return to Algeria'  [5(ii)].

15. He was satisfied that even if her evidence were true, she would be able
    to relocate to a place of safety in Algeria beyond  the  reach  of  her
    father. She had worked there previously  and  had  a  good  educational
    background. Her prospects of employment would be  good.  He  noted  the
    many women's centres in Algeria which would  assist  her  as  a  single
    mother in relocating and re-establishing herself [6]. He dismissed  the
    appeal on asylum grounds.

16. On 12 November 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal on the basis that it is arguable that in the brief
    determination there had been a failure to address the best interests of
    the second appellant, particularly in the context of  the  findings  on
    internal flight. Permission was granted on all grounds.

17. In her submissions, Ms Bexson, who did not represent the  appellant  at
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, submitted that  it  was  of
    concern that there had been no consideration or  findings  relating  to
    the best interests of the child. It was incumbent upon the Tribunal  to
    consider those interests as a primary consideration.   A  key  question
    was whether the child would be subjected to harm or ill  treatment  and
    how he would be received on return.

18. Ms Bexson referred to the appellant's witness statement produced at the
    hearing, in which she stated that she cannot return as a single mother.
    She would have no support and would be taunted,  ridiculed  and  be  in
    danger of her life. Her son's life would  also  be  in  danger  as  her
    family perceives him to be "a sinful object" and they do not accept him
    as an innocent child.

19. She recently visited the Algerian Embassy in London  and  was  informed
    that her child is "not recognised by the Algerian government" as he was
    born when she was not married. There was a notice to this effect at the
    embassy as well.

20. Ms Bexson submitted that on that evidence, it appeared that  the  child
    would not have the benefit  of  Algerian  nationality.  This  has  been
    raised at an early stage. There had  been  no  findings  by  the  Judge
    relating to the child at  all.  The  appellant  had  contended  in  her
    witness statement that her parents were angry when she  disclosed  that
    she was pregnant and threatened to  kill  her,  stating  that  she  had
    brought shame on the family. She was scared as her parents are  serious
    about their religion and culture.

21. Ms Bexson accordingly submitted that there is a "clear  error  of  law"
    having regard to the fact that the Judge did not consider  the  child's
    best interests at all. Moreover, the Judge should have  looked  at  the
    child's best interests, particularly in the context of internal flight.



22. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24  response.
    The Judge did not accept the appellant's account  for  various  reasons
    detailed in the  determination.  Nevertheless,  he  considered  in  the
    alternative that even if her account were true, she has the  option  to
    relocate internally.

23. As set out in the Rule 24 response, the child's best interests as a one
    year old are clearly to be with his mother and  as  an  educated  woman
    there would be no reason to suppose that there would be any significant
    detriment to the child on return. He also referred to the support noted
    at [6] that would be available to the appellant on return.

24. Mr Tarlow referred to the assistance available to women as set  out  at
    paragraph 35 of the reasons for refusal. There are  a  number  of  NGOs
    committed to women's rights. There is also  a  network  of  15  women's
    centres where there are psychologists and lawyers to  give  advice  and
    support. The Ciddef also helps mediate in conflicts  with  the  women's
    families.

25. Mr Tarlow accepted that currently there appeared to be a need for  more
    places than those available. The women's centres are consequently under
    resourced. He also accepted that it is not clear whether mothers can be
    admitted to such centres with small children.

26. In reply, Ms Bexson submitted that the findings by the Judge were  "too
    brief." At the very least, notwithstanding any findings on  credibility
    grounds, the Judge should have looked at the fact that  the  child  was
    illegitimate and would return to a hostile environment.

    Assessment

27. The child was an appellant in the  appeal.   The  evidence  before  the
    Judge, as set out in the appellant's witness statement, claimed that  a
    person in her position would have no support and would be  taunted  and
    ridiculed and in danger of her life. It was  also  contended  that  her
    son's life would be in danger having regard to  the  fact  that  he  is
    illegitimate and would not be treated as an infant.

28. More significantly, there was  unchallenged  evidence  that  the  child
    would not be recognised by the Algerian authorities as he was born  out
    of marriage. Accordingly, his status or otherwise as  an  Algerian  was
    placed in issue but was not referred  to  or  considered  in  assessing
    whether  this  would  give  rise  to  any  significant   problems    if
    relocating.

29. Although the Judge considered the potential availability of  assistance
    to women, including women's centres, where support can be given,  there
    is, as fairly noted by Mr Tarlow, no indication  that  there  would  be
    support and shelter given to the appellant and her child.

30. The Judge in a very short paragraph found that the appellant  would  be
    able to relocate to a place of safety beyond the reach  of  her  father
    [6]. He also states that the evidence shows that there were at least 15
    women's centres in Algeria who would assist her as a single  mother  in
    relocating. However, it is not apparent from the  respondent's  reasons
    for refusal that this would include an illegitimate child  who  is  not
    recognised by the Algerian government. No consideration  was  given  to
    any potential difficulties for  the  child  on  their  return,  and  in
    particular the reaction of the community to the child of a lone  single
    mother, who might have no status in Algeria.

31. Nor did the Judge did not consider the child's position in the  context
    of the respondent's claim that the appellant could safely relocate. The
    Judge did not have regard to his best interests pursuant to s.55 of the
    2009 Act, let  alone  considering  his  best  interests  as  a  primary
    consideration.

32. In the circumstances, I find that in his very brief determination,  the
    Judge failed to address the best interests of the second appellant. The
    child's interests ought to have been carefully and fully considered  in
    the light of the evidence relating to him  as the child,  born  out  of
    wedlock to a lone single mother, whose status in Algeria  was  unclear.
    Further, when considering his interests  in  the  context  of  internal
    relocation the Judge should have had regard to  the  apparent  lack  of
    appropriate facilities or centres for a child in the  position  of  the
    second appellant.

33. I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    contained an error on a point of  law.  I  accordingly  set  aside  the
    decision, which will have to be re-made.

34. Ms Bexson submitted that having regard to the fact that the  Judge  had
    failed to consider the child's best interests under s.55  of  the  2009
    Act, that the appellant had not had  a  proper  opportunity  of  having
    their  claims  considered  in  the  light  of  the  evidence  that  was
    available. Accordingly she submitted that this was an appropriate  case
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Tarlow did not make  any
    submissions in this respect.

35. I  have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
    regarding remitting an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    decision. In giving effect to the approach, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    effect of the error has been to deprive the appellants before the First-
    tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or opportunity for their case  properly
    to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

36. The appeal is accordingly  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (at
    Taylor House) for a fresh decision to be made.

    Notice of Decision

    Having found that there was a material error of law in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision I set it  aside  and  direct  that  the  appeal  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, Taylor House, for a fresh decision
    to be made before another Judge.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 4 April 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
