
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01753/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th March 2016                           |On 1st July 2016              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                             MR KANSHI RAM LUND
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S Khan instructed by Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. I Broklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Lloyd-Smith  promulgated on 10th July 2015, in  which  she  dismissed
       the appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State
       for the Home Department to refuse to grant the appellant  asylum  and
       the respondent's  decision  of  21st  January  2015,  to  remove  the
       appellant from  the  UK  by  way  of  directions  under  s10  of  the
       Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


    2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan who arrived in the  UK  on
       3rd August 2014.  He claimed asylum the following day.  The  evidence
       received by the First-tier Tribunal, both by way of oral evidence and
       set out in statements and interview records, is set out at paragraphs
       [8] to [10] of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and I do
       not repeat that here.


    3. The grounds of appeal that are advanced in the appeal before  me  are
       set out in the appellant's renewed grounds of appeal that  are  dated
       14 August 2015.  Permission to appeal was granted by  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Kebede on 11th September 2015.  In doing  so,  she  noted  that
       there is arguable merit in the grounds that the Judge, in relying  as
       she did on the country guidance in SL and Others (Returning Sikhs and
       Hindus) Afghanistan [CG] 2005 UKIAT 00137, arguably  failed  to  take
       account of the more recent decision of DSG  and  Others  (Afghanistan
       Sikhs departure from CG) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 148 that was  before
       her.


    4. At paragraph [11] of her decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge sets
       out the evidence before her that supports  the  submission  that  the
       appellant's account of events in Afghanistan is a credible  one.   At
       paragraph [13] the Judge sets out particular  matters  identified  by
       the  respondent  that  weigh  against  the  appellant.   The  Judge's
       findings are set out at paragraphs [15]  to  [20]  of  her  decision.
       Having considered  the  evidence  before  her,  the  Judge  found  at
       paragraph [16] that the  appellant's  account  of  events  is  not  a
       credible one.   At paragraph [23], the Judge concluded:


             "There are no substantial grounds for believing that any  harm
             would come to him on return to Afghanistan.  His  return  will
             not  breach  Article  3  and  it  does  not  entitle  him   to
             humanitarian protection. I  reject  the  appellant's  refugee,
             humanitarian protection and Article 3 claim because he has not
             established that there is any truth to his account."


    5. The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lloyd-Smith  is  in  my
       judgement very carefully crafted and runs to some  26  paragraphs  in
       which she carefully considered all aspects of  the  protection  claim
       that was advanced before her. Insofar as the  appellant  relied  upon
       his Hindu faith as the basis upon which the appellant fears return to
       Afghanistan, the Judge states at paragraph [20]:


             "20. As far as his religion is concerned it is  accepted  that
             the appellant is from the Hindu faith. His son's  claims  were
             both connected to the problems they claimed  to  suffer  as  a
             result of their religion, both were  rejected.  The  appellant
             was specifically asked if he had ever had any  problems  as  a
             result of his religion, during his SEF his  answer  was  "once
             they attacked our temple. When there was a  problem  over  the
             Babri Mosque in India"(R B16 q 126). He was asked if he  could
             practice his religion  openly  in?Afghanistan  and  said  that
             "earlier it was ok to practice openly but  after  the  Taliban
             you have to do it quietly. They beat  us  up  if  we  practice
             openly. We have to go to the temple quietly" (R B16 q130-131).
             He did say that he was able to attend the temple twice  a  day
             (R B16 q121). Whilst religion is mentioned  by  the  appellant
             the main basis of his claim appears to relate to the fact that
             he had taken a photograph of a girl "a Taliban  with  a  beard
             saw her and afterwards the Taliban came, searched my shop  and
             they said they are not allowed to take photos  of  women",  he
             goes on to describe his beating and his wife's murder  (R  B10
             q49). Later he was specifically asked "These three  incidents:
             the death of your first and second wives  and  the  kidnap  of
             your daughter".  Are there  any  other  incidents  which  have
             caused you to claim asylum?" to which he replied "no,  nothing
             else" (R B15 q108). When it was  put  to  him  that  he  fears
             return?because of the Taliban and he was  asked  "what  is  it
             that places you at risk over anyone else  there?"  he  replied
             "Because of the photograph thing, they killed  my  wife.  Then
             they wrecked my shop, so we are enemies. Therefore I'm scared"
             (R B25 q232). He went on to state that he  fears  all  Muslims
             and has been asked to convert or he will be killed.   However,
             it is apparent from the  content  of  the  interview  and  his
             evidence that he believes photographs being taken started  the
             problems he had and not his faith "In our case it all happened
             because we took a photo of a girl" (R B12 q76).  He attributes
             the second attack in  2013  on  the  "earlier  incident.  They
             thought they had killed me but I was unconscious so they  came
             again" (R B14 q95). Having considered the  objective  material
             that has been provided and given  my  credibility  findings  I
             have little difficulty in accepting the  finding  made  within
             the refusal letter that whilst "Hindus in Afghanistan may face
             some societal discrimination, however, this does not amount to
             persecution". This is a finding that was also made in  respect
             of the appellant's sons.  It seems apparent that  Hindus  were
             not perceived as a threat and were not  therefore  persecuted.
             This is supported by the fact that the appellant prior to  him
             leaving in 2014 was able to attend the temple twice daily  and
             the temple is still able to operate. I therefore  endorse  the
             findings made in the previous appeals. It  also  accords  with
             the current country guidance case of SL and Others  (Returning
             Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan CG 2005 UKAIT 00137 the Tribunal
             said that there was no evidence  to  support  the  claim  that
             Afghan Sikh and Hindu minorities were persecuted or treated in
             breach of their protected human rights under article 3 by  the
             State or that the degree of  societal  discrimination  against
             them was  such  as  to  give  rise  to  any  such  persecution
             treatment as  a  class.  The  objective  material  in  the  US
             Department of State report 27th April 2014, that I was invited
             to look at by Mr Blundell (A pg19), acknowledges  that  Hindus
             are "allowed to practice publically" but face  discrimination.
             'Non-Muslim minorities such as Sikhs,  Hindus  and  Christians
             continued to face social discrimination and harassment and, in
             some cases, violence ......the Hindu  population...faced  less
             harassment.....reportedly continued  to  face  discrimination,
             including intimidation" (A pg25). This is  not  an  indication
             that they are persecuted. Given my findings  above  I  do  not
             accept that in Jalabad the appellant would be persecuted as  a
             result of his religious beliefs."


    6. The findings of fact that were made by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       are not in issue before me.


    7. The grounds of appeal  contend  that  it  was  the  gravamen  of  the
       appellant's protection claim that he would be at risk upon return  on
       account  of  his  faith,  and  not  the  specific  incidents  he  had
       described.  The appellant contends that the Judge failed to  consider
       the Kabulblogs  article  dated  28th  February  2015  that  had  been
       submitted by the appellant and which clearly refers to comments  made
       by the Afghan Minister for refugees and  repatriation.   Furthermore,
       the appellant contends that the Judge failed to  consider  the  Upper
       Tribunal decision in DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure  from  CH)
       Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 000418 (IAC).


    8. At the hearing before me, Mr Khan submits that the  Judge  failed  to
       properly take into account the matters that are set out at paragraphs
       [23] to [25] of the Upper Tribunal's decision in DSG  &  Others,  and
       failed to take account of the evidence  that  was  before  the  Judge
       regarding the reduction in the numbers of Sikhs and Hindus now living
       in Afghanistan. He submits that the community to which the  appellant
       would be returning is diminishing, and these were factors  that  were
       not properly taken into account by the Judge.


    9. A written response was submitted on behalf of  the  respondent  under
       Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.   The
       respondent  opposes  the  appellant's  appeal  and  in  summary   the
       respondent contends that although the Judge  did  not  refer  to  the
       decision of the Upper Tribunal in DSG & Others there was no  need  to
       do so, given the unequivocal findings set out at  paragraph  [20]  of
       the Judge's decision.  The respondent submits that the appeal amounts
       to  a  disagreement  with  the  overall  outcome  of  the  appeal  in
       circumstances where the Judge made findings and  reached  conclusions
       that were properly open to her on the evidence.   Ms Broklesby-Weller
       submits that the Judge has given cogent reasons  for  her  conclusion
       that the appellant would not be at risk upon return on account of his
       being a Hindu.  She submits that the decision in DSG and  Others  was
       based upon the individual findings made in favour of  the  appellants
       in that case, and the specific expert evidence that they relied upon.


   10. In my judgment, the grounds that the appellant  seeks  to  rely  upon
       overlook entirely the unchallenged findings that  were  made  by  the
       Judge.  At paragraph [20] of her decision, the Judge  considered  the
       evidence before her as to the appellant's faith and  whether  it  was
       his Hindu faith that gave  rise  to  the  protection  claim,  or  the
       incidents that he had claimed had taken place, but were  rejected  by
       the Judge.  The Judge carefully  considered  at  paragraph  [20]  the
       evidence of the appellant as to whether he had faced any problems  in
       Afghanistan as a result of his religion.  The Judge  considered  what
       the appellant had said during his SEF interview, and found that it is
       apparent from his interview and his evidence that he believes it  was
       the photographs taken, that had started his  problems,  and  not  his
       faith.


   11. In the same paragraph, the Judge states that  having  considered  the
       objective material that  has  been  provided  and  in  light  of  her
       findings as to the credibility  of  the  appellant  and  the  account
       advanced by him, she has little difficulty in accepting what had been
       said in the respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  letter  that  whilst
       "Hindus in Afghanistan may face some  societal  discrimination,  this
       does not amount to persecution.".  As the Judge records at  paragraph
       [20] of her decision, the finding that she made that the  appellant's
       problems were not because of his Hindu faith, and her conclusion that
       whilst Hindu's face  some  societal  discrimination,  that  does  not
       amount to persecution, are entirely consistent with the findings  and
       conclusions  reached  in  the  previous  appeals   pursued   by   the
       appellant's sons.


   12. In my judgement, it is clear that the appellant's appeal proceeded on
       the basis that whilst his Hindu faith was referred to,  the  core  of
       the appellant's claim for protection arose from his claim that he had
       taken photographs of a girl that had been found by the  Taliban,  and
       it was after that, that the Taliban had any interest in him.   It  is
       right in my judgement to note  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       rejected the appellant's case in  that  respect.   She  rejected  the
       appellant's account of having been targeted by the Taliban in 2013 as
       being  untruthful.    The  conclusion  reached  by  the   Judge   was
       consistent with the Country Guidance case of SL and others that makes
       it clear that all Sikh's and Hindu's are not at risk  of  persecution
       but  the  individual  circumstances  of  each  person  will   require
       consideration. The Judge, as is clear  from  paragraph  [20]  of  her
       decision did consider the individual circumstances of  the  appellant
       and his family.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  has  adequately
       explained why she considers there is not a real risk  of  persecution
       for the appellant on account  of  his  Hindu  faith.  The  Judge  has
       properly directed  herself  to  the  evidence  before  her  that  the
       appellant was able to attend the temple twice daily and the temple is
       still able to operate.  The Judge has properly, and in line with SL &
       Others reminded herself that any general societal discrimination does
       not amount to persecution.


   13. It is right to say that SL and Others does not support general  risk.
       The appellant contends that that decision was  followed  by  DSG  and
       Others holding that the evidence had moved  on,  and  the  First-tier
       Tribunal in that case had been entitled to  depart  from  SL  and  to
       allow an asylum appeal.  There, the Upper Tribunal upheld  the  Judge
       in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  departing  from  a  country   guidance
       decision. That appeal concerned a claim by a number of  Afghan  Sikhs
       that they were at risk of persecution  or  serious-ill  treatment  on
       return to Afghanistan. The First-tier Tribunal in that case  departed
       from the country guidance case of SL and Others relying on expert and
       background evidence submitted by the appellants, in particular as set
       out in the Upper Tribunal's determination at [11] that:


             "By the end of 2001 only 50 to 100 families were left  of  the
             approximately 2,000 who lived there in 1992."


   14. At [24], the Upper Tribunal concluded that,  on  the  basis  of  this
       evidence, the First-tier Tribunal had been entitled to depart from SL
       and Others:


             "24. We consider it was open to the judge in the light of  the
             glaring difference in the figures (3,700 as opposed to 20,000)
             to  consider  that  the  Tribunal's   figures   in   SL   were
             significantly wrong and that at the date of the hearing before
             him that remained the case. He went on to note, as we have set
             out above, what was said by Collins J in Luthra and  what  was
             said in the report of  Dr  Giustozzi  which  was  specifically
             prepared for this appeal. He also noted and bore in mind  what
             was said by Dr Ballard.  Of  clear  relevance  also  were  the
             positive credibility findings and the adoption of the  earlier
             finding by the judge in April  2004  that  the  appellant  had
             experienced persecution in the past in Afghanistan."


   15. Consequently, the Upper Tribunal concluded the First-tier  Judge  was
       entitled to depart from country  guidance  where  evidence  indicated
       that it should not be followed. At [25] the Upper Tribunal stated:


             "In the circumstances it seems to us entirely clear  that  the
             judge was entitled to depart from the country guidance in this
             case."


   16. At paragraph [26], the Upper Tribunal stated:


             "26. A country guidance case retains its status  until  either
             overturned by a higher court or replaced by subsequent country
             guidance. However, as this case shows, country guidance  cases
             are not set in stone and a  judge  may  depart  from  existing
             country  guidance  in  the  circumstances  described  in   the
             Practice Direction and the Chamber Guidance Note.   This  does
             not amount to carte blanche for judges to depart from  country
             guidance as it is necessary, in the wording  of  the  practice
             direction to show why  it  does  not  apply  to  the  case  in
             question. In SG (Iraq) [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940,  the  Court  of
             Appeal made it clear, at paragraph 47, the decision-makers and
             tribunal  judges  are  required  to  take   country   guidance
             determinations into account, and to follow  them  unless  very
             strong grounds supported  by  cogent  evidence,  are  adduced,
             justifying their not doing so. To do so otherwise would amount
             to an error of law."


   17. In DSG and Others the Upper Tribunal summarised SL and others stating
       that there was no evidence to support the claim that Afghan Sikh  and
       Hindu minorities in Afghanistan are persecuted or treated  in  breach
       of Article 3, but following UNHCR Guidance  their  status  as  Afghan
       Sikhs and Hindus is a factor to be taken into  account  in  assessing
       individual claims on a case-by-case basis.


   18. Mr. Khan submits that there was background material before the Judge,
       as in DSG and Others, which demonstrated that the  number  of  Hindus
       and Sikhs in Afghanistan was much lower than had been the evidence in
       SL and Others.  The appellant claims that that alters  the  level  of
       risk to individual Hindus from  attacks.  As  a  consequence,  it  is
       submitted  that  Afghan  Sikhs  and  Hindus  are  at  real  risk   of
       persecution on return to Afghanistan  and  the  Judge's  has  made  a
       material error of law.


   19. DSG and Others is not a country guidance case and the Judge's failure
       to take it into account and follow it cannot, in itself, amount to an
       error of law. The appellant's case must in my judgment rest  upon  an
       argument that the material in DSG and Others and that  relied  on  in
       this appeal, such as the Kabulblogs article dated 28th February 2015,
       required the Judge to depart from SL and Others.


   20. It is correct that the Judge does not refer to the  decision  of  the
       Upper Tribunal in DSG and Others but  it  is  clear  that  the  Judge
       acknowledged that the appellant is a  Hindu  and  his  status  as  an
       Afghan Hindu is plainly a factor taken into account in by  the  Judge
       in assessing, as she was required to, the  individual  appeal  before
       her.


   21. On the facts of DSG & Others the Judge was entitled  to  depart  from
       the country guidance case of SL and Others See [25], but that is  not
       to say that the level of risk to individual Hindus  from  attacks  is
       such that all Afghan Sikhs and Hindus are at real risk of persecution
       on return to Afghanistan.  I acknowledge that there was some evidence
       before the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the security  situation  in
       Afghanistan is not stable, but I do not consider that it gave rise to
       the very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,  required  for
       departing from the country guidance decision of SL and Others.


   22. In any event, the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in DSL  and
       Others was different  and  more  focused  on  the  individuals.   The
       evidence included two expert reports which supported those particular
       appellants' claims to be at risk and the Upper Tribunal, in upholding
       the First-tier Tribunal's decision to  depart  from  SL  and  Others,
       stated at paragraph [24] that:


             "Of  clear  relevance  also  were  the  positive   credibility
             findings ... that the appellant had experienced persecution in
             the past in Afghanistan".


   23. In this appeal, the First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected the account of
       past persecution relied upon by the appellant and she made an adverse
       credibility  finding.  That  finding  is   not   challenged.   As   a
       consequence, the appellant cannot establish that he has been  subject
       to any persecution in the past.


   24. The appellant had been running a photography shop for  several  years
       and his own evidence was that he was able to attend the temple  twice
       daily and that the temple is still able  to  operate.   Whatever  the
       evidence was, concerning the number of Hindu's  currently  living  in
       Afghanistan, and the instance of any acts of persecution against that
       population, the appellant had lived  free  of  persecution.  On  that
       evidence, there is in my judgment no basis for  concluding  that  the
       Judge was not entitled to find  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
       establish a real risk of  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  or
       serious ill treatment. That finding was consistent with the  relevant
       country guidance case, and as I say, there is simply no basis to  say
       that there were "very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence" to
       depart from the Country Guidance case.


   25. In the circumstances it was open to the Judge to conclude, as she did
       at paragraph [23] of her  decision  that  there  are  no  substantial
       grounds for believing that any harm would come to  the  appellant  on
       return to Afghanistan, that his return will not breach Article 3  and
       it does not entitle him to humanitarian protection.


   26. It follows that the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


   27. The appeal is dismissed.


   28. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.





Signed                                  Date 1st July 2016



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


There can be no fee award in the circumstances.

Signed                                  Date 1st July 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
