
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01773/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     T S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahluwalia, counsel, instructed by Birnberg Peirce
& Partners.
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 11  October  1980.  She
    appealed against a decision of the respondent dated 16 January 2015  to
    refuse her asylum and human rights claims and to remove her  under  s10
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. Her appeal was refused by Judge
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  Afako  ("the  FTTJ")  who  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 July 2015 dismissed her appeal  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  This was granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Finch on 16 September 2015 in the following terms:
         "As found in Mibanga v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         [2005] EWCA Civ 367 and R (B) v  Special  Adjudicator  [2002]  EWHC
         1469 (Admin) the First-tier Tribunal judge should  have  considered
         the totality of the evidence, including the evidence provided by Dr
         Dhumad,  when  considering  whether  the  Appellant's  account  was
         credible. He did not do so and, instead, at  paragraph  36  of  his
         decision and reasons, he found that "it is not for me to  speculate
         as to what the  true  causes  of  her  symptoms  might  be,  it  is
         sufficient that I have not been able to find that  the  account  of
         the targetting of the appellant is [not] credible.
         The First-tier Tribunal Judge also failed to  consider  whether  it
         was the Appellant's sur place activities which may have led to  the
         Sri Lankan authorities' interest  in  him;  thereby  indicating  an
         enhanced risk on return."

 3. Thus the appeal came before me.

Submissions

 4. At the outset, Mr Duffy indicated that  he  was  in  difficulties  with
    regard to this  appeal;  he  agreed  that  the  decision  of  the  FTTJ
    contained material errors of law.

 5. Mr Ahluwalia helpfully outlined the  appellant's  position  as  regards
    those errors of law, as follows.  He submitted  that,  with  regard  to
    paragraphs 27 and  28  the  FTTJ  had  not  identified  any  additional
    elements of appellant's husband's case  which  would  have  raised  his
    profile in the current climate.  The  FTTJ  had  failed  to  take  into
    account the appellant's  activities  in  the  UK  and  her  history  in
    reaching his conclusions.  Paragraph 28 demonstrated that the FTTJ  had
    misunderstood the evidence: whereas he says that a direction to produce
    the appellant had been made upon the appellant's husband's  release  in
    2010, that was factually inaccurate. The appellant's witness  statement
    (paragraph 24) made it clear that there had been no such instruction at
    that time.

 6. With regard to paragraph 30 of the  decision,  Mr  Ahluwalia  submitted
    that, whereas the FTTJ found it was not clear why the authorities would
    wish to persecute the appellant and her husband after  no  interest  in
    the family for some  9  years  (2002-2010),  this  was  to  ignore  the
    evidence of the appellant in her witness statement, paragraph 25, which
    gave the reason for the risk of  persecution.   The  FTTJ  should  have
    considered this explanation and explained why he had rejected it.

 7. He  also  submitted  that  the  FTTJ's  findings  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's profile had been made without consideration of a  range  of
    factors, such as the appellant's brother being a fighter for  the  LTTE
    (paragraph 3 of the appellant's statement), the family being told  they
    were LTTE supporters  by  the  army  (paragraph  13),  the  appellant's
    support for the  LTTE  whilst  at  university  (paragraph  14-17),  the
    appellant and her husband being refused permission to live  in  Colombo
    because of her LTTE connections, the appellant's husband's detention in
    a camp known to accommodate suspected LTTE members, the  harassment  of
    the appellant's in-laws, the appellant's  activities  in  the  UK  from
    2011,  the  appellant's  evidence  to  the  Internal  Centre  for   the
    Prevention and Prosecution of Genocide and  the  appellant's  husband's
    arrest and continued reporting to the authorities.  There  appeared  to
    be a complelte absence of consideration of these factors  and  if  they
    had been rejected, this should have been made clear and reasons given.

 8. As regards the  medical  evidence,  Mr  Ahluwalia  submitted  that  the
    failure of the FTTJ to take into account evidence (appellant's  bundle,
    pages 35-53) of the appellant's counselling from July 2012 was an error
    of law.

 9. He further submitted that  the  FTTJ  had  made  findings  of  fact  on
    credibility rather than making it part of the rounded assessment of all
    the  evidence,  including  the  medical  evidence.   Furthermore,   the
    appellant's activities in the UK were at the crux of her appeal.

10. Mr Ahluwalia concluded that these failures amounted to material  errors
    of law.    Mr  Duffy  indicated  that  he  had  did  not  challenge  Mr
    Ahluwalia's submissions that the decision contained material errors  of
    law.

Discussion

11. I share the analysis of the  two  representatives.   I  find  that  the
    FTTJ's decision contains material  errors  of  law,  particularly  with
    regard to the assessment and treatment of the evidence of relevance  to
    credibility, including the medical evidence. The  FTTJ  has  failed  to
    follow the guidance in Mibanga and R(B) and this infects  his  analysis
    of the appellant's credibility. That error is compounded by the  FTTJ's
    failure to understand the appellant's case, particularly the impact  of
    her sur place activities which he appears to treat as  an  afterthought
    in his analysis of the risk.  It is also relevant in this context  that
    he treats other factors (see paragraph 27) as the key triggers  of  the
    risk of persecution  when  it  is  the  appellant's  case  that  it  is
    principally her sur place activities which put her at risk  on  return.
    There is insufficient reasoning as to why those  activities  would  not
    "come close to triggering persecution by the Sri Lankan state".

12. Taken together, these errors undermine the reliability  of  the  FTTJ's
    findings and render them unsustainable.  None  can  be  preserved.  The
    decision must be set aside in its entirety. All  parties  were  agreed,
    that in the circumstances, it was appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be
    considered and all matters decided afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

13. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before  any  judge  aside  from
    Judge Afako.

14. The anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge     Dated: 23 December 2015


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge     Dated: 23 December 2015

