
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01077/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 May 2016                       |On 1 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                    [N S]
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Furner of Birnberg Peirce & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1    This matter is listed before the Upper Tribunal as a rehearing  of  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  of  22  December
    2014 refusing to vary his leave to remain, and making a decision  under
    section 47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 to remove
    him to Afghanistan.

2    The Appellant's appeal was  first  heard  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Plumtre) on 7 May 2015, resulting  in
    a decision of 20 May 2015 dismissing his appeal. The Appellant's appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal against  that  decision  came  before  me  on  22
    December 2015, at which time I made  an  ex  tempore  decision  finding
    material errors of law in the judge's decision, and setting  it  aside.
    The matter was adjourned, retained in the Upper Tribunal,  reserved  to
    me, and directions were given. A typed notice of reasons for the  error
    of law decision was promulgated on 15  March  2016,  albeit  that  that
    typed decision had not been approved by me, but merely represented  the
    verbatim extempore decision given by me on 22 December 2015. Although I
    would have preferred to have improved on the structure of the same, and
    the decision should not have  been  issued  without  my  approval,  the
    decision stands as representing this Tribunal's reasons for finding  an
    error of law in the judge's decision.

3    That written decision (appended) is to be read alongside  the  present,
    and I do not seek to reiterate the reasons  advanced  in  that  earlier
    decision for setting the judge's decision aside.

4    Upon discussing with the parties on 22 December  2015  how  the  matter
    should be re-decided, Mr Furner argued that the judge had made positive
    findings of fact in relation to  the  Appellant's  historical  account,
    which ought to be preserved. These were said to be:

    1.   The Appellant's account was credible, 'insofar as it goes' [62].

    2.   The Appellant's father was a fighter 'for some Islamic group' [62]

    3.   The Appellant's family may well have been visited  by  members  of
    whichever group for whom his father fought [64].

5    For his part, Mr Tarlow had argued that the matter should  be  remitted
    to the First tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

6    I ruled on 22 December 2015 that the matter should be retained  in  the
    Upper Tribunal reserved to me. I agreed with Mr Furner that the core of
    the Appellant's account had been accepted  as  being  credible  by  the
    judge; the errors of law  identified  in  the  error  of  law  decision
    related principally to the way in which the judge had dealt with expert
    and country information, and the inferences which had been  drawn  from
    the Appellant's evidence. I held that the Appellant would be prejudiced
    by a remittal to the First tier Tribunal if all findings of  fact  were
    to be re-made, and remittal to the First-tier Tribunal (to a  different
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal) with partially preserved findings  of
    fact would be unwieldy.

7    Mr Furner indicated at the hearing of 22 December 2015 that he did  not
    intend to call any further oral evidence from  the  Appellant  for  the
    purposes of this Tribunal re-making the decision  in  the  appeal,  but
    queried whether facilities should be arranged to hear oral evidence, by
    way  of  videolink,  from  Mr  Mohammed  Hashim  Safi,  a  witness   in
    Afghanistan who had given written evidence regarding enquiries  he  had
    made in Afghanistan regarding some of the factual  assertions  made  by
    the Appellant  in  his  appeal.  The  Respondent  had  challenged  that
    evidence in submissions before the judge. It is to be  recalled  I  had
    ruled that the judge had erred in the manner in which she  had  treated
    that witness's written evidence.

8    However, given the logistical difficulties  in  arranging  evidence  by
    way of videolink, I suggested  instead  that  any  questions  that  the
    Respondent wished to put to Mr  Mohammed Hashim Safi should be made  in
    writing, with an opportunity for him to  respond,  in  advance  of  the
    resumed hearing before me.

9    On 22 December 2015, I therefore gave the following directions  to  the
    parties:

    1.   Upon the Tribunal having decided today to set aside  the  decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal dated 20 May 2015  the  matter  will  be
         adjourned and reheard by this Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

    2.   The Respondent is directed, if  so  advised,  to  provide  to  the
         Appellant's representatives any questions which she would  wish  to
         be put to the witness Mohammed Hashim Safi, such  questions  to  be
         provided by 4.00pm Friday, 15 January 2016.

    3.   The Appellant to provide any response by 29 January  2016.  Matter
         to be relisted for rehearing, reserved  to  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge O'Ryan, not before 12 February 2016.

    4.   ELH 2 hours.

10   At the resumed hearing before me on 25 May  2016,  it  became  apparent
    that the Respondent had  not  taken  the  opportunity  to  provide  any
    written questions to Mr Safi in Afghanistan. Mr  Kotas  confirmed  that
    his colleague Mr Tarlow had made an accurate  note  of  the  directions
    that I had given at the hearing of 22 December 2015. A letter  from  Mr
    Furner dated 18 January 2016 to the Tribunal, copied to the Respondent,
    also pointed out that the Respondent had not provided  Mr  Furner  with
    any questions that she wished to put to Mr Safi. There can be no  doubt
    therefore that the Respondent was aware of the directions that had been
    given and that no action had been taken in relation to them.  Mr  Kotas
    did not offer any explanation as to why no further questions  had  been
    put. It was not obligatory for the Respondent  to  have  done  so;  the
    directions required that, if so advised, she was  to  put  any  further
    questions that she had for Mr Safi to the  Appellant's  representatives
    by 15 January 2016. The Respondent has not done so.

11   At the outset of the hearing of 25 May 2016 I also discussed  with  the
    parties the extent of the retained findings of fact. Mr Kotas confirmed
    that Mr Tarlow's note had recorded the position that I had set  out  at
    the earlier hearing (described at paragraph 4 above).

12   On 25 May 2016 I also clarified that, given that in  my  error  of  law
    decision I held that the judge had not taken properly into account  the
    psychiatric evidence in relation to the Appellant  when  assessing  any
    vulnerability on return to  Afghanistan,  and  that  this  resulted  in
    material  errors  in  the  assessment  of  risk   of   harm   and   the
    reasonableness of internal relocation, this also resulted in  it  being
    necessary to re-assess the proportionality of the Appellant's  proposed
    return, under Article 8 ECHR.

13   Prior to the resumed hearing of 25 May 2016, the Appellant had,  on  29
    January 2016, provided further evidence in  a  Rule  15(2A)  notice  in
    which he sought to rely on a witness statement dated  29  January  2016
    from Bridget Price, Executive Director of One World Research, providing
    further information as to the research conducted by Mr  Mohamed  Hashim
    Safi, and providing the telephone number in Afghanistan of  a  Mr  [A],
    one of the persons that Mr  Safi  had  contacted  when  conducting  his
    original enquiries in March 2015. Mr Furner also sought to rely  on  an
    updated expert report from Dr Giostozzi  dated  21  December  2015.   I
    admitted this evidence as  being  relevant  to  the  re-making  of  the
    decision.

14   Given the discussions at the outset of the hearing on 25 May  2016,  it
    was  therefore  unclear  to  me  why,  when  Mr  Kotas  commenced   his
    submissions  as  to  re-making,  he  raised  issues   challenging   the
    credibility of the Appellant's account that his father had been killed,
    seeking to  rely  on  alleged  discrepancies  between  the  Appellant's
    screening interview and his SEF witness statement as to the  timing  of
    the father's death.  I pointed  out  to  him  that  in  preserving  the
    judge's finding  that the Appellant's account was credible, insofar  as
    it went, the Appellant's account went so far as to say that his  father
    had been killed in the course of his being a  fighter  for  an  Islamic
    group in Afghanistan. The alleged discrepancy was had not  been  relied
    on the Respondent in the  refusal  letters  of  5  August  2011  or  22
    December 2014; did not, insofar as one could tell, feature as  part  of
    the Respondent's case as put  by  the  Presenting  Officer  before  the
    judge; and was not a matter open for consideration before me. I  ruled,
    for the avoidance of  doubt,  that  the  judge's  decision  included  a
    finding that the Appellant's father had been killed, and that this  was
    a retained finding.

    Submissions

15   Mr Kotas addressed me on the Appellant's evidence regarding the  visits
    by Islamic group. Whereas at paragraphs 14 and 16  of  the  Appellant's
    witness statement of July 2011, the Appellant appeared to refer to  two
    visits, in his SEF interview of 6 July 2011 the Appellant  appeared  to
    state at question 29 that the Taliban had asked him  once  to  go  with
    them (albeit that he sought to correct that to twice at  question  30).
    Further, there was inadequate evidence at paragraphs 7 and  14  of  the
    witness statement to suggest that the Appellant was being subjected  to
    either forced or coerced recruitment.

16   Mr Kotas argued that any failure by  the  Respondent  in  its  duty  to
    attempt to trace family members did  not alter the principle that it is
    for the Appellant  to  make  out  his  case  that  he  is  in  need  of
    International protection and the date for assessment  is  the  date  of
    hearing - the Ravichandran principle applied in asylum appeals  without
    exception (MA and AA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [20156] UKSC 40 para 72).

17   Mr Kotas submitted that in her psychiatric  report,  Dr  Treliving  had
    failed when  assessing  the  causation  of  the  Appellant's  cognitive
    problems,  to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  his
    screening interview that when he was very young he had a fall  and  hit
    his head resulting in headaches and dizzy spells.   Mr  Kotas  accepted
    however  that  the  Appellant  did  have  the  mental  health  problems
    diagnosed by the psychiatrist in her report, howsoever caused.

18   In relation to the evidence of Mr Mohammed Hashim Safi Mr Kotas  argued
    that the evidence contained multiple hearsay,  and  Mr  Safi  had  been
    required to make contact with a number of different people to find  the
    information.  There  was  inadequate  evidence   in   the   report   to
    satisfactorily identify the persons named, or as  to  how  the  persons
    named came to be aware of the information  recorded.  Mr  Kotas  stated
    that  the  supplementary  letter  from  One  World  Research  did   not
    satisfactorily address the concerns he raised.

19   In relation to the country expert report from Dr  Giostozzi,  Mr  Kotas
    referred to a UNHCR document dated July 2012 at pages  352  to  353  of
    Appellant's bundle, and suggested that  there  was  little  information
    available  about  forced  or  coerced  recruitment  strategies  of  the
    Taliban. In that regard, Mr Kotas submitted, there was not much country
    information to support the expert report.

20   Mr Kotas referred  to  paragraph  9  of  Mr  Giostozzi's  report  which
    suggested that Afghan parents do not  usually  share  information  with
    their children about the family business or other adult  affairs  until
    they reached adulthood,  and  therefore  queried  why  the  Appellant's
    mother would have informed the Appellant that his  father  was  in  the
    Taliban and had  been killed as a result  of  his  activities  for  the
    Taliban. Mr Kotas queried how Dr Giostozzi could suggest  at  paragraph
    12 that the Appellant would be easily  and  immediately  identified  by
    local Taliban  in  Kapisa  province,  given  that  the  events  in  the
    Appellant's account were now  approximately  six  years  ago.  He  also
    argued that as the Appellant  was  now  an  adult,  he  would  be  less
    susceptible to any pressures upon him to  join  the  Taliban,  compared
    with his position as a child.

21   Mr Kotas argued that it was speculative for the expert  to  suggest  at
    paragraph 13 of his report that the Appellant could  relatively  easily
    be tracked down  around  Afghanistan  by  the  insurgents  and  by  the
    security forces. He argued that there would not be any risk of harm  to
    the Appellant on arrival at  the  airport  in  Kabul,  given  that  the
    Appellant himself has not had any dealings directly  with  the  Taliban
    and he was not fighter. Internal flight to Kabul would be available  to
    the Appellant and any psychiatric problems the Appellant may  have  did
    not result in it being unduly harsh for the Appellant to relocate.

22   On behalf  of  the  Appellant,  Mr  Furner  relied  upon  the  skeleton
    argument  for  the  original  First-tier   hearing,   and   his   short
    supplementary skeleton argument. He pointed out that even if there  was
    some uncertainty in  the  Appellant's  evidence  about  the  number  of
    occasions that he was approached, the judge had not held  this  against
    the Appellant (para 72 of the judge's decision).

23   In relation to the weight to be attached to  the  evidence  of  the  Mr
    Safi, it was to be noted that the Respondent had failed to take up  the
    opportunity made available to her to put any further  queries  to  that
    witness. Further, in the  additional  witness  statement  from  Bridget
    Prince, the telephone number of the Mr [A] had  been  provided,  giving
    the Respondent a further opportunity to make any enquiries she  thought
    necessary as to Mr Safi's evidence. The witnesses to whom Mr  Safi  had
    spoken each confirmed that they knew that the  Appellant's  father  had
    been in the Taliban, that he had been killed in the course of  a  night
    raid, and that the Taliban had sought to recruit  the  teenage  son  of
    that man. There was no animus on the part of Mr  Safi  to  misrepresent
    any part  of  his  evidence,  and  there  was  no  adequate  reason  to
    disbelieve any part of it.

24   The second report from Dr Giostozzi provided further information  about
    the activities of  the  Taliban  in  the  Appellant's  home  area,  and
    confirmed the evidence at paragraph 10 of the original report that  the
    home village of the Appellant was inside the area  of  control  of  the
    Taliban. Further reasons were given at paragraphs 5 to 9 of the  second
    report as to why it was most likely to be Taliban  had  approached  the
    Appellant, as opposed to Hizb-i Islami or Jamiat-i Islami.

25   In relation to the issue of risk to the Appellant  overall,  Mr  Furner
    referred to paragraph 6 of Dr Giostozzi's  initial  report  which  gave
    sufficient reason for his assertion that coerced recruitment was not at
    all uncommon. At paragraph 7 of the first report, it was explained that
    the Appellant's account  was  consistent  with  the  Taliban's  typical
    recruitment patterns and Dr Giostozzi had explained adequately why  the
    Appellant had not been taken immediately by the Taliban; because he was
    the son of a 'martyr'.

26   Mr Furner pointed out  that  the  Taliban  had  not  only  visited  the
    Appellant's family whilst the family  remained  in  Kapisa  during  the
    initial mourning period following the  Appellant's  father  death,  but
    also approached the Appellant's family on two  occasions  in  Nangahar,
    after the Appellant and his mother had moved there  to  live  with  the
    Appellant's maternal uncle. This indicated a  significant  interest  by
    the  Taliban  in  the  Appellant,  and  would   represent   significant
    psychological pressure on the Appellant to join them, and a  danger  to
    him if he refused.

27   Whereas Mr Kotas had suggested that Dr  Giostozzi  gave  an  inadequate
    explanation as to why the Appellant could  easily  and  immediately  be
    identified in Kapisa province, Mr Furner argued that paragraph 13 of Dr
    Giostozzi's report deals with  this  in  some  detail,  describing  the
    practice of reference-checking in Pushto culture,  and  that  questions
    would be asked about the Appellant's background  wherever  he  went  in
    Afghanistan. This practice was also referred to by the  Upper  Tribunal
    in the case of  AA  (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UK
    UT00016 at paragraphs  130  to  132.   The  Taliban  had  sophisticated
    intelligence gathering practices. As  regards  the  likelihood  of  the
    Appellant facing recruitment into Taliban, Mr Furner  referred  to  the
    article in the Institute for War and Peace Reporting dated 10  February
    2015 at 217 to 218 of the Appellant's bundle, regarding  the  issue  of
    unemployment amongst young men in Afghanistan  driving  them  into  the
    arms of the insurgent groups. The same point was raised  in  the  UNHCR
    eligibility guidelines dated 17  December  2010  at  page  379  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.

28   Mr Furner also referred to the Respondent's Operational  Guidance  Note
    of February 2015 on Afghanistan, paragraphs 3.10.16 and 3.10.17 at page
    310 of the Appellant's bundle, in which reports of the European  Asylum
    Support Office (EASO) and  of  UNHCR  were  discussed.  It  was  to  be
    observed that UNHCR were of the view  that  the  definition  of  forced
    recruitment as set out in the EASO report was too narrowly defined  and
    that the report did not include as part of that definition that Taliban
    recruitment mechanisms may be based on a  broader  coercive  strategies
    including fear, intimidation  and  the  use  of  tribal  mechanisms  to
    pressurise  individuals  into  joining  the   Taliban.   The   report's
    conclusion that forced recruitment is the  exception  rather  than  the
    rule should therefore not be taken to apply to  these  other  forms  of
    coercive recruitment.

29   As regards the risk of harm to the Appellant from government forces  as
    a result of his perceived connections with the Taliban, Dr  Giostozzi's
    comments on this at paragraph 13 and 14 of his first  report  were  not
    speculative; these issues were also discussed in the UNHCR document  at
    pages 370 to 371; see also pages 228-240 in the UNAMA report  referring
    to many children being detained and tortured  on  the  basis  of  their
    perceived support for the Taliban.

30   As regards the Appellant's ability to internally relocate to Kabul,  if
    there was a real risk of serious harm to him  in  his  local  area,  Mr
    Furner relied upon paras 13, 30, and 33-39  of Dr  Giostozzi's  report,
    describing connections between the Taliban and  the  police  forces  in
    Afghanistan, such that information about the Appellant might be shared.
     Mr Furner also referred to the case of RQ (Afghan National Army - Hisb-
    i Islami - risk) Afghanistan CG (2008) UK AIT 00013, paragraphs  107  -
    109, where it was accepted that if news of being specifically wanted by
    a warlord or commander was likely to reach Kabul, an Appellant's safety
    in Kabul cannot be satisfactorily assured; see the summary  finding  at
    paragraph 109(6). Further the psychiatric evidence in relation  to  the
    Appellant was relevant as to his vulnerability on return to Kabul.

31   As regards the Appellant's appeal under Article  8,  Mr  Furner  argued
    that the Respondent's  failure  to  adequately  trace  the  Appellant's
    family resulted in the Appellant remaining in the United Kingdom for an
    extended period and  the  judgement  in  MA  and  AA  (Afghanistan)  at
    paragraph 52 and 72 established that such failure may be relevant  when
    assessing Article 8 ties to the United Kingdom. I was invited to  allow
    the appeal.

    Discussion

32   Having regard to the preserved findings, and the reasons in  the  error
    of law decision setting the judge's decision aside, it is apparent that
    findings are required on the following issues:

    (i)  What was the Islamic group of which the Appellant's father  was  a
         member?

    (ii) How many times, and in what circumstances did that  Islamic  group
         visit the Appellant and his family, and for what purpose?

    (iii)    Was that Islamic group seeking to coerce  the  Appellant  into
         joining it?

    (iv) If so, what might the consequences to the Appellant be for  having
         left the area (and indeed Afghanistan)?

    (v)  If any real risk of serious harm exists for the Appellant  in  his
         home area, would it be unreasonable/unduly harsh to expect  him  to
         relocate to another area of Afghanistan?

    (vi) What bearing, if any, does the psychiatric evidence regarding  the
         Appellant have in relation to that assessment?

    (vii)    Is there any risk of harm to  the  Appellant  from  the  state
         authorities in Afghanistan?

    (vii)    What weight is to be given to the evidence of Dr Giostozzi  in
         relation to the above matters?

    (ix) What weight is to be given to the evidence of Mohammed Hashim Safi
         in relation to the assessment of the above matters?

33   I find, contrary to the judge, that there was  no  real  doubt  in  the
    Appellant's evidence as to which Islamic group the  Appellant's  father
    was a member of, or had approached him for recruitment. I find that the
    Appellant has been consistent throughout his evidence in  this  regard.
    The following references to the Taliban are  made  in  the  Appellant's
    witness statement of 5 July 2011:

    (i)  "My father was killed six months before I arrived in the  UK.  The
         Taliban called my maternal uncle [WK] and told him that  my  father
         died." (Para 5)

    (ii) "My uncle told my mum that we should move because I was young  and
         the Taliban may come  and  take  me  from  her.  The  Taliban  were
         recruiting young people likely to perform jihad." (Para 7).

    (iii)    "My father used to work with the Taliban but  I  do  not  know
         what his job was." (para 8).

     (iv)    "I know that my father worked with the Taliban because he  was
         martyred. They brought his body to the house. My mother  also  told
         me that my father was killed fighting with the Taliban." (Para 9).

34   The  Appellant  continued  to  refer  to  the  Taliban  throughout  his
    account, and further stated at paragraph 18 that:  "My  uncle  told  me
    that my life is at risk as the Taliban will come and take me".  I  find
    that the reference at paragraph 16 of the Respondent's original refusal
    letter dated 5 August 2011 that no one had told the Appellant that  his
    father was a member of the Taliban, does  not  accurately  reflect  the
    evidence which the Appellant has given.

35   Further, although Dr Giostozzi states at paragraph 4 of his  report  of
    6 May 2015 that the Tagab and Nejrab areas are mainly populated by  the
    Safi tribe, which is divided by bitter rivalries  and  is  split  three
    ways between supporters of the Taliban,  Hizb-i  Islami,  and  Jamiat-i
    Islami, he further states at paragraph 10 that it was  clear  that  the
    Appellant's  village was  well  inside  the  area  of  control  of  the
    Taliban. If there was any doubt about that evidence (which I find  that
    there is not) Dr Giostozzi  in  any  event  confirms  his  evidence  at
    paragraphs 8 and 9 of his further  report  of  21  December  2015  that
    Taliban controls the Tagab district (where the Appellant is  from).  He
    also states that given that the Appellant relocated  to  Nangahar,  and
    that  his  father's  comrades  were  able  to  visit  him  there,  this
    effectively excluded the possibility that the father belonged to Jamiat-
    i Islami, which has no presence in Nangahar and faces a high  level  of
    local hostility there.

36   I also take into account the evidence of Mr Mohammed  Hashim  Safi,  in
    the One World Research report of 18 April 2015.  In  my  error  of  law
    decision, I found that the judge had erred in law in failing  to  place
    adequate weight on this evidence, on the basis  that  she  treated  the
    report are self-serving, whereas there was no evidence that Mr Safi had
    any nexus to the Appellant which would provide him with any  motivation
    to exaggerate or manipulate the evidence contained within  his  written
    report. I find that Mr Safi gives an adequate explanation of the outset
    of his report as to his background, and the purpose of the  report.   I
    find that he gives sufficient explanation within the body of his report
    as to how he made contact first of all with a local MP, Azizullah Safi,
    who put him in touch with a Mr [A], the 'Malik'  (local  representative
    for a village or number of villages)  for the Tagab district.

37   It is to be noted that the Respondent has not put any questions  to  Mr
    Safi. Further, the  full international telephone number for Mr [A]  has
    now been  provided  by  One  World  Research  to  Respondent,  and  the
    Respondent has not indicated any intention of contacting Mr [A] herself
    in order to corroborate or dispute the content of Mr [A]'s  answers  as
    given to Mr Safi, and recorded in Mr Safi's report. I find that Mr Safi
    also adequately explains the means by which Mr  [A]  had  made  contact
    with two further persons, named in Mr Safi's report, and had put  those
    persons in contact with Mr Safi. All three of the persons named  in  Mr
    Safi's report confirmed their knowledge that the Appellant's father was
    in the Taliban, had been killed in a night raid, and that  the  Taliban
    had sought to recruit the teenage  son  of  the  family.  It  was  also
    recorded that the Appellant's family had  disappeared  from  the  Tagab
    area.

38   I find that all of this evidence corroborates the  Appellant's  account
    and I place significant weight on the report of Mr Safi,  finding  that
    there is no objective reason to doubt the information contained in  his
    report. In doing so, I also take into account the  further  explanation
    of Mr  Safi's  background,  and  the  research  methods  of  One  World
    Research, as set out in the letter  Bridget  Prince  dated  29  January
    2016.

39   I place no real significance on the fact that cultural practices  would
    normally mean that a child would not be informed of the detail  of  his
    father's affairs (thus explaining why the Appellant knew little  detail
    of  his  father's  activities);  this  is  not  inconsistent  with  the
    Appellant having been informed, after  the  father's  death,  that  the
    father had been killed whilst fighting  with  the  Taliban.  There  was
    nothing in the country  information  which  suggested  that  discretion
    attached to such matters would extend to preventing the Appellant being
    told that his father had been killed or the circumstances in  which  he
    had been killed.

40   I therefore find that the  Appellant's  father  was  a  member  of  the
    Taliban. The judge had already accepted  as  credible  the  Appellant's
    account, insofar as it went, which  included  the  Appellant's  account
    that his father had been killed. For the avoidance  of  doubt,  I  find
    that the Appellant's father was killed in a night raid  by  ISAF/Afghan
    forces in the Khanji Khil area of Tagab district, Kapisa province.

41   I turn to the Appellant's evidence about the  contact  which  was  made
    with him and his family by the Islamic group after his father's  death.
    Having found that the Appellant's father had been a member of  Taliban,
    it follows that I find that it was the Taliban who came  to  visit  the
    Appellant's family and the Appellant.

42   It is right to note that the Appellant's first witness statement  dated
    5 July 2011 is not entirely clear as  to  the  sequence  of  events  as
    regards the Taliban's visits to the Appellant's home. At  paragraph  10
    of the statement the Appellant refers  to  events  during  the  15  day
    mourning period after his father was killed, before the  Appellant  and
    his family moved to Nangahar. He states that 'they' (by which  I  infer
    the Taliban)  talked  to  his  uncle.  The  Appellant  also  refers  at
    paragraph 11 to an incident after he and his mother had gone to live in
    the maternal uncle's home in Nangahar, where two Taliban arrived at the
    home, and the Appellant went to fetch the uncle at  the  uncle's  shop.
    When the Appellant later saw his mother, she was upset and crying,  but
    the Appellant did not know why.

43   The Appellant then describes at paragraph 14 an  occasion  in  Nangahar
    where a Taliban approached him and told him to go with them, as it  was
    an obligation of every Muslim to perform jihad and as  his  father  had
    been killed, the Appellant had 'to revenge'.  The  Appellant  told  his
    mother about this and she in turn told his maternal uncle.

44   There is then a reference at paragraph 16 to an  incident  said  to  be
    almost 2 � months later, with the Taliban coming 'for the second time'.
    They remained for lunch. The Appellant states:

         "When they were leaving the house one of  them  approached  me  and
         said I should go with them to perform jihad and revenge my father's
         death. He said that they will come back and that I should get ready
         as they will take me with them but nobody heard what they  said  to
         me. They talked to my uncle but I do not know what it was about."

45   At paragraph 17 the Appellant states that he told his mother  what  the
    Taliban had said, and she told the uncle. The Appellant described  that
    a few days later the uncle came with another man and arrange for him to
    leave the Afghanistan.

46   The judge did not hold it  against  the  Appellant  that  at  the  oral
    hearing before her she was he was unsure whether the men who approached
    the family after his father's death did so in two  or  three  occasions
    (paras 69 and 72).

47   I find that there were a number of visits by the Taliban;  the  Taliban
    first attending at the time of the mourning period for the  Appellant's
    father in the Appellant's home area of  Tagab,  Kapisa,  but  that  the
    Taliban had on at least two later  occasions  visited  the  Appellant's
    maternal uncle's home in Nangahar. On those occasions the Appellant was
    told directly that he was expected to perform jihad as his  father  had
    been killed, and on the last  occasion  he  was  specifically  informed
    that they will come back and that the Appellant  should  get  ready  as
    they will take the  Appellant  with  them.  The  expressions  that  the
    Appellant recalled being used suggested a certain  imminence  to  their
    return to collect him.

48   I have had regard to the country  information  on  Taliban  recruitment
    practices. The following passages appear in the Respondent's  Operation
    Guidance Note of February 2015 (emphasis added)

         "3.10.16 The  EASO  report  (referred  to  in  3.10.4)  provides  a
         comprehensive insight into the Taliban, a history of  the  conflict
         in Afghanistan and recruitment strategies. It notes that "Local and
         autonomous commanders, tribal structures and religious clerics  are
         the main channels through which recruitment is  facilitated  within
         Afghanistan. As a general principle, it could be  stated  that  the
         local cell - commander, tribe, family or madrassa -  is  the  basic
         recruitment  hub.  In  general,  the  direct  use  of  coercion  or
         retaliation for refusing enlistment by the Taliban is  not  typical
         for the current  Afghan  Insurgency.  There  are  cases  of  forced
         recruitment, but these  are  considered  as  exceptional.  To  gain
         support and recruit fighters, they relied on economic  needs,  fear
         and coercion, pride and  honour,  tribe  and  tradition,  religious
         persuasion, etc.  Clerics  played  an  indispensable  role  in  the
         recruitment processes".  In its  summary  the  EASO  report  states
         "Other sources stated explicitly that force or  coercion  were  not
         used for recruitment in their provinces: Ghazni, Herat  and  Logar.
         Sources discussing the general situation  in  Afghanistan  commonly
         state that coercion  is  rare  in  the  recruitment  process.  They
         sometimes refer to locations where it did happen: refugee camps and
         areas under strong influence of the Taliban. One  source  mentioned
         that the Taliban recruited porters and medical staff  by  force  in
         areas under their control.  Some  sources  gave  arguments  against
         forced recruitment: it would alienate communities or  there  is  no
         need for it, since the Taliban dispose of sufficient volunteers.

         3.10.17 In July 2012 UNHCR welcomed the EASO report and noted  "The
         report focuses on forced recruitment by the Taliban  and  concludes
         that the Taliban only uses forced  recruitment  exceptionally.  The
         report defines "forced recruitment" narrowly, limiting its scope of
         application to situations where individuals are forced to join  the
         Taliban under the use or threat of immediate violence.  The  report
         does not include in this definition Taliban recruitment  mechanisms
         based on broader coercive strategies, including fear,  intimidation
         and the use of tribal mechanisms  to  pressurize  individuals  into
         joining  the  Taliban.  The   report's   conclusion   that   forced
         recruitment is the exception rather than the rule should  therefore
         not be taken to apply to these other forms of coercive recruitment.
         In circumstances where recruitment is based at  least  in  part  on
         fear, intimidation, tribal pressures or other coercive elements, it
         is  exceedingly  difficult  in  practice  to  make  a   clear   cut
         distinction between individuals joining the Taliban voluntarily and
         individuals being forcibly recruited. Where  Afghan  asylum-seekers
         claim to have fled forcible recruitment by  the  Taliban,  decision
         makers in EU Member States will need to identify the precise nature
         of the coercion of which the applicant  complains  and  decide  the
         case on the basis of the applicant's  individual  circumstances".34
         Amnesty International  expressed  concern  that  the  term  "forced
         recruitment" is defined  narrowly  in  the  EASO  report:  "In  its
         conclusion the EASO does not acknowledge the situations of  persons
         joining or supporting the Taleban as result of indirect methods  of
         intimidation such  as  through  instilling  fear  among  the  local
         population  by  threatening  night  letters,  killing  individuals,
         including  children,  perceived  as  spies  or  supporters  of  the
         government,  the  extortion  of  fines,  as  well   as   pressuring
         individuals  to  join  the  Taliban  through  tribal,  family   and
         religious mechanisms, and other indirect means of coercion.   Also,
         in the current context of reintegration and reconciliation  efforts
         with the Taliban,  it  is  expected  that  more  people,  including
         members of ethnic minority groups, may submit to  Taliban  demands,
         fearing reprisals."

49   I note that the Appellant is from an area under  the  strong  influence
    of the Taliban. He is  not  from  Ghazni,  Herat  or  Logar.   The  OGN
    continues:

         "3.10.18 Conclusion. The risk from anti government groups  will  be
         highest in areas where they operate or  have  control.  Caseworkers
         will need to  take  into  account  the  most  up  to  date  country
         information, the nature of the threat and the particular profile of
         the claimant. For applicants who  can  demonstrate  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution for reason of their imputed  political  opinion
         and who are unable to acquire protection or relocate internally,  a
         grant of asylum will be appropriate.

         3.10.19 Forced recruitment by Taliban military commanders,  leaders
         or fighters (i.e. situations where individuals  or  their  families
         are directly approached and forced  to  join  up  under  threat  of
         retaliation or violence if they refuse) has  to  be  considered  as
         exceptional. The risk will be highest in areas  where  armed  anti-
         government groups are operating or  have  control  and  in  refugee
         camps but the evidence is of recruitment  driven  more  by  broader
         coercive strategies, such as economics, fear,  intimidation,  pride
         and honour, religious persuasion and the use of  tribal  mechanisms
         to pressurise individuals into joining the Taliban, rather than  by
         force."

50   I note that the type of broader coercive  strategies,  including  fear,
    intimidation and the use of tribal mechanisms to pressurize individuals
    into  joining  the  Taliban,  described  in  the  UNHCR   and   Amnesty
    International reports (as referred to in the OGN), is exactly the  sort
    of coercion referred to by Dr Giostozzi in  his  paragraphs  6  and  7,
    which he stated the Appellant would  have  little  practical  scope  to
    resist,  for cultural, financial and personal safety reasons  (paras  6
    and 12). I find that the Appellant would be  targeted  by  Taliban  for
    recruitment upon return to Kapisa or Nangahar, due to his father's past
    membership of the Taliban and  his  'martyrdom'.  I  also  accept  that
    unwillingness to join the Taliban would place him in  danger  amounting
    to a real risk of serious harm.

51   Further, and in any event, I find that whether  the  Taliban  would  be
    likely to inflict serious harm upon the Appellant for  retribution  for
    past or future unwillingness to join them, is irrelevant. I  find  that
    he would be made to join. Requiring a 19 year old young man to join the
    Taliban, against his will, would in and of  itself  amount  to  serious
    harm. This is not a sovereign government requiring a citizen to perform
    legitimate military service. The Taliban has no legal writ  to  require
    the Appellant to do anything.  It  is  an  organisation  proscribed  in
    international law and would require the  Appellant  to  take  up  arms,
    against his will, to engage in  military  conflict  and,  according  to
    their standard modes of operation,  would  be  likely  to  require  the
    Appellant to engage in serious human rights  abuses.  This  is  serious
    harm.

52   I place  weight  on  Dr  Giostozzi  explanation  about  the  reference-
    checking (as Mr Furner called it) that would take  place  wherever  the
    Appellant went in Afghanistan (report, 13), (also noted  at  paragraphs
    130 -132 of AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UK UT00016),
    and on his evidence about Taliban's intelligence gathering and  sharing
    with police. I find that the Appellant would be at  continued  risk  of
    serious harm from the Taliban in Kapisa and Nangahar province.

53   However, I find that there is  inadequate  evidence  to  demonstrate  a
    real risk of harm to the Appellant in Kabul from the Taliban.

54   Dr Giostozzi considers the risk of  harm  to  the  Appellant  from  the
    government authorities. It is not argued that there would be a risk  of
    harm to the Appellant at the airport. I agree that in  Kapisa  province
    there is local knowledge of the fate  of  the  Appellant's  father  (as
    demonstrated by the evidence obtained by Ms Safi), and bearing in  mind
    Dr Giostozzi's evidence at paragraph 15 of his  first  report,  I  find
    that it is likely that the police and security services in  Kapisa  are
    likely to be aware of  information  about  the  family,  including  the
    Appellant's father's membership of the Taliban.

55   I also accept, based on the evidence of Dr Giostozzi at  paragraphs  13
    - 27 of his first report, that if the authorities in Kabul were to make
    enquiries about the  Appellant  to  the  authorities  in  Kapisa,  then
    information would be provided, and the Kabul authorities would  suspect
    the Appellant of association with Taliban, though his father,  and  the
    Appellant would be at real risk of serious harm in  Kabul.  However,  I
    find that there is inadequate evidence to establish a real risk of  the
    government authorities in Kabul  making  such  enquiries.  Although  Dr
    Giostozzi refers to the  existence  of  such  risk  arising  from,  for
    example, a routine police check, his report does not state  how  often,
    or routine, such checks are, or why the Appellant might be  subject  to
    such a check.

56   I find that there is no risk of serious harm to the Appellant in  Kabul
    arising from either the government authorities or the Taliban in Kabul.



57   However, in considering whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant to relocate to Kabul, I  consider  the  psychiatric  evidence
    regarding the Appellant. Dr Treveling's findings that the Appellant  is
    suffering from Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, is cognitively  impaired
    and has difficulties with concentration and memory are not disputed  by
    the Respondent. Her opinion was that these conditions would  leave  him
    vulnerable to exploitation.

58   There is no evidence that the Appellant  knows  where  his  mother  and
    maternal uncle  are.  The  Respondent  took  no  effort  to  trace  the
    Appellant's family. The Appellant's efforts to do so  through  the  Red
    Cross have not resulted in any useful information, and Mr  Safi  stated
    that he had insufficient information to be  able  to  make  any  useful
    enquires as to their whereabouts. The Appellant will have no family  or
    other support system available to him on return to Afghanistan.

59   Dr Giostozzi sets out the difficulty that the  Appellant  may  have  in
    securing housing and employment in Kabul at  paragraphs  42-44  of  his
    first report and at paragraph 16 of his second. I find that, due to the
    Appellant's mental health problems mentioned, and his vulnerability  to
    exploitation by others, he would be at a  significant  disadvantage  to
    other returnees to Kabul in securing accommodation and employment.  The
    Appellant has never lived in Kabul and has no local  knowledge  of  the
    city. I find that it would be unlikely that the Appellant would be able
    to secure adequate income or  accommodation  to  prevent  himself  from
    becoming destitute. I find that his return to Kabul would amount  to  a
    breach of the Appellant's rights under Article  3  ECHR  and  that  his
    proposed internal relocation to Kabul would be unduly harsh.

60   The Appellant's appeal under the Refugee Convention succeeds.

61   For like reasons,  the  Appellant's  appeal  would  succeed  under  the
    immigration rules and under Article  8  ECHR;  given  the  difficulties
    likely to experienced by the Appellant  upon  return  to  Kabul,  there
    would very significant obstacles to his integration  into  Afghanistan,
    and the requirements of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) would be met.




    Decision:

    On 22 December 2015,  I  held  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of law.

    On 22 December 2015, I set aside that decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on Refugee Grounds,
    under Immigration Rules (276ADE(1)(iii)) and Human Rights Grounds.


Signed:                         Date: 31.10.16

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
Appendix 1 - Error of law decision 22 December 2015 (verbatim ex tempore)


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Furner of Birnberg Peirce & Partners
For the Respondent:    Ms A, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Appellant,  [NS]  against  the
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Plumptre dated 20  May  2015.   The
         appeal before the judge was against the Respondent's decision of 22
         December 2014 to refuse to vary the Appellant's leave and to make a
         decision under Section 47 of the 2006 Act requiring  him  to  leave
         the United Kingdom.

      2. The grounds on which the Appellant resisted that decision were that
         he feared serious harm on return to Afghanistan from Taliban in his
         home area in the province of Kapisa as a  result  of  his  father's
         alleged membership of the Taliban, the father's demise  in  an  air
         strike against the  Taliban  and  the  Taliban  coming  on  two  or
         possibly three occasions to the Appellant's family home  thereafter
         at which point the Appellant said that he was being coerced to join
         the Taliban.  The Appellant argued that in having left the area  he
         would be deemed as having been disloyal to the  Taliban  who  would
         then seek to seriously harm him.   He  also  argued  that  internal
         flight to Kabul was unreasonable and unduly harsh.   Those  matters
         came before the judge on 7 May 2015 at Hatton Cross.

      3. The Appellant relied upon evidence which included a country  expert
         evidence from Dr Giustozzi which dealt with  issues  including  the
         prevalence of Islamist militia activity  in  the  Appellant's  home
         area, their practices as  regards  coerced  recruitment  and  their
         potential to locate or trace the Appellant either in his home  area
         of in Kabul.  The evidence of Dr Giustozzi also addressed the issue
         of internal relocation in Kabul.

      4. The judge in a lengthy determination purports to accept as credible
         the Appellant's account insofar as it went.  She accepted that  the
         Appellant's father had been in a militia but held  that  there  was
         inadequate evidence before her to identify which militia it was.

      5. On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Furner  appearing  before  me  today
         argues that that is a material error on the basis that it failed to
         take into account specific evidence contained within Dr Giustozzi's
         report of the presence of Taliban in the particular area  in  which
         the Appellant lived.  I find in relation to that that the judge has
         failed to properly take into account that evidence and there was no
         adequate reason given by the judge for finding that it had not been
         established that the group of which the Appellant's  father  was  a
         member was the Taliban.  Mr Furner also complains that there were a
         number of references throughout the Appellant's account in which he
         had identified the Taliban as being the relevant organisation  that
         his father had been a member of and that the judge  had  not  given
         adequate reasons for giving proper weight to  the  Appellant's  own
         evidence.  I also agree with  the  Appellant's  challenge  in  that
         respect.  The judge held that it would not be unduly harsh for  the
         Appellant to relocate to Kabul.

      6. The remaining matters within the grounds of appeal brought  by  the
         Appellant include  the  following.   The  judge  had  rejected  the
         proposition  that  the  Appellant  had  been  subject   to   forced
         recruitment into Taliban.

      7. Ground 2 of the Appellant's grounds argue that  this  misapprehends
         the Appellant's case in that he had asserted not that he  had  been
         forced to be recruited into the Taliban but rather because  of  the
         Taliban's two or possibly three visits to the family home after the
         Appellant's father's death.  He feared future  coerced  recruitment
         into the Taliban.  I find that the Immigration Judge fails to  give
         proper regard to the  evidence  of  Dr  Giustozzi  as  regards  the
         practice of coerced recruitment and I agree with  paragraph  15  of
         the  Appellant's  original  grounds  of  appeal,  quoting  from  Dr
         Giustozzi's evidence, that he did not as the judge alleged move the
         goalpost by allegedly talking about forced recruitment and then  at
         a later stage talking about coerced recruitment.  I  find  that  Dr
         Giustozzi gave a balanced and reasoned opinion as to why he was  of
         the view that the practice of coerced recruitment was,  as  he  put
         it, not at all uncommon.  I find that the judge does  not  properly
         deal with that evidence.

      8. The third ground of appeal challenges the judge's finding that  the
         Appellant was not at risk of being harmed by the state  authorities
         in Afghanistan.  Her  reasons  at  paragraph  97  of  her  decision
         appeared to be that this had not  been  a  fear  described  by  the
         Appellant himself when interviewed by the Home Office  in  2011  at
         which point in time he was  aged  14.   I  accept  the  Appellant's
         argument at paragraph 21 that the assessment of risk of harm should
         not place undue weight on the subjective expression of  a  14  year
         old child but rather consider  the  risk  objectively  particularly
         risks that have been clearly  argued  and  pleaded  by  experienced
         representatives.  This was a matter which the judge ought  to  have
         given proper  consideration  to  and  I  find  that  she  proceeded
         erroneously in not giving adequate consideration to that issue.

      9. The Appellant's fourth ground challenges the judge's assessment  of
         internal  relocation  in  Afghanistan.   Although   a   number   of
         criticisms of the judge's decision are made I find  that  paragraph
         28 of the grounds of appeal made out  which  is  that  the  medical
         evidence  before  the  judge   establishing   from   a   consultant
         psychiatrist that the Appellant suffers from post-traumatic  stress
         disorder, that he has cognitive difficulties and poor memory  is  a
         matter which was relevant to  her  assessment  of  his  ability  to
         internally relocate in Afghanistan.  That  evidence  was  something
         that  the  judge  only  turned  to  at  the  end  of  her  decision
         considering the issue of Article 8 at  which  point  she  considers
         that the medical evidence did  not  cross  the  high  threshold  in
         medical cases in Article 3 or 8 of the European Convention on Human
         Rights but she ought I find to have separately  considered  whether
         that evidence was relevant to her assessment  of  whether  internal
         relocation was unduly harsh under the Refugee Convention.

     10. Ground 5 is a  discrete  challenge  as  to  the  judge's  erroneous
         approach to Dr Giustozzi's report.   I  do  not  find  that  it  is
         necessary for me to consider that ground any further because I have
         already found  previously  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  that
         evidence was lacking, particularly with regard to the likelihood of
         the Taliban being the relevant militia group operating  within  the
         Appellant's  home  area  and  also  their  practices   as   regards
         recruitment.

     11. The sixth ground is a challenge to  the  judge's  assessment  of  a
         statement given by a Mr Mohammed Safi.  This is a  person  residing
         in Afghanistan and operating or employed by a  company  called  One
         World Research.  He  had  been  specifically  commissioned  by  the
         Appellant's representatives to make enquiries  in  the  Appellant's
         home area as  to  the  fate  of  the  Appellant's  father  and  the
         whereabouts of any other members of the Appellant's  family.   This
         resulted in a report at page 194 to 198  of  the  Appellant's  main
         bundle dated 18 April 2015 in which Mr Safi had made  a  number  of
         enquiries and had spoken to  three  separate  people  who  provided
         information about the fate of the  Appellant's  father,  [KK].   It
         suffices to say that the evidence that  Mr  Safi  set  out  in  his
         statement corroborated the Appellant's account that his father  had
         been a member of the Taliban and had been killed in an  attack  and
         also that the witnesses spoken to by Mr Safi had  been  aware  that
         [KK] had a young son aged around 14  and  at  least  one  of  those
         witnesses had said that they were aware that the Taliban  had  been
         interested in recruiting that son.  The inference to be drawn  from
         that evidence is the son mentioned was the present Appellant.   The
         judge placed little weight on that evidence based on the fact  that
         it was hearsay evidence and that information had not been  provided
         by Mr Safi as to the contact details of the person spoken to.   She
         deals with that evidence at paragraphs 105 to 110 of her  decision.



     12. Mr Furner challenges the judge's dealing with that evidence on  the
         basis that the attack on that evidence mounted  by  the  Presenting
         Officer, Mr Vardanjan at the hearing of 7 May was unfairly  mounted
         in the  light  of  the  fact  that  on  21  April  the  Appellant's
         representatives had written to the court copying that letter to the
         Secretary of State with a copy of Mr Safi's letter and had  invited
         the Secretary of State to indicate in advance of  the  hearing  any
         queries that she had in relation  to  that  evidence  so  that  any
         further enquiries could be made  to  Mr  Safi  and  for  a  further
         supplementary report to be provided if necessary.

     13. It seems to me that there was in fact no direction  issued  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal after the invitation made  by  the  Appellant's
         solicitors and so, although the approach adopted  by  those  acting
         for the Appellant was novel and was clearly potentially helpful,  I
         do not find in the absence of any direction issued to the Secretary
         of State that they reply to the Appellant's request that there  was
         any procedural unfairness which seems  to  be  the  nature  of  the
         challenge mounted here  to  criticisms  being  made  of  Mr  Safi's
         evidence at the hearing  itself.   However  I  do  agree  that  the
         judge's description of Mr Safi's  evidence  as  being  self-serving
         which seemed to be part of the  reasons  why  she  gave  it  little
         weight is not made out.  There was no personal animus motivating Mr
         Safi to give false evidence and the only real criticism that  could
         be made of his evidence is potentially that  telephone  numbers  of
         the persons that he spoke to were not given but I do not find  that
         the evidence was self-serving.  The judge I find gave  insufficient
         reasons for placing little weight on the evidence  and  I  consider
         that to be a material error of law.

     14. In the light of those findings  I  do  not  find  it  necessary  to
         proceed to deal with grounds 6 or 7 of the Appellant's  grounds  of
         appeal which mounted  a  challenge  to  the  judge's  finding  that
         apparent inadequate tracing enquiries  made  or  not  made  by  the
         Secretary of State to find the Appellant's family  had  an  adverse
         effect on the outcome of the Appellant's application for protection
         on the one hand and ground 9 dealt with the  judge's  consideration
         of the Appellant's claim under Article 8 of the European  Court  of
         Human Rights.  I find it is not necessary for me to consider  those
         matters any further because, as a result of  all  of  the  material
         errors that I have identified thus far I find that it is  necessary
         for this Tribunal to set aside the decision of Judge Plumptre dated
         20 May 2015 and for this matter to be re-made.




    Signed:






    Date:


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


