
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01616/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 23 July 2015                     |On: 11 August 2015                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                        Mr Sinthujan Thanabalasingam
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, counsel (instructed by S Satha and Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 6 January  1987.  His
    appeal against the respondent's decision  dated  21  February  2014  to
    refuse to grant him asylum and to remove him from the UK was  dismissed
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in a decision promulgated  on  13  May
    2015. The Judge found that  the  appellant's  claim  for  international
    protection lacked credibility and  had  been  fabricated  around  known
    facts to match the risk categories within  case  law.  His  claim  that
    there is an arrest warrant for him and that he has suffered arrest  and
    detention in the past has been supported by documents which  he  stated
    had been provided by his father.

 2. By reason of discrepancies,  however,  the  Judge  did  not  accept  as
    credible either the information on the documents  relied  upon  or  the
    appellant's account. Nor was there any reasonable explanation  for  his
    failure to claim asylum instead of remaining in the UK from August 2010
    until December 2013 with a Tier 4 visa and applying for  an  extension,
    when he now claims that  he  was  unfit  to  study  because  of  mental
    problems arising from ill treatment in Sri Lanka [70].

 3. Moreover, the fact that he had cuff marks on his wrists and other scars
    is not determinative of the fact that these were sustained in  the  way
    that he claimed. The fact that Dr Goldwyn did not consider  or  explore
    with him the infliction of injury by proxy is a gap in her report [72].



 4. Nor did the appellant fall into  a  risk  category  identified  in  the
    country guidance case of GJ and Others (Post Civil War: Returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC). There was no real risk that he would be
    on a stop list or that he is the subject of a  Court  order  or  arrest
    warrant [73]. There was no risk that he would be on  a  watch  list  or
    monitored on return [75].  The  attendance  at  demonstrations  in  the
    diaspora alone is not sufficient to create a real risk  that  he  would
    attract adverse attention on return.

 5. His Article 8 (private life) appeal was also dismissed.

 6. On 12 June 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal: It  is  arguable  that  the
    Judge's conclusions on the documentary evidence and on the  appellant's
    credibility lacked  reasoning  and  omitted  consideration  of  various
    material matters.

 7. Ms Jones, who had not represented the appellant before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, relied on the detailed grounds of appeal prepared by  counsel
    who had represented him there.

 8. Ms Jones referred to paragraph  52  where  the  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant's account of keeping in touch with his parents in  Sri  Lanka
    was inconsistent  with  the  fact  that  his  parents  are  kept  under
    surveillance.

 9.  However,  his  account  was  not  that  his  family  were  kept  under
    surveillance but that the authorities had monitored the  house  on  one
    occasion. Accordingly, his having maintained contact with them was  not
    inconsistent as he had never  contended  that  the  family  were  under
    surveillance as such.

10. In that respect, counsel who  represented  him  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stated in  the  permission  application  that  his  record  of
    proceedings demonstrated that the appellant  made  it  clear  that  the
    authorities were outside of his house on one particular  occasion,  not
    that  the  authorities  had  placed  the   appellant's   family   under
    surveillance.

11. Ms Jones amplified that submission  and  referred  to  the  appellant's
    witness  statement  (paragraph  25)  which  did  not  mention   general
    surveillance. The house was visited on one occasion.

12. The Judge had referred to the fact that the appellant had  remained  in
    the UK for a period of over three years before making  his  claim,  not
    keeping an appointment to claim asylum, but finally  making  it  on  23
    January 2014. Ms Jones submitted that the appellant had sought to  deal
    with the contention in paragraph 28 of his witness statement, but  that
    the Judge had not engaged with that at all. No reasoned explanation was
    given.

13. She submitted  that  the  Judge's  handling  of  the  medical  evidence
    amounted to a material error of law. The Judge found that the  clinical
    findings of Dr Goldwyn were undermined by the fact  that  she  had  not
    commented on the appellant's delay in claiming asylum.

14. It is contended that that delay had no relevance to the findings of the
    independent medical expert, who had to consider clinical causation  and
    consistency of the scarring in accordance with the  Istanbul  Protocol.
    Failure to comment on the delay has not been shown to  have  undermined
    the clinical corroborative value of that medical report, including  the
    mental health issues.

15. At paragraph 53 of the determination, the Judge found that  the  weight
    to be attached to Dr Goldwyn's report was undermined by the  fact  that
    the appellant did not in his witness statement explain that he suffered
    from ongoing symptoms consistent with PTSD. He stated that he  had  had
    headaches and that his depression started  ten  months  before.  It  is
    submitted that this was irrational.

16. At paragraph 57 of the determination, the Judge found that  the  report
    of Dr Persaud was poor and  superficial  and  was  predicated  upon  an
    acceptance and a recital of the  appellant's  account.  It  is  however
    contended in the grounds that Dr Persaud made  it  clear  that  he  had
    reached  his  conclusions  based  on  a  clinical  examination  of  the
    appellant and the sources that he examined were referred to. The doctor
    had to take the history from the appellant and make  relevant  clinical
    findings. No particularity was given as to why the report was  poor  or
    why she considered his analysis of the documentation he had before  him
    was simply based upon an account of what the appellant told him.

17. Ms Jones further submitted that the Judge's finding that the  appellant
    would not be targeted if returned was not properly reasoned. She stated
    at paragraph 59 that younger persons do tend to  attract  more  adverse
    attention but that the claimed risk profile of the appellant's  father,
    if credible, could reasonably have expected to have brought him to  the
    adverse interest of the authorities. Accordingly, she  found  that  the
    appellant's family, including the appellant, his father  and  siblings,
    were not a risk factor on return.

18. However, the Judge did not consider or engage with paragraphs 26-27  of
    the appellant's witness statement. His sister was released pursuant  to
    a bribe. His brothers have both disappeared. The fact that  the  father
    alone has been of no interest does not mean that the appellant's  other
    family members, including the appellant, would not be of such interest.



19. The seventh ground of appeal  attacked  the  Judge's  finding  that  Dr
    Goldwyn's report was undermined by the fact  that  she  had  failed  to
    consider SIBP. During the submissions before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    counsel had submitted that a doctor could not consider SIBP, nor  could
    the  Tribunal,  unless  "presenting  features"   exist.   Neither   the
    respondent nor the Tribunal had particularised  the  existence  of  any
    such feature.

20. Nor did the Judge provide  any  reasoning  for  the  finding  that  the
    appellant had not satisfactorily explained  the  alleged  discrepancies
    raised  by  the  respondent  in  the  decision  letter  regarding   his
    assistance to the LTTE, namely, by facilitating communication.

21. Ms Jones further submitted that the Judge did not attach any weight  to
    the documents produced by the appellant because of discrepancies in the
    dates highlighted in the reasons for refusal [61]. Those  discrepancies
    were said to go to the core of the account, constituting matters  which
    the appellant could reasonably have been expected to have recall or say
    that he could not recall when he was interviewed.

22. However, she submitted that the appellant in his witness statement  did
    not merely state that he was confused in the detailed witness statement
    but provided explanations for the alleged discrepancy. No reasoning has
    been provided for rejecting his account.

23. More significantly, there has been no assessment  of  the  verification
    letter from Mr Iman which itself constitutes a material error  of  law.
    In that respect, the document referred to as "the  receipt  of  arrest"
    had been independently verified by Mr Iman, an  attorney  in  Pakistan.
    The Judge did not engage with that evidence set out in the respondent's
    bundle at D1-D2. That evidence Ms Jones contended was relevant  to  any
    assessment of credibility.

24. At D1 there is a document headed "Ministry of Defence, Public Security,
    Law and Order." A "Receipt on Arrest" form  at  the  identified  police
    station setting out the name of the arrestee  (the  appellant)  stating
    his address and the date and time of that arrest was also provided. The
    reason for the arrest was  stated  to  be  'for  helping  communication
    facilities with terrorists'. The arresting officer's  name  and  police
    station are also set out.

25.  Ms  Jones  also  referred  to  the  court  records  produced  in   the
    respondent's bundle  at  E1-E2.  This  shows  that  the  appellant  was
    produced as a suspect and was arrested on suspicion under the Terrorist
    Act. This is in the magistrate's court, Colombo. It is  stated  in  the
    Court record that the appellant was arrested at an operation  conducted
    by the army on 6 August 2009. Permission was sought to detain  him  for
    interrogation. That was granted and his detention was ordered until  20
    November 2009. The date of that order was 10 August 2009.

26. On 20 November 2009,  both  the  complainant  and  the  appellant  were
    produced at Court.  Permission  was  again  sought  to  detain  him  as
    inquiries had not been completed. He was ordered to be  detained  until
    15 February 2010.

27. On 15 February 2010 he was bailed on condition that he signed in at the
    Colombo Terrorist Investigating Unit every Sunday. He was  released  on
    bail in the amount of Rs.100,000.  Sureties were accepted.

28. Ms Jones submitted that  all  these  documents  were  verified  by  the
    attorney, Mr Iman. However, the Judge did not mention the fact of their
    independent verification by the attorney at all.

29.  She  further  submitted  that  the   First-tier   Tribunal's   adverse
    credibility findings regarding alleged discrepancies were based on what
    was stated in the reasons for refusal letter. However,  no  independent
    reasoning  was  given  as  to  why  she   favoured   the   respondent's
    interpretation of his account and not the appellant's  own  explanation
    as to the alleged discrepancies. The Judge had found that the appellant
    had been able to state the reasons set  out  for  his  arrest  when  he
    attended the interview. He did not repeat the contents of  the  receipt
    of arrest and added information not included  in  that  receipt.  Those
    were said to  be  discrepancies  which  undermined  the  weight  to  be
    attached to those documents.

30. However, so far as those discrepancies are concerned, no regard was had
    to the fact that at the date of interview the appellant was in a  state
    of confusion and panicked, having regard to his vulnerability which  he
    claimed  to  have  suffered  following   torture.   No   allowance   or
    consideration was given to that when by considering the evidence  as  a
    whole.

31. Nor did the Judge pay proper  regard  to  the  letter  written  to  the
    appellant from a relative. In  accordance  with  the  country  guidance
    case, it is made clear that those  with  LTTE  family  affiliations  or
    other affiliations may be at risk on return to Sri Lanka. The Judge has
    misinterpreted the country guidance.

32. She submitted that the Judge did not adequately engage with  paragraphs
    308 of GJ (Sri  Lanka),  supra,  which  noted  that  returnees  can  be
    expected to be asked about any previous LTTE affiliation or any  family
    links to the LTTE. The Judge did not engage  with  the  fact  that  the
    appellant is likely to be asked questions in this regard. The Judge had
    accepted that the appellant was involved in sur place activity [67].

33. Nor did the Judge properly consider  Appendix  C  in  GJ  (Sri  Lanka),
    supra, which was concerned with the questions that the appellant  might
    be asked on his forced return to Sri Lanka. Those questions  asked  and
    the answers that would be provided by him demonstrate that he  will  be
    deemed to be of  sufficient  threat  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities'
    conception of a "unitary state" and will be perceived to be involved in
    significant post war separatism when considered against the  background
    of his own LTTE profile.

34. This compounds the Judge's errors of law in  relation  to  the  medical
    evidence which undermined her assessment of the appellant's credibility
    and consequently the risk on return.

35. Ms Jones referred to paragraph 14 of Appendix C of GJ. When interviewed
    at the airport, passengers were required to supply  the  address  where
    they intended to live in Sri Lanka. The evidence was that quite  a  few
    cases showed that the police or army had gone to confirm that  address.
    The addresses are now checked within seven days following arrival.

36. The evidence presented confirmed that an international agency had  told
    a Mr Lewis, who submitted a statement before the Tribunal in  GJ,  that
    the questions included whether the returnee had any links to  the  LTTE
    and what they had done abroad.

37. It is also submitted that  the  Judge  failed  adequately  to  consider
    paragraph 50 of the decision of MB (Sri Lanka)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829.
    There, Lord Justice Underhill emphasised that an appellant need not  be
    involved in post war separatism in a significant manner to be  at  risk
    on return to Sri Lanka. The First-tier Judge found that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk as he had not played a significant role  in  post-
    conflict  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and  would  thus  not   be
    considered to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka.

38. Ms Jones submitted that counsel had in his skeleton argument before the
    First-tier Tribunal had referred the  Judge  to  paragraph  50  of  MB,
    namely, that even apart from cases falling under heads  (b)  -  (d)  in
    paragraph 356(7) of GJ there may, although untypically, be other  cases
    where the evidence shows particular grounds  for  concluding  that  the
    government might regard the appellant as posing a current threat to the
    integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single  state,  even  in  the  absence  of
    evidence that he or she has been involved  in  diaspora  activism.  She
    submitted  that  the  failure  by  the  Judge  adequately  to  consider
    paragraph 50 of MB is a material error of law.

39. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tufan  relied  on  various  authorities
    including Gheisari v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1854 (Court  of  Appeal).  At
    paragraph 14, Lord Justice Sedley stated that he came to the view after
    much hesitation that the passage which saved the adjudicator's decision
    from a deficiency of reasons is the  single  passage  quoted  from  the
    judgment ending "his evidence lacks  the  ring  of  truth."  That  went
    beyond simply  echoing  the  secretary  of  state's  incredulity.  This
    expressed the adjudicator's own  evaluation  of  the  veracity  of  the
    account given. Slender though it  is,  it  represents  his  independent
    judgment on the critical matter upon which the issue  of  risk  to  the
    appellant hinged, namely whether he had been arrested, ill treated  and
    liberated as claimed. It would have been far better if the  adjudicator
    had addressed his mind to giving proper and more  detailed  reasons  in
    relation to the issue that lay at  the  heart  of  the  case,  but  the
    reasons are in that case  "just  sufficient"  [17]  (per  Lord  Justice
    Thomas).

40. Mr Tufan submitted that at its highest, the appellant did not come into
    the current categories of persons at  real  risk  of  serious  harm  on
    return to Sri Lanka as set out in paragraph 7 of the head note  in  GJ.
    Headnote 7(a) relates to those who are perceived to have a  significant
    role in relation to post conflict Tamil separation within the diaspora.
    That did not apply to the appellant. Nor did headnote 8,  which  refers
    to  the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  making  an  approach   based   on
    sophisticated intelligence. Accordingly, he submitted that any  alleged
    errors of law would not be material.

41. He also relied on the Rule 24 reply. There were inconsistencies between
    the appellant's oral evidence and the documentary evidence he sought to
    rely on from Sri Lanka relating to his arrest and  court  records.  The
    whole basis of his claim  was  therefore  undermined.  The  expert  and
    medical reports were predicated upon false accounts that the  appellant
    had given.

42. Mr Tufan relied on JL (Medical Reports - Credibility) China [2013] UKUT
    145. The writers of medical reports for  use  in  such  appeals  should
    ensure if possible before forming their opinions, that they  study  any
    assessments  already  made  of  the  appellant's  credibility  by   the
    immigration authorities and/or a Tribunal Judge. The more  a  diagnosis
    is dependent upon assuming that the account given by the appellant  was
    to be believed, the less likely it is that significant weight  will  be
    attached to it.

43. The authors of such reports need to understand that what is expected of
    them is a critical  and  objective  analysis  of  the  injuries  and/or
    symptoms displayed.

44. He submitted that the more recent decision in KV clarified what doctors
    are expected to do. That decision, however, was only promulgated  after
    the publication of the report. The doctor should have considered  SIBP.
    Even if they  found  the  findings  relating  to  scars  to  be  highly
    consistent, there may well be other reasons explaining their presence.

45. Mr Tufan did however very fairly accept that there had been no  mention
    by the Judge of the evidence produced by the attorney, Mr Iman.

46. In reply, Ms Jones submitted that the appellant's evidence relating  to
    the arrest warrant was that this would place him at risk. There was  no
    reason to suppose that these were not genuine documents. They had  been
    verified  by  Mr  Iman.  They  constituted  central  documents  in  any
    consideration of credibility. It was the solicitors who  approached  Mr
    Iman asking him to "do the job." The veracity of  those  documents  was
    crucial. The appellant might be telling the truth. The  arrest  warrant
    would  constitute  a  significant  risk  for  him  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 7(d) of GJ, supra.

    Assessment

47. I have had regard to Mr Tufan's robust submission to  the  effect  that
    the Judge was entitled to come  to  the  conclusion  that  he  was  not
    credible. I have also had regard to his reliance on cases  such  as  JL
    relating to the alleged deficiencies of the  medical  reports  in  this
    case. The weight to be attributed to various features of an appellant's
    evidence are matters for the Judge.

48. However, as very properly conceded by Mr Tufan, there was a receipt  of
    arrest  as  well  as  Court  documents  relating  to  the   appellant's
    detention, including the imposition of conditions  of  reporting,  that
    were verified by Mr Iman, an attorney in Pakistan.

49. There was no suggestion that this verification was anything other  than
    authentic. Nor is it contended that  the  documentation  from  Pakistan
    which is relied on is anything other than genuine. I have had regard to
    the original receipt of arrest and record  of  proceedings  before  the
    Colombo magistrate's court.

50. Mr Iman's letter sent to the appellant's solicitors dated 25 June  2014
    notes that documents which he requested be verified, namely the receipt
    of arrest and the Colombo Magistrates' Court record, were  verified  by
    him. He visited the Colombo Chief Magistrates' Court and  was  provided
    with the opportunity of perusing the Court's records.  The  appellant's
    file contained a record of the Court proceedings. He stated  that  that
    case exists. The details are correct and match a copy  of  the  Court's
    records sent to Mr Iman.

51. Mr Imam also attended the Colombo police station and was informed  that
    an official copy of the  arrest  receipt  bearing  the  same  reference
    number supplied, was in fact held at Colombo police station in  respect
    of the appellant.

52. The failure by the Judge to consider the potential significance of that
    evidence in the context of all the evidence, documentary and otherwise,
    which is relevant to a proper and fair assessment  of  the  appellant's
    credibility, constituted a material misdirection.

53. I am unable to find as submitted by Mr  Tufan  that  the  result  would
    necessarily have been the same. I have had regard  to  the  degrees  of
    risk identified in GJ, supra.

54. I have also referred to the subsequent decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in MP. Paragraph 356(7)(a) of  GJ  does  not  prescribe  that  diaspora
    activism was the only  basis  on  which  a  returning  Tamil  might  be
    regarded as posing a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a  unitary
    state. There may be other cases where  the  evidence  shows  particular
    grounds for concluding that an applicant may pose a current  threat  to
    that integrity even in the absence of evidence that he was involved  in
    diaspora activism.

55. In the circumstances, I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of of an error of law.  I  set  aside  the
    decision. It will  have  to  be  re-made.  At  the  hearing,  Ms  Jones
    submitted that this was an appropriate case for remitting the whole  of
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal as the appellant had  not  had  a
    proper opportunity of having his case fully considered by the Tribunal.
    Mr Tufan did not submit otherwise.

56. I have had regard to the Practice Statements regarding the remitting of
    an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. In giving effect to the approach,
    I am satisfied that the errors have deprived the appellant  of  a  fair
    hearing and the opportunity  for  his  case  to  be  properly  put  and
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law.  It is set aside and will be re-made.  The appeal is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for a fresh decision to be made.

    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed   Date 1/8/2015
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
