
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01519/2009 and others


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 9-13 and 17-18 September 2013     |On 16 March 2015                     |
|9 January and 14 October  2014       |                                     |
|and 12 February 2015                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                          MEHMOOD AHMED and others
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms. K. Cronin, Mr R. Toal, Mr D. Jones, Counsel,
                    instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Blundell, Mr A. Byass, Counsel, instructed by
                    the Treasury Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Index                                            Paragraph

Introduction                                              [1]
The issues                                                [12]
The criminal conspiracy                                            [13]
Immigration decisions under appeal
    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal                       [26]
    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal                               [38]
The preliminary issue - Ahmad and others (removal of children over 18) [40]

The error of law                                               [48]
The nature of the offending - the role played by Mohammed Faruq        [52]
Events in Srinagar and Jammu Kashmir, India                        [55]
Trafficking - the development of the claim                             [72]
Trafficking - the legal basis                                      [83]
Our evaluation of this issue                                       [94]
Conclusion on trafficking                                          [116]
Section   10(1)(c)   of   the   Immigration    and    Asylum    Act    1999
[119]
Delay                                                          [139]
The appellants' claim to  benefit  from  the  Secretary  of  State's  delay
[145]
Our analysis of the effect of delay                                [168]
Delay by the Tribunal                                          [184]
Inconsistency in decision-making                                   [189]
The Zambrano issue                                                 [201]
The decision in Zambrano                                           [206]
Decisions after Zambrano                                           [211]
United Kingdom provisions - Zambrano principle                     [215]
Application of 2006 Regulations                                    [219]
Abuse                                                          [241]
Derogation and the Zambrano right                                  [258]
Qadir Ahmed and Nasreen Bi's family                            [279]
Ghulam Rabani and Noreen Shakila's family                          [287]
Rungzaib Mohamed and Jamila Kauser's family                        [297]
Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan's family                               [316]
The evidence of the professional witnesses
    Diane Jackson's evidence
         Rungzaib Mohamed and Jamila Kauser's family               [328]
         Ghulam Rabani and Noreen Bi's family                      [332]
         Qadir Ahmed and Nasreen Bi's family                   [333]
         Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan                           [335]
    Johanna Huyg's evidence                                        [340]
    Chloe Purcell's evidence                                       [353]
    Sue Conlan's evidence                                     [356]
    Kate Helsby's evidence                                    [361]
Paragraph 276ADE                                               [368]
Article 8 and the new rules                                        [386]
The assessment of proportionality                                  [401]
Family life                                                        [408]
The legal principles                                               [421]
Our assessment
    General considerations                                    [437]
    General      considerations       -       The       oral       evidence
    [439]
    General considerations - The public interest                   [441]
Conclusions - The families
    Qadir Ahmed and Nasreen Bi's family                       [445]
    Ghulam Rabani and Noreen Shakila's family                      [464]
    Rungzaib Mohamed and Jamila Kauser's family                    [472]
    Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan's family                           [482]

Decision                                                  [page 133]

The families.

[The date of birth of each child is shown in parenthesis and date of the
removal decision in relation to the appellants is shown in square brackets]


Family 1 - Qadir Ahmed's family

Parents  (i) Qadir Ahmed [10 October 2008]
             (ii) Nasreen Bi [10 October 2008]
Children (1) Toukeer Ahmed (1 August 1988) now aged 25 [10 October 2008]
             (2) Tousif Ahmed* (10 February 1990) now aged 24 [5 May 2009]
             (3) Sulva Bi (20 April 1994) now aged 20 [5 May 2009]
             (4) Salma Bi (10 December 1998) now aged 15 [10 October 2008]

Family 2 - Ghulam Rabani's family

Parents  (i) Ghulam Rabani [10 October 2008]
             (ii) Noreen Shakila Bi [10 October 2008]
Children (1) Mohammed Atif* (18 March 1986) now aged 28 [5 May 2009]
             (2)Mobushra Begum* (2 October 1988) now aged 25 [5 May 2009]
             (3)Farah Begum* (10 March 1990) now aged 24 [5 May 2009]
             (4) Nusrat Bi (2 January 1987) now aged 27 [10 October 2008]
             (5) Mohammed Rustam Rabani (1 November 1991) now aged 22
             [24 April 2009]
             (6) Zahra Bi (3 August 1993) now aged 20 [10 October 2008]

Family 3 - Rungzaib Mohamed's family

Parents  (i) Rungzaib Mohammed [10 October 2008]
             (ii) Jamila Kauser [29 April 2009]
Children (1) Kamran (3 October 1985) now aged 28 [29 April 2009]
             (2) Jehan* (3 January 1988) now aged 26 [5 May 2009]
             (3) Ishrut* (12 January 1990) now aged 24 [5 May 2009]
             (4) Idris (10 February 1993) now aged 21 [5 May 2009]
             (5) Alam (6 January 1992) now aged 22 [29 April 2009]
             (6) Hina Bi (20 May 1997) now aged 17 [29 April 2009]

Family 4 - Mehmood Ahmed's family

Parents  (i) Mehmood Ahmed [29 April 2009]
             (ii) Fazal Jan [29 April 2009]
Children (1) Wasim (12 April 1993) now aged 21 [29 April 2009]
             (2) Arfan (12 April 1993) now aged 21 [29 April 2009]
             (3) Atteqa (4 May 1996) now aged 18 [29 April 2009]
             (4) Adeel (25 June 1997) now aged 16 [29 April 2009]
             (5) H (24 April 2004) now  aged  10,  a  British  citizen  and
             therefore not an appellant in these proceedings


[* connotes an applicant in Ahmad and others (removal of children over 18)
[2012] UKUT 00267(IAC)]

Introduction

    1.  This  appeal  concerns  four  families  totalling  29   individuals,
       comprising four sets of parents and 21 children, both adult  children
       and minors.

    2. All are Pakistani citizens  and  inter-related  either  by  blood  or
       marriage or both. Each family obtained visit entry clearances in 2000
       or 2001 as Pakistani nationals applying through the High Commissioner
       in Islamabad.  Having arrived in  the  United  Kingdom,  each  family
       claimed asylum on the basis that they were  Indian  nationals  giving
       names, dates of birth and histories which differed from what had been
       presented to obtain the entry clearances.  In particular, each family
       alleged that the parent was single and his or  her  spouse  had  been
       murdered by the Indian army.

    3. Not all of the 29 family members are before us following the judgment
       of the Upper Tribunal (Collins J and Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker)  in
       Ahmad  and  others  (removal  of  children  over  18)   [2012]   UKUT
       00267(IAC).

    4. Neither the names of the individuals concerned, nor  their  dates  of
       birth have remained consistent.  Accordingly, the names attributed to
       the  appellants  and  their  respective  dates  of  birth  cannot  be
       definitively stated but, for these purposes, the Tribunal will  adopt
       both the names and the dates of birth that each  appellant  currently
       claims as his or her own.  In the  course  of  these  proceedings,  a
       schedule  was  produced,  appropriately  coloured,  setting  out  the
       membership of the four families with which we are concerned  and  the
       respective claims that each member  makes  to  one  or  more  of  the
       methods relied upon in resisting removal.

    5. The issue before the Upper Tribunal in Ahmad and others  (removal  of
       children over 18) related to the lawfulness of removal  decisions  in
       relation to those appellants who had (a) leave to remain  in  the  UK
       and (b) were over the age of 18 on the date of decision.  As a result
       of the determination in Ahmad and others (removal  of  children  over
       18), the removal decisions made against the  6  appellants  who  fell
       into this classification were rendered  unlawful.   These  six  adult
       children now have leave to remain and we are told that  one  of  them
       has now become a British citizen.  The appellants before us,  reduced
       by these six, comprise  the  parents  and  14  of  the  15  remaining
       children.

    6. Ahmad and others (removal of children over 18) was heard  on  10  May
       2012 in relation to decisions made earlier.  The  appellants  contend
       that another three children, having now reached  18,  should  benefit
       from the decision in  Ahmad  and  others  for  the  reasons  we  will
       explain.

    7. These three children and eight others (making 11 in all) are now said
       to derive the  benefit  of  paragraph  276ADE  (iv)  or  (v)  of  the
       Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules either from  being,  at
       the relevant time, under 18 and present in  the  United  Kingdom  for
       seven years or over 18 and under 25 and having spent more  than  half
       their lives in the United Kingdom.

    8. Only 5 of the children are now minors.  One of  the  minor  children,
       whom we shall refer to as 'H', was born in the United Kingdom and was
       granted British citizenship  under  the  provisions  of  s.1  of  the
       British Nationality Act 1981 at a time when his parents  had  settled
       status.    H was born on 24 April 2004.  He is now aged nine.  It  is
       said that he cannot be removed and that  the  other  family  members,
       including both parents, benefit from a  derivative  right  to  remain
       following Zambrano principles, (Case C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano  v  Office
       National de l'Emploi [2012] QB 265).

    9. Each of the 22 individuals before us has a right to  have  his  claim
       considered separately but there are,  however,  broad  categories  in
       relation to which similar considerations apply with  certain  issues.
       For these purposes, it will be convenient to refer to the  four  sets
       of parents as 'the parents', the six children who benefitted from the
       decision in Ahmad and  others  as  'the  adult  Ahmad  children'.  In
       relation to the children who are now over 18 years of age, we propose
       to  refer  to  them  as  being  'now  adult'.   The   remainder   are
       collectively referred to as the minor children.

   10. These four families form part of a wider group of individuals who, in
       their different ways, were involved in the  matters  which  form  the
       subject-matter of this determination.

   11. The appeal has involved the  preparation  of  some  nine  volumes  of
       evidence and background material as well as seven volumes of case law
       drawn  from  the  United  Kingdom  and  European  sources,   together
       totalling in excess of 150 cases.  Inevitably, this determination can
       only  summarise  part  of  this  material.   So,  too,  the  skeleton
       arguments.  The appellants' arguments and replies cover some 65 pages
       and the respondent's some 93 pages.  We are indebted to  all  counsel
       for the care with which they have approached  the  issues  raised  in
       this appeal.

The issues

   12. The issues (many of which overlap) may be summarised  as  follows  by
       way of headlines only:

        i. The roles played by the various  adults;  the  circumstances  in
           which the families came to the  United  Kingdom;  the  roles  of
           Mohammed  Faruq  and   his   immediate   family   members;   the
           role/responsibility of the parents; their criminal wrong-doing.

       ii. The above feeds into a  consideration  of  trafficking  and  the
           extent to which the parents (or some of them) and  the  children
           can properly be classified as victims  of  trafficking  and  the
           effect this has upon their claims and the claims of their family
           members.

      iii. The effect of the Tribunal's decision  in  Ahmad,  removing  the
           adult Ahmad children from the current appeal and raising  issues
           as to the position of the children now adult and the prospective
           position of the minor children.  This involves  a  consideration
           of the powers of removal  under  s.10  of  the  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 1999.

       iv. The families arrived in the United Kingdom between 2001 and 2002
           and have remained here ever since.  The Secretary of  State  has
           not  yet  succeeded  in  removing  them.   The  lapse  of  time,
           characterised by  the  appellants'  as  delay,  requires  to  be
           analysed both in order to ascertain the  responsibility  for  it
           and in order to assess the consequences of it.

        v. Not all those involved in this case have been made  the  subject
           of removal decisions.  The adult Ahmad children are not now  the
           subject of removal  action.   This  has  resulted  in  different
           outcomes for different people characterised by  the  appellants'
           as inconsistent decision-making.

       vi. As a result of the  presence  of  the  children  in  the  United
           Kingdom, some have potential claims under the Immigration  Rules
           and, in particular, under paragraph 276 ADE (1) which provides:

                 "The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
                remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that  at
                the date of application, the applicant:

                ...

                (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously
                in the UK for  at  least  7  years...and  it  would  not  be
                reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or

                (v) is aged 18 years or above and under  25  years  and  has
                spent at least half of his life living continuously  in  the
                UK..."

      vii. H, as a Union citizen, enjoys the benefits of  the  decision  of
           the Court of Justice in Zambrano.  The extent of his rights  and
           the rights of his parents  and  siblings  derived  through  them
           require assessment.   In  particular,  the  Secretary  of  State
           asserts H's rights are derogable.

     viii. Alam, one of the children, now  adult,  is  currently  suffering
           from mental health problems.  The Secretary of State agrees Alam
           cannot currently be removed.  Other family members also  suffer,
           in varying degrees, from mental health difficulties.

       ix. All those appellants over the age of 18 remain at  home.   There
           is an issue as to whether they  enjoy  family  life  of  a  type
           protected by the ECHR.

        x. All of these factors, and more, including discrete  private  and
           family life considerations, feed  into  the  assessment  of  the
           Article 8 claims of all of the appellants.

The criminal conspiracy

   13. The commencement of the conspiracy did not involve these  appellants.
       It concerned the grant of a visa to Rasheeda Begum in April 2000  for
       the specific purpose of allowing her to enter into the United Kingdom
       to take up employment as a domestic servant. She  was,  however,  the
       wife of Abdul Rafiq, the brother of Mohammed Faruq and  Abdul  Qayyum
       and the claim was fraudulent.  In pursuing  it,  Mohammed  Faruq  and
       Abdul Qayyum elicited the help of the Rt. Hon. Andrew Smith  MP.   It
       included the initiation of judicial review proceedings which the Home
       Office conceded. Rasheeda Begum made a  false  claim  for  asylum  in
       another name. It was, however, accepted by Ms Cronin in the course of
       the hearing that she was married to a British citizen.

   14. The prosecution asserted that the planning began  in  late  1999  and
       included the concept that once in the United  Kingdom  the  newcomers
       would change their names and lodge false asylum  claims  which  would
       then permit them to make claims for state benefits. It was always the
       prosecution's case, as well as the respondent's case before us,  that
       Mohammed Faruq was the directing mind  behind  the  planning  of  the
       enterprise. Pages within a notebook found in the office of a  company
       that facilitated  the  enterprise  indicated  how  the  scheme  would
       operate.  Mohammed  Faruq's  wife,  Khurshid,  and   their   daughter
       travelled to Pakistan in February 2000 as part of the conspiracy.

   15. The case of Chaudry Mahboob Hussain and Shakila Begum (whom  we  know
       as part of Family 3 -  Ghulam  Rabani  and  Noreen  Shakila  Bi)  was
       typical.  They are married with six children.  For  the  purposes  of
       making false asylum claims, they both pretended to  have  lost  their
       spouses in  tragic  circumstances.  They  split  their  six  children
       between them in support of their asylum applications. Within days  of
       arrival in the United Kingdom on 25 July  2000  on  the  strength  of
       visit visas sponsored by Mohammed Faruq and granted to them and their
       six children, Mr Hussein claimed asylum for himself and three of  the
       children in the name of Rabani. He claimed that he came from Srinagar
       in India and had been arrested, detained and tortured by  the  Indian
       authorities and that his wife had been murdered. He was provided with
       emergency accommodation that was in fact owned by Mohammed Faruq. His
       claim was refused. His wife, acting  independently,  made  a  similar
       claim with the remaining three children claiming that  she  had  been
       beaten and raped by the Indian authorities and her husband  murdered.
       On the strength of her claim, she was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
       remain.

   16. Family 2, Rungzaib Mohamed and his wife, Jamila Kauser, made separate
       and almost identical claims, claiming that each came from Srinagar in
       Indian  Kashmir,  that  each  had  been  persecuted  by  the   Indian
       authorities and their spouse had been murdered leaving them  widowed.
       Each claimed with three of their six children  as  their  dependents.
       Eventually,  Rungzaib's  appeal  was  allowed  and  he  was   granted
       indefinite leave to remain on 3 January  2001.  Jamila's  appeal  was
       dismissed in a determination promulgated on 11 March 2003.

   17. The pattern was repeated in relation to the  remaining  parents  with
       the result that, in each case, only one of the  spouses  was  granted
       indefinite leave to remain.

   18. A similar pattern emerges in relation to  the  evidence  provided  by
       Zafar Iqbal and Shazia Kausar. This couple are not appellants  before
       us.  They obtained visit visas sponsored by  Mohammed  Faruq's  wife,
       Kurshid, and entered the United Kingdom on 17 August 2000. They  then
       claimed asylum using different names.  Zafar claimed he was from  the
       Indian occupied area of Kashmir and  had  been  arrested,  raped  and
       beaten by the Indian authorities. His wife  had  been  murdered.  His
       wife in a separate claim, claimed that she was from Srinagar and  had
       been beaten and raped and her husband murdered by  the  Indian  army.
       Zafar was granted exceptional leave to remain. His wife's  claim  was
       refused.  There is  one  difference,  however,  in  this  claim.   It
       appears that, six days before  their  arrival,  Mohammed  Faruq  made
       arrangements for two unidentified persons to make a claim for  asylum
       on 11 August 2000 so as to ensure that Zafar Iqbal and Shazia  Kausar
       would be housed in accommodation provided by  Mohammed  Faruq  in  an
       attempt to avoid changes introduced on 14 August  2000  whereby  NASS
       took over responsibility for housing asylum seekers on  a  nationwide
       basis, [vol 5, tab A, p 30].

   19. The parents stood trial on two counts.

   20. The  first  related  to  a  conspiracy  to  contravene  s.25  of  the
       Immigration Act 1971 to the effect that they conspired together  with
       others to being knowingly concerned in the making or carrying out  of
       arrangements for securing or facilitating the obtaining of  leave  to
       remain in the  United  Kingdom  by  means  which  they  knew  or  had
       reasonable cause for believing to include deception. Count  2  was  a
       conspiracy to defraud contrary to common law. The conspiracy  related
       to defrauding central and local government  agencies  or  authorities
       charged with the provision  of  financial  support  and  benefits  to
       persons legitimately seeking asylum by  dishonestly  representing  in
       their false asylum claims in assumed names that they were entitled to
       financial support and benefits.

   21. The male parents pleaded guilty to both counts.  The  female  parents
       pleaded guilty to count one, described by the judge as 'dishonesty in
       relation to the claims for asylum', [vol 5, tab A, p 586].

   22. When the proceedings came before Judge McIntyre on 9 March  2006,  he
       made it plain that there remained an issue between  the  parents  and
       the prosecution as to where the defendants came from and  whether  or
       not they had been  persecuted  in  India.  He  resolved  to  make  no
       findings on these issues [vol 5, tab A, p 585]. However, [vol 5,  tab
       A, p 586]  he expressly approached  sentencing  in  relation  to  the
       defendant's dishonesty in connection with  their  making  claims  for
       asylum and applying for leave to remain in the country  and,  in  the
       case of the male parents, their dishonesty in relation  to  obtaining
       benefits in the course of their asylum claims. He continued [pp  585-
       6]:

           "... I have to bear in mind the parts you played in  respect  of
           those offences. There was no doubt, as I have  said  previously,
           that Mr Mohamed Faruq was the organiser of  these  conspiracies,
           and the initiator of them, and that his business (MP S) was  the
           main beneficiary in terms of  benefits  received,  and  although
           sums of �500,000 have been referred to,  as  the  benefits  that
           were paid to you, the losers should look to Mr Mohamed Faruq for
           compensation rather than you.

           So far as the male defendants here are concerned, you did  agree
           to do what he asked  you  to  do.  And  so  far  as  the  female
           defendants here are concerned, I take into account the fact that
           you did what your husbands ask you to do... and I am  sentencing
           you for being dishonest in relation to  your  asylum  claims  by
           lying about the death of your spouses, by lying  about  how  you
           came to this country. Whether or not you were born in  India  or
           Pakistan, whether or not at some  time  in  the  past  you  were
           subjected to persecution  is  better  left  to  the  immigration
           authorities to decide than this court, and it seems  to  me  has
           more to do with whether or not you should be allowed  to  remain
           here or be sent back to Pakistan.

           This court is concerned with your dishonesty. In my  view,  only
           sentences  of  imprisonment  are  appropriate.   The   sort   of
           dishonesty, your acts of dishonesty which you committed,  strike
           at the root of the  proper  administration  of  the  system  for
           processing asylum claims. The immigration authorities rely  upon
           the honesty of the accounts given by applicants for asylum,  and
           have only a limited ability to check them out.  It  is  somewhat
           more difficult for me to understand why, if you had good reasons
           to seek asylum here rather than  come  for  a  visit,  you  were
           dishonest about it. Your dishonesty  is  prejudicial  to  honest
           applicants, and there is no doubt  that  as  a  result  of  your
           dishonesty public money  has  been  spent  on  you  which  would
           otherwise have been spent on honest applicants.

           I take into account your pleas of guilty, and although they were
           made for different reasons this week they have nevertheless  led
           to a considerable saving of money which would have been spent if
           you had fought the case to the end. I take into account the fact
           that none of you have previous convictions."

   23. In considering the parts that were played by the various individuals,
       Judge McIntyre equated their conduct with that of Mr Qayyam. The male
       parents were each sentenced to 6 months imprisonment on count  1  and
       nine months imprisonment on count 2.  Judge McIntyre continued

           "So far as deportation is concerned, having considered the cases
           which have been put before me, I have  come  to  the  conclusion
           that it will be better left to the  immigration  authorities  to
           decide whether or not you should be allowed to remain  here.  So
           far as I am concerned, bearing in mind the  offences  which  you
           have admitted, and your previous good character, I do not  think
           the potential detriment to the UK is such if you remain  that  I
           ought to make a recommendation that you be deported today."

   24. It is apparent from the foregoing that, for his purposes,  the  trial
       judge was not concerned with whether the appellants came  from  India
       and were at risk of persecution on return. Accordingly, he could  not
       have reached a conclusion whether they should be deported  to  India.
       He properly left those issues  to  the  immigration  authorities.  We
       construe his remarks as being neutral in relation  to  the  issue  of
       removal considering it best  left  to  the  immigration  authorities.
       Furthermore, whilst he acknowledged the part played by Mohamed Faruq,
       he also sentenced the parents for their part in  the  conspiracy  and
       the dishonesty for which they themselves  were  responsible.  Clearly
       these sentences imposed on  the  women  were  'exceptional'  [p  588]
       arising from the fact that their imprisonment would have led  to  the
       children being placed in care as well as the  express  acknowledgment
       of  health  problems   which   would   have   rendered   imprisonment
       inappropriate.

   25. Similar considerations arose when he  sentenced  some  of  the  other
       appellants on 25 April 2006 [vol 5, tab A, p 592] in which  he  spoke
       of the mothers being very much the primary carers of  young  children
       one or more of whom had significant health problems  which  would  be
       exacerbated if the  children  were  separated  from  their  care.  He
       continued:

           "... I have reconsidered the authorities that were put before me
           then and it seems to me now, as it did then, that  the  offences
           which all four of you have admitted are directly related to your
           presence in this country. They are not, in my view,  so  serious
           as to merit a recommendation being made, and I take into account
           your previous good characters and the fact that you have been of
           good character since coming to this country some five... or  six
           years ago. In all the circumstances I think it more  appropriate
           to leave it to the immigration authorities to decide whether  or
           not you should be deported.

           ...I find it very difficult to understand why  any  of  you  are
           still here given that the one  adult  member  in  each  of  your
           familyies was refused permission to stay here in your cases, all
           of you, as long ago as 2002, but that is a matter which  I  have
           raised already and which I hope will be further investigated  [p
           595]."

Immigration decisions under appeal

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal

   26.  At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel   (Senior
       Immigration Judge Renton and  Immigration  Judge  Forrester)  the  28
       appellants conceded that:

             i. they were entitled to Pakistani citizenship;

            ii. they would not be at risk on return to  Pakistan,  nor  were
                they entitled to recognition as refugees or to  humanitarian
                protection;

           iii. the Secretary of State had been entitled to cancel the grant
                of  refugee  status  where  it  had  been  granted,  or  any
                derivative status based upon it.

            iv. some of the appellants were liable to removal  under  s.  10
                (1) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

   27. It was not, however, conceded that those children who had reached the
       age of 18 at the date of the immigration decision or at the  date  of
       the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal could be removed under the
       provisions of s.10.

   28. It was common ground that the parents were capable of  being  removed
       under the powers reserved in s.10 of the 1999  Act.   The  First-tier
       Tribunal construed s.10(1)(c) as applying to  a  child  of  a  person
       capable of being so removed, irrespective of his age so long as he or
       she remained part of the family.

   29. Having so decided, the panel went  on  to  consider  whether  it  was
       proportionate to remove the entire family. The respondent maintained,
       as identified in paragraphs 28 and 29 of the determination, that  the
       public interest in removing those found guilty of serious breaches of
       immigration law outweighed the rights of all the family members.

   30. The appellants, however, argued that their culpability  was  limited.
       They maintained their claim that  they  were  from  Srinagar  or  the
       neighbouring area of Jammu Kashmir on the Indian side of the  border.
       They further maintained their claim to have  been  persecuted  before
       fleeing to Pakistan; where  they  were  thereafter  able  to  acquire
       Pakistani documentation identifying them as citizens of Pakistan.  In
       doing so, none of the parents gave  evidence.  Instead,  they  relied
       upon the expert evidence of Professor Menski  and  Drs.  Ballard  and
       Price to establish the truthfulness of their account.

   31. The principal point advanced by the parents in  seeking  to  diminish
       the degree of their culpability was the claim that they  acted  under
       the malign influence of Mr Faruq and  members  of  his  family.  They
       claimed that they were  all  subject  to  manipulation,  control  and
       exploitation by him as evidenced by the prosecution case against them
       at their trials in Oxford. Relying on the comments of Judge McIntyre,
       they classified Mr Faruq as the mastermind  and  he  and  his  family
       members  as  the  initiators,  organisers,  directors  and  principal
       beneficiaries of the fraud. He had presented himself as  a  community
       worker, a friend, a representative of the  local  community,  and  an
       interpreter while directing the fraudulent claims of  the  appellants
       for asylum and for an  entitlement  to  receive  state  benefits.  In
       advancing this claim, the appellants relied upon the expert  evidence
       dealing with the influence of the biradhiri.  The  biradhiri  is  the
       network of familial relationships  through  which  influence  can  be
       exerted on other family members. Furthermore, the  appellants  argued
       in paragraphs 36 of the determination [vol 6, tab A,  p  11]  that  a
       distinction should be made between the male parents on one  hand  and
       their wives and children on the other as establishing that the latter
       were required to comply with the decisions of their husbands or their
       fathers. This was forcibly contested by the Secretary of State.

   32. Whilst accepting that Mr Faruq and his family benefited greatly  from
       the  fraud,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  also  found  the   appellants
       themselves to have benefited both by  way  of  benefits  from  health
       care, education and other publics services  but  also  by  reason  of
       their obtaining, through deception, the right to remain  as  refugees
       or as dependants of refugees. It was said that the appellants:

           "...achieved refugee status  by  a  sophisticated  web  of  lies
           maintained for many years. That web even extended to  the  child
           appellants who were able to dupe experienced  experts  assisting
           them with their problems. The fact of the matter is that none of
           the appellants were ever entitled to enter the United Kingdom as
           family visitors, or to remain as refugees with their dependants,
           and their lengthy presence in the United Kingdom since  2000  or
           2001 has been at considerable expense to the State and has never
           had any lawful basis."

   33. In order to  reduce  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  parents'
       wrongdoing, the panel was invited to make positive findings  of  fact
       in  relation  to  the  credibility  of  significant  parts   of   the
       appellants' accounts. This was not, of course, on the basis that  the
       appellants themselves had given oral evidence. The panel made no such
       positive credibility findings but neither did it find the claims were
       fabricated. Instead, in paragraph 39 of its determination [vol 6, tab
       A, p 12] it made no findings:

            "On reflection,  we  find  these  arguments  to  be  of  little
           consequence, and we therefore make no specific findings of  fact
           in respect of those parts of the account in dispute in this way.
           It may be the case that the appellants have shown to  the  lower
           standard of proof applicable in asylum appeals, and despite  the
           fact  that  earlier  appeals  on  those  and  other  facts  were
           dismissed, that the families originated from Jammu Kashmir where
           they  were  persecuted  by  the  Indian  authorities  and  as  a
           consequence crossed the border into Pakistani Kashmir.  Although
           the expert evidence produced on behalf of the appellants in this
           respect was of varying quality, it may be the case that there is
           sufficient such evidence to find that this part of  the  account
           is plausible. It has been commented with accuracy that  such  is
           the  extent  of  the  various  deceptions  perpetrated  by   the
           appellants that it is  impossible  to  have  confidence  in  the
           credibility of anything they have said, but  even  taking  their
           account at its highest, we find that  it  assists  them  little.
           There is so much of the appellants' stories which  are  accepted
           as  lies  for  us  to  find  that  it  is  necessary  to  attach
           considerable weight to the legitimate public end sought by their
           removal."

   34.  The  panel  accepted  the  central  role  played  by  Mohamed  Faruq
       describing him as a "malevolent figure" who was at  "the  fulcrum  of
       all these events". However, it was not  persuaded  that  his  actions
       absolved the parents of all responsibility.

           "We do not see the appellants entirely as  victims  and  thereby
           deserving of sympathy. Regardless of the pressures, they did not
           entirely lose the capacity for independent thought, and we  find
           it significant that the appellants persisted in their deceptions
           even after the influence of Mohammed Faruq had been  removed  by
           his own prosecution. In any event, we repeat that in considering
           the weight to be attached to the legitimate public end  of  fair
           and proper immigration control, the overriding fact is that  the
           appellants never had any lawful right to enter the UK as  family
           visitors, nor to remain as refugees with their  dependants.  For
           that reason, we further find that it is not a mitigating  factor
           that  the  wife  and  children  appellants   acted   under   the
           understandable influence of their husbands and  fathers.  It  is
           not a case that the sins of the fathers should  not  be  visited
           upon their wives and children. It is more the  case  that  those
           wives and children should not  benefit  from  the  sins  of  the
           fathers." [p13, paragraph 40]"

   35. Having considered whether the appellants, or some of them,  were  the
       victims of trafficking, the panel rejected their claim [vol 6, tab A,
       p 14, paragraph 44]:

           "Our findings in respect of these arguments  are  that  although
           the appellants  are  not  the  victims  of  trafficking  in  the
           conventional meaning of the term, many features of  their  entry
           to and continued presence in  the  UK  with  at  the  least  the
           assistance of Mr Faruq,  and  his  subsequent  exploitation  and
           control of them after entry, accord with many of the features of
           trafficking as recited on behalf of the appellants. However,  we
           have decided to attach little  weight  to  this  aspect  of  the
           matter. There is no evidence that any  of  the  appellants  have
           been subjected to any physical coercion or  force,  although  no
           doubt they have been subject to other pressures. It must be  the
           case that they are not now the victims of trafficking  according
           to any definition of that term... there is no evidence  that  if
           the appellants returned to Pakistan they would be  at  any  real
           risk of being trafficked again."

   36. Having also rejected the appellants' claim  that  significant  weight
       should be attributed to delay on the part of the Secretary  of  State
       in accordance with the principles of EB (Kosovo) v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL
       41, the panel went on to assess the balance arising in the assessment
       of proportionality. The basis of its approach was  that  all  of  the
       appellants would return to Pakistan in their respective family  units
       and would continue to benefit from the  support  they  provided.  The
       panel noted the evidence of Dr  Ballard  to  the  effect  that  those
       returning would be at risk of bonded labour; the daughters  would  be
       at risk of exploitation;  that  the  females  would  be  at  risk  of
       discrimination as a result of their gender and would face the loss of
       enjoyment of an independent life.

   37.  Finally,  in  concluding  that  removal  of  the  families  was  not
       disproportionate, the  panel  considered  the  mental  health  issues
       raised in the appeals of Alam and Wasim but  decided  that,  although
       the provision of health care in Pakistan 'may not be  ideal  and  may
       not compare well with that available in the United Kingdom',  it  was
       sufficient to avoid a  violation  of  their  human  rights  or  their
       families'.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   38. Permission to appeal was granted on 23  April  2010  on  all  grounds
       submitted:

        i) It is arguable that the Tribunal erred  in  law  by  failing  to
           allow the appeals of those aged over 18 at the date of  decision
           on the grounds that the decisions were not  in  accordance  with
           the Immigration Rules and/or failing to  allow  the  appeals  on
           the grounds that the decisions were not in accordance  with  the
           law owing to the Secretary of State's failure to give effect  to
           his policy as to how he  would  exercise  his  powers  under  s.
           10(1)(c) and/or failing to allow the appeals because  they  were
           not the spouses or partners or children under the age of 18 of a
           person in respect of whom removal directions  under  s.  10  had
           been made and there was therefore no power in law to make  those
           immigration decisions.

       ii) It is arguable that the Tribunal erred in  law  in  relation  to
           those appellants nearing the age of 18 at the date of  decision.
           The decision was not in accordance with the law because  it  was
           made without regard to policy contained in  Chapter  50  of  the
           Enforcement  Instructions  and  Guidance  with  regard  to   the
           exercise of the power under s. 10(1)(c).

      iii) It is arguable that the Tribunal erred in law  in  reaching  its
           conclusion that the nature and  consequences  of  the  deception
           practised were  of  such  gravity  as  to  operate  against  the
           presumption not to remove families where the children have  been
           in the UK for  7+  years,  wrongly  treated  all  appellants  as
           parties to the deception, irrationally excluded the  benefit  of
           DP5/96 and Article 8, erred in its assessment of the  individual
           culpability of each appellant, failed to make proper  assessment
           of the trafficking submission.

   39. The case was listed for hearing to consider as a preliminary issue:-

           "Whether there is power in law to remove children who  are  over
           the age of 18  under  the  provisions  of  s.  10(1)(c)  of  the
           Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 as family members  of  an  adult
           being removed under s. 10(1)(b)."

The preliminary issue - Ahmad and  others  (removal  of  children  over  18)
[2012] UKUT 00267 (IAC)

   40. In Ahmad and others (removal of children over 18) [2012]  UKUT  00267
       (IAC) (Collins J and Upper Tribunal Judge Coker),  the  decision  was
       summarised in these terms:

           There is no power under the provisions of  section  10(1)(c)  of
           the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 to remove children  who  are
           over the age of 18 years as the family members of an adult being
           removed under section 10(1)(b) of that Act.

   41. It was agreed between the parties that the individuals whose  appeals
       were allowed by the Ahmad decision  are  as  follows:   Tousif  Ahmad
       AA/08844/2008,   Jehan   Mohammed   AA/08847/2008,    Ishrut    Begum
       AA/08849/2008,   Mohammed   Atif   AA/08853/2008,   Mobushra    Begum
       AA/08852/2008 and Furah Begum AA/08856/2008.

   42. The Tribunal in Ahmad considered s. 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum
       Act 1999 which deals with administrative removal.  Under the  heading
       "Removal of certain persons unlawfully in the United Kingdom", s.  10
       provides:

           "(1) A person who is not a British citizen may be  removed  from
           the United Kingdom, in accordance with directions  given  by  an
           immigration officer, if:

                (a)...

                (b) he uses deception in seeking  (whether  successfully  or
                not) leave to remain;

                (c) directions have been given for the removal,  under  this
                section, of a person to whose family he belongs

           ...

           (5A) Directions for the removal of  a  person  under  subsection
           (1)(c) cease to have effect if he ceases to belong to the family
           of the person whose removal under subsection (1)(a)  or  (b)  is
           the cause of the directions under subsection (1)(c) ....."

           ...

           (8) Where a person is notified that a decision has been made  to
           remove him in accordance with  this  section,  the  notification
           invalidates any leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom
           previously given to him."

   43. The process by which administrative removal is effected continues  to
       be governed by Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act to which paragraph 10A  had
       been added by the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and
       which provides:

           "Where directions are given in respect of a person under any  of
           paragraphs 8 to 10 above, directions to the same effect  may  be
           given under this  paragraph  in  respect  of  a  member  of  the
           person's family."

   44. In neither legislative source were members of  the  family  expressly
       limited to children under the age of 18.  This  might  be  contrasted
       with the provisions effecting deportation.  Section 5 of the 1971 Act
       dealing with deportation provides in s. 5(4):

           "For the purposes of deportation the following  shall  be  those
           who are regarded as belonging to another person's family -

           (a) where that other person is a man, his wife or civil  partner
           and his or her children under the age of eighteen; and

           (b) where that other person is a woman,  her  husband  or  civil
           partner and her or his children under the age of eighteen."

   45.  However,  new  Immigration  Rules  were  passed  to  deal  with  the
       provisions of s.10.  These included:

           "395A. A person is  now  liable  to  administrative  removal  in
           certain circumstances in which he  would,  prior  to  2  October
           2000, have been liable to deportation.

           395B. Those circumstances are set out in s.10 of the  1999  Act.
           They are:

                (i)    ...

                iv) where the person is the spouse, civil partner  or  child
                    under 18 of someone in respect of  whom  directions  for
                    removal have been given under section 10."

   46. The expression 'family' inevitably contained limitations  as  to  the
       persons who might qualify.  Indeed, s. 10(5A) recognised  that  those
       who were family  members  could  cease  to  be  such.   For  example,
       children under 18 might marry and  so  move  away  from  the  family.
       Further, the clear understanding of the draftsman of  paragraph  395B
       of the Rules, approved by Parliament, was  that  'family'  within  s.
       10(1)(c) should be limited to those specified in s. 5(4) of the  1971
       Act, that is children under 18. Once in a Rule, the policy had to  be
       followed.  Thus, paragraph 395B would require the Tribunal  to  allow
       the appeals of those over the age of 18 in any event, but  this  also
       pointed the way to the true construction of s.10(1)(c).

   47. Hence, the Tribunal construed the provisions of s.  10(1)(c)  of  the
       1999 Act as limited in their application to the removal  of  children
       under the age of 18 years when the family members of  an  adult  were
       being removed under s. 10(1)(b).  It followed that removal could  not
       lawfully be effected pursuant to s.10(1)(c) - the  route  adopted  by
       the Secretary of State - in the cases of the adult Ahmad children.

The error of law

   48. By directions dated 12 December  2012,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker
       explained in paragraph 1 that the First-tier Tribunal's determination
       on Article 8 had been set aside on  28  October  2011.   Neither  the
       Tribunal nor the parties  have  located  this  decision  and  it  was
       suggested it took the form of a concession at a hearing on that date.
        We are satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  is
       flawed if only  because  of  the  different  approach  taken  by  the
       decision of the Tribunal in Ahmad and others which, although relating
       to only  six  of  the  family  members,  upset  the  balance  in  the
       assessment of proportionality.   As  the  adult  Ahmad  children  who
       formed the subject matter of  the  preliminary  issue  will  not,  we
       understand, now be removed, the First-tier Tribunal's  approach  that
       the four entire families will be removed  together  no  longer  holds
       good. Accordingly, the appeal  has  to  be  re-made  insofar  as  the
       appellants before us are concerned.

   49. On 10 May 2013, this panel sought to identify the nature and scope of
       the hearing before us and we directed:

           The scope of the hearing is  to  include  consideration  of  the
           effects of the Secretary of State's refusal decision  of  1  May
           2013 declining to issue a  residence  card  to  members  of  the
           Mehmood Ahmed  family  confirming  their  derivative  (Zambrano)
           right of residence and a further fresh decision so long  as  the
           same is served on the relevant appellants  and  the  appellants'
           representatives by 31 May 2013.  (For the  avoidance  of  doubt,
           the Upper Tribunal will not be sitting as judges of  the  First-
           tier Tribunal to determine any appeal brought against either  or
           both of the decisions but its consideration of them  will  cover
           all the issues arising from them  as  necessary  issues  falling
           within the scope of the present appeals.)

   50. A further decision was indeed made by the Secretary of  State  on  31
       May 2013 in relation to the Zambrano issue.

   51. In the course of the hearing we invited  the  parties  to  agree  the
       exact scope of the hearing in the Upper Tribunal and it was agreed as
       follows:

           The parties conceding that the First-tier Tribunal made an error
           on a point of law and the Upper Tribunal agreeing in like terms,
           the Upper Tribunal will set aside the decision of the First-tier
           Tribunal and re-make the decision in light  of  the  submissions
           made by  the  parties  in  their  skeleton  arguments  and  oral
           submissions, subject to the determination of Collins J and Upper
           Tribunal Judge Coker and give such weight  and  significance  as
           the Upper Tribunal considers appropriate to the findings of  the
           First-tier Tribunal.

The nature of the offending - the role played by Mohammed Faruq

   52. In paras 4.1 to  4.12  of  the  appellants'  skeleton  argument,  the
       parents seek to minimise their own responsibility in  the  conspiracy
       whilst attributing fault to Mohammed Faruq and  his  family  for  the
       events that resulted  in  their  coming  to  the  UK.   Indeed,  when
       asserting that the appellants are the objects  of  trafficking,  they
       expressly assert that they, collectively,  are  victims  rather  than
       perpetrators.   Whilst  it  goes  without   saying   that,   in   the
       circumstances of this case, none of the  children,  adult  or  minor,
       bears any responsibility for what occurred, the Tribunal is  required
       to make findings of fact on the responsibility that the parents  must
       bear for what occurred.  This is not limited to the circumstances  of
       their entry into  the  United  Kingdom  but  also  extends  to  their
       continued presence here.

   53. This requires us to consider the factors upon which the parents  rely
       in support of their claim to bear only limited responsibility.

   54. They rely on  paragraph  39  of  the  determination  (which  we  have
       summarised above).  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  findings  in
       relation to whether the families originated from Jammu Kashmir  where
       they were persecuted by the Indian authorities and as  a  consequence
       crossed the border into Pakistan Kashmir.  They point  out  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal accepted [44]  that  the  appellants'  entry  and
       continued  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  Mohammed  Faruq's
       exploitation and control  of  them  had  'many  of  the  features  of
       trafficking' and that the cultural norms of their biradhiri made them
       susceptible   to   Mohammed   Faruq's   control.   Whilst   expressly
       acknowledging their responsibility for the deception, they then  move
       to attribute much greater responsibility  upon  Mohammed  Faruq.   In
       summary, they claim:

             i. Mohammed Faruq and his immediate family (wives and daughter)
                bore full responsibility for the initiation and execution of
                the deceptions and have been the principal beneficiaries.

            ii.  Judge  McIntyre  was   clear   as   to   the   differential
                responsibilities   and   culpability   of   the   individual
                defendants and found Mohammed Faruq's criminal conduct  went
                beyond that alleged in  the  indictment;  that  Mr  Mohammed
                Faruq was the  organiser  of  these  conspiracies,  and  the
                initiator of them, and that his business (MPS) was the  main
                beneficiary, in terms  of  benefits  received.   The  losers
                should look to Mohammed Faruq for compensation  rather  than
                to the appellants.  The male parents did what Mohammed Faruq
                asked them to do; the female parents did what their husbands
                asked them to do. The appellants were present in the  UK  as
                victims of trafficking, brought into the UK and harboured by
                Mohammed Faruq for the purpose of exploitation.

           iii. The 'large scale conspiracy' conducted by Mohammed Faruq was
                relevant because it  provided  the  background  and  context
                necessary to assess the extent of the  parents'  culpability
                and the weight properly to be attached to their  involvement
                in the conspiracy and it provides  background  evidence  for
                the later proportionality exercise.

            iv. Mohammed Faruq (variously described  as  the  "head  of  the
                family and the head of the family business", the  "directing
                mind", "instrumental in the organisation  and  execution  of
                the [claims]...with whom the Council liaised directly", "the
                initiator"   and   "organiser",   "principal   beneficiary")
                together with his wives,  Khurshid  and  Sheila  Faruq,  his
                daughter Haleema Saida Kamal and his  brother  Abdul  Qayyum
                implemented the scheme to bring the appellants and others to
                the United Kingdom.

             v. Mohammed Faruq was  involved  in  multiple  immigration  and
                financial frauds over many years  as  a  practised,  serious
                fraudster before the entry of the appellants. At the time of
                his arrest he had acquired 62 houses in Oxford and made  his
                income letting these properties  as  emergency  and  asylum-
                seeker accommodation through Oxford County Council and NASS.
                He was claimed to be a large scale trafficker of adults  and
                children for benefit fraud.

            vi. Prior to the entry of the appellants, Mohammed Faruq and his
                wife Sheila and  brothers  were  directly  involved  in  the
                deceptive entry of his wife Khurshid, his brothers and their
                wives; altering Khurshid's age when sponsoring her  to  come
                to the UK as his fianc�e, and arranging for  Sheila  Hancock
                (his common law wife and mother of his children),  to  enter
                into a fraudulent marriage with his brother Abdul  Hamid  to
                gain him entry  clearance.  During  her  marriage  to  Abdul
                Hamid, she underwent a religious marriage to Faruq at  which
                Abdul Hamid was a witness.

           vii. Mohammed Faruq arranged  the  entry  of  his  brother  Abdul
                Rafiq's  wife, Rasheeda Begum, as a domestic worker. At  the
                time of her entry Rasheeda Begum had two children  to  Abdul
                Rafiq and a family home in Pakistan. His brother Abdul Hamid
                fraudulently sponsored Robina Kauser into the UK as his wife
                when she was the wife of another of Faruq's brothers,  Abdul
                Qayyum.   Documents   showed   Mohammed    Faruq's    direct
                involvement, as well as  arranging  for  Rasheeda  Begum  to
                apply for asylum in the UK as Buksheeda Bi  as  a  means  by
                which Mohammed Faruq was enabled to claim housing benefits.

          viii.  Mohammed  Faruq  was  also  directly  involved   with   the
                fraudulent entry and fraudulent asylum claims in relation to
                others and committed multiple tax and business frauds  using
                his company MPS as a vehicle for these purposes,  for  which
                he benefitted directly.

            ix. The appellants' deceptions, it is said, were  calculated  to
                serve his ends.  Planned by Mohammed  Faruq,  Abdul  Qayyum,
                Khurshid  Faruq  and  her  adult  daughter  Haleema  visited
                Pakistan  to  make  arrangements  for  the  entry  clearance
                applications for the appellants and others. The  appellants'
                entry and asylum  applications  were  dictated  by  Mohammed
                Faruq (via his associates)  relying  on  false  standardised
                evidence.  Mohammed  Faruq  liaised  directly  in  arranging
                housing accommodation, signing the invoices and  letters  in
                support of the housing benefit applications as well as post-
                NASS asylum appeals. The housing benefit was  paid  directly
                to him.  Mohammed Faruq chose the solicitors, interpreted at
                meetings and interviews or arranged for his daughter Haleema
                so to act and instructed  medical  experts,  monitoring  and
                correcting  their  reports.  Mohammed  Faruq  retained   the
                appellants' travel  and  identity  documents,  their  asylum
                appeal  papers  and  statements.  The  children's   teachers
                recorded that Mohammed Faruq and  his  family  provided  the
                identity and family information for the appellants and  they
                noted  his  control  of  the  children  and  parents,  their
                activities and his refusal to sanction  their  participation
                in school group activities.

Events in Srinagar and Jammu Kashmir, India

   55. At the commencement of her submissions to  us,  Ms  Cronin  conceded,
       according to the expert evidence of Prof Menski,  that  even  if  the
       appellants were from Jammu Kashmir, they  would  be  given  Pakistani
       citizenship and it was therefore  accepted  that  if  returned,  they
       would return to Pakistan. The appellants did not give evidence before
       the First-tier Tribunal and were not going to give  evidence  in  the
       Upper Tribunal because, she accepted, on  certain  core  issues  they
       could not be found to be credible. She  maintained  that  credibility
       was a significant factor and  that  the  decision  not  to  call  the
       appellants was a "professional decision" because a live contest on  a
       credibility issue that had been conceded would serve no  purpose.  Mr
       Blundell commenced his submissions on the basis that the parents were
       not advancing a case on  the  basis  that  they  were  credible.  The
       appellants did not give evidence but relied upon the expert  evidence
       of  others  to  advance  their  claim.  Accordingly,   it   was   his
       understanding that, for the first time, the appellants were conceding
       that they had not told the truth about that part of  their  claim  in
       which they alleged they had been tortured and persecuted in India.

   56. Later in the hearing, on the morning of 18 September 2013, Ms  Cronin
       sought to clarify the extent of the concession that she had made.  It
       had not been her intention to concede that the  appellants  were  not
       telling the truth about their claims to have been persecuted  in  the
       past or the risk of persecution in India.

   57. We have already pointed out that Judge McIntyre expressly declined to
       make findings on this issue and the  First-tier  Tribunal  adopted  a
       similar course. Notwithstanding this, the  Secretary  of  State  has,
       throughout these proceedings, maintained that this part of  the  case
       was untruthful. Whilst, in view of what he had earlier considered  to
       be a concession, Mr Blundell did not  initially  address  us  on  the
       issue of credibility, he later  did  so  by  submitting  the  written
       submissions on credibility that had been advanced before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.

   58. We were referred to the respondent's  closing  submissions  and  were
       provided with an extract of paragraphs  30  to  121  of  the  written
       submissions as they were advanced to the First-tier  Tribunal.  These
       closing submissions are a detailed critique of the evidence that  was
       advanced by the experts on the appellants' behalf in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and the accounts given by the parents.

   59. They begin with the premise that three of the  families  are  closely
       related and the fourth related but less so. All are related by  blood
       or marriage to Mohammed Faruq. Three of the parents are siblings, all
       the  children  are  first  cousins.  The  parents  speak   of   their
       experiences in Jammu Kashmir. All were living in or around  Srinagar,
       according to their accounts. It is, in  our  judgment,  inconceivable
       that one  family  would  not  have  been  highly  familiar  with  the
       circumstances of the other two or  three  families.  Their  accounts,
       however, are silent on this.

   60. What is more striking still are the similarities that  exist  between
       the accounts provided  when  it  is  said  that  these  are  truthful
       accounts of different incidents which happened to different people on
       different occasions. For example, the Secretary of State  points  out
       that the accounts  of  Nasreen  Bi  and  Fazal  Jan  demonstrate  the
       following similarities:

             i. Indian soldiers coming to their home;

            ii. the soldiers breaking down the door;

           iii. their husbands trying to stop the soldiers;

            iv. each husband was shot dead by the Indian soldiers;

             v. the wives were grabbed and their  hands  tied  behind  their
                back;

            vi. each of the wives was blindfolded and put in a truck;

           vii. the soldiers took them to a camp;

          viii. each of the wives  was  burned  with  cigarettes  and  given
                electric shocks;

            ix. each was beaten with a belt;

             x. each was raped;

            xi. each was released near their village;

           xii. neither could walk properly;

          xiii. on arrival home each found the house had been burned down;

           xiv. in the case of these two sisters, each describe having  lost
                a baby as a result of the injuries they  received,  although
                neither sister refers to the incident  as  it  affected  the
                other.

   61. These are not the  only  similarities.  For  example,  one  tells  of
       forefingers being  cut  off  the  hand  of  his  father;  another  of
       forefingers being cut off the hands of her husband.

   62. We are, of course, mindful of the fact that  a  striking  consistency
       between two events does not necessarily mean that  the  two  accounts
       cannot be true. However, it is the scale of the similarities that is,
       in our judgment, so significant.

   63. The evidence of what occurred in India has  to  be  assessed  by  the
       parents' portrayal of these events in what appears  to  have  been  a
       rural setting. However, it is apparent that the places named  by  the
       appellants are in the city of Srinagar.  The events do not apparently
       relate to village life but are placed in an urban setting.

   64. Further, as the closing submissions  make  clear,  the  Secretary  of
       State was at pains to  point  out  the  degree  of  integration  that
       Mohammed Faruq has with Pakistan, the parents' own admitted  evidence
       about the time spent in Pakistan, the relations and connections  they
       have with Pakistan and various other factors suggestive, although not
       necessarily determinatively, of their coming from Pakistan.

   65. Together, they make up a compelling case that  the  parents  are  not
       telling the  truth  and  that  the  appellants'  overall  account  is
       fabricated.

   66. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal had the benefit of the expert evidence
       of Drs Price, Ballard and Huckstep, none of the  experts  was  called
       before us, nor were we referred  to  their  expert  evidence  in  the
       bundles, although we know those reports were contained within them.

   67. Furthermore, the appellants' representatives  can  have  been  in  no
       doubt that credibility was in issue since Mr Blundell repeatedly made
       this clear.

   68.  Notwithstanding  the  respondent  setting  out  her  submissions  on
       credibility in detail,  no  evidence  was  produced  by  any  of  the
       appellants in response to them.

   69. The appellants' case is that given the parents' admitted inability to
       provide credible evidence to us on  what  they  consider  to  be  the
       'core' issues, there was little  point  in  making  the  attempt.  We
       regard this as a counsel of despair. In our judgment, it  has  always
       been open to the parents to face up to the fact  (which  they  admit)
       that they have not told the truth but nevertheless advance a case  by
       explaining why they did so and seeking to put the record straight  by
       telling the truth.  There are, of course, hurdles  that  have  to  be
       overcome in this path, but that does not prevent the attempt.

   70. We  must  assess  the  credibility  of  these  accounts  against  the
       background of the appellants' case as a whole. We  are  satisfied  so
       that we are sure that these accounts are not  credible.  Furthermore,
       we are satisfied that by continuing to maintain  them,  even  in  the
       face of the detailed criticism that has been made but  has  not  been
       adequately answered, the parents are continuing to  lie  about  their
       claim. Whilst the parents seek to claim that  their  responsibilities
       for events ended with the conspiracy  which  effected  their  initial
       entry into the United Kingdom, we do not regard this as  an  adequate
       description of the role that has been played by them. Notwithstanding
       the fact that the appellants entered the United Kingdom in  2001  and
       2002, they have still not seen fit to  provide  us  with  a  truthful
       account. We accept that the decision not to call the  appellants  was
       made on their behalf by their legal representatives but  this  cannot
       absolve  the  parents  from   responsibility   for   the   underlying
       instructions they as parents were providing to their  counsel.  Those
       instructions  are  not  the  truth.  Doubtless  that  provides  their
       representatives with a difficulty but the responsibility for this  is
       that of the parents alone, not that of their representatives.

   71. We will deal with the effect this finding has in  due  course.  What,
       however, is clear to us is  that  the  parents  cannot  realistically
       attribute blame to Mohammed Faruq for the continuing deception  since
       he no longer has any  influence  on  their  lives.  Accordingly,  the
       continuing  use  of  deception  provides  an   insight   into   their
       independent engagement with deception in furthering their claim.

Trafficking - the development of the claim

   72. When the appeal came before us there was a fully developed claim that
       the appellants were the victims of trafficking.  For  example,  in  a
       statement made by Gulan Rabani [vol 2, tab L, p 1] dated 1 May  2013,
       he said this:

           "[Mohammed Faruq] is a very cruel man. That's all I can  say.  I
           cannot say more than that. He always lied and he told us to  lie
           as well. He has made me work in this country. I have never  told
           anyone this  before  because  I  was  afraid.  He  had  lots  of
           properties and he made me work in them for free.

           As I said in my previous statement, it was not  until  after  we
           were arrested that I realised how much control [Mohammed  Faruq]
           had over our arrangements to come to the UK and what we did when
           we got here."

   73. This is strikingly different from the way in  which  the  claims  had
       previously been put.  Qadir Ahmed made a statement [vol 6, tab  X,  p
       42] in which he said in paragraphs 18 to 20:

           "We left India in 2001 and went  to  Pakistan...  the  Pakistani
           police arrested me... After I was  released  I  asked  Ajab  [my
           employer] to help me as I  was  scared  that  the  police  would
           arrest me again. I told Ajab that I had four maternal uncles  in
           the UK namely Mohammed Faruq,  Abdul  Qayyum,  Abdul  Hamid  and
           Abdul Rafiq... I had a good relationship  with  my  uncle  Abdul
           Qayyum. I had maintained communication with him since the  first
           time that I  went  to  Pakistan.  My  uncle  used  to  phone  me
           regularly while I was working... to ask about me and my family's
           welfare. After a discussion with Ajab I phoned my uncle  in  the
           UK and asked him to help me."

       He continued in paragraphs 25 to 30:

           "That evening my uncle Qayyum advised me  that  I  should  claim
           asylum but it would be  best  to  make  separate  asylum  claims
           because if one spouse was  granted  then  the  other  one  could
           benefit from that. He said that this increased  the  chances  of
           success...Qayyum told me to destroy our Pakistani passports  and
           ID cards which I did... I had been encouraged by Qayyum to  tell
           my children to lie. I  had  to  coach  them  to  tell  everybody
           outside of the immediate  family  that  their  mother  or  their
           father had died and if they did not do this then they  would  be
           deported. I accept that I coached my children into  saying  that
           either their mother or father was dead whilst we lived  together
           as a family."

   74. In a statement made by Qadir Ahmed dated 7 March 2013 [vol 1, tab  A,
       p 1] at paragraphs 8 to 9, he said:

           "I now know what we did when he claimed asylum  in  the  UK  was
           wrong. We did not understand the system. My wife and I were  new
           to the country, illiterate and uneducated. We did what  we  were
           told to do by [Mohammed Faruq] and his associates. We could  not
           refuse to do as they said as we did not know anything about  the
           system, and had no way of finding out... it is horrible  to  see
           how it has affected our children. We thought that  we  would  be
           giving them a better life when we came to  the  UK.  Instead  we
           have put them in a terrible position."

   75. Qadir Ahmed's wife, Nasreen Bi made a statement [vol 1, tab D, p  57]
       dated 31 October 2009 in which she said in paragraph 16:

           "I know that we have lied. We did not know  any  better  and  we
           followed the advice of people that we thought  were  doing  this
           because it was best for us. Everything we have done we have done
           in  order  to  give  the  children  a  better  chance  and,   in
           particular, to provide them with a place of safety."

   76. Ghulam Rabani's earlier statements  are  couched  in  very  different
       terms from his latest one.  In a statement of 31 October 2009 [vol 2,
       tab C, p 68] he said in paragraphs 12, 13 and 15:

           "Sponsorship papers were sent to Pakistan to Gul  Mohammed  -  I
           presume by Mohammed Faruq. When I spoke to  Mohammed  Faruq,  he
           asked me to contact Gul Mohammed...Gul Mohammed gave  me  advice
           about what documents to get including statements from the Muslim
           Commercial Bank... Mohammed Faruq knew it was our  intention  to
           claim asylum in the UK."

   77. In supplementary statement dated 4 December 2009 [vol 2, tab C, p 77]
       he said at 79]:

           "But it is the truth that both myself, my wife and  all  of  our
           six children, were born in Jammu Kashmir and  that  we  have  no
           connection to the village of Mair in Pakistan. It is  only  very
           recently that we have come to learn, through our lawyers, of the
           extent to which we were used in order to benefit Mohammed  Faruq
           and his business."

   78. His wife, Noreen Shakila said in her statement of 3 July 2007 [vol 2,
       tab D, p 45] at paragraph 24:

           "My uncle, Mohammed Faruq, knew that it  was  our  intention  to
           claim asylum. He was nevertheless willing to help us in order to
           get to England to make that application. He did  not  advise  us
           directly about making separate  claims  and  giving  some  false
           information but he had a connection to the main person  who  did
           advise us whose name is Ali Wahid."

   79. Rungzaib [vol 3, tab C, p 67] in paragraphs 20  -  24  and  32  of  a
       statement dated 31 October 2009 described events as follows:

           "We  travelled  to  England  using  false  Pakistani   passports
           obtained on our behalf by the friend with whom  I  was  working.
           His name was Abdul Majid. Abdul  Majid  also  obtained  a  false
           Pakistani ID card for my wife. I  already  had  one  due  to  my
           numerous travels to Pakistan before... I spoke to  Abdul  Qayyum
           when he was in England and asked for his help.  I also  met  him
           afterwards in Pakistan. He told me that when  he  went  back  to
           England he would send sponsorship forms. He posted the documents
           to me. I do not know what papers were in the envelope.... I  did
           not pay Mr Majid any money to help me... before coming to the UK
           I had  met  Abdul  Qayyum  on  three  or  four  occasions...  in
           Pakistan. My family and I arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  5
           August 2000. We were picked up by Mr Qayyum's wife, Shahida, and
           his friend Habib.  Habib advised me that Qayyum  had  instructed
           him to help us claim asylum  separately.  I  was  reluctant  but
           agreed... everything that  I  have  done,  for  which  I  accept
           responsibility, has been done in order  to  make  sure  that  my
           children are safe and can grow up in a way that any parent would
           expect for their children."

   80. Jamila, his wife [vol 3, tab D, p 79] said at paragraph 8:

           "My husband phoned my uncle, Abdul Qayyum, when we  were  living
           in Pakistan in order to help us because we could not continue to
           live in Pakistan... my husband told me  that  we  were  claiming
           asylum and that we would make separate applications. He told  me
           that I was to say that my husband had died and that I  only  had
           three children. He also told me that I had to tell them  that  I
           had arrived in the UK illegally. In fact it was  Habib  who  sat
           with us many times until we learned an account  of  how  we  had
           travelled to England. Although I was  confused,  I  followed  my
           husband's instructions because I had no choice... In my culture,
           we follow our husbands' orders, right or wrong."

   81. Mehmood Ahmed had this to say in a statement he signed on 3 July 2007
       [vol 4, tab D, p 28] at paragraphs 20 to 24:

           "I had left  Kashmir  on  several  occasions  and  travelled  to
           Pakistan. Whilst there I had  been  able  to  obtain  employment
           through a man called Munshi Mohammed. I have worked  for  Munshi
           Mohammed on several occasions. It was Munshi Mohammed who helped
           me to get false passports for myself, my wife, and two  boys  in
           order to be able to travel from Pakistan with visitor's visas to
           England in order to come to claim asylum. However, to do that we
           also needed the assistance  of  family  members  in  the  UK  to
           sponsor us....Fazal's sister, Khurshid,  had  already  moved  to
           England and had married Mohammed Faruq ... I  telephoned  Safdar
           [my wife's brother] in the UK and begged him to help me as I was
           now desperate to find a safe haven for myself and my family.  As
           I have stated above, Munshi Mohammed helped me to  obtain  false
           passports using fake identity documents. He also  helped  me  to
           obtain bank statements and property papers that would be  needed
           in support of my Visa  application...  I  approached  Safdar  in
           order to help us. I thought  that  Safdar  was  the  person  who
           sponsored us.  The sponsorship documents were sent not to myself
           but to Munshi Mohammed.  It was only after  my  arrest  in  July
           2004 that I found out that the actual sponsor had been  Khurshid
           and that all her documents had been made available in support of
           their visa application....  After  our  arrival  in  the  United
           Kingdom, Safdar advised me to myself and  my  wife  should  make
           separate claims. He also told me that  I  should  give  a  false
           account of our journey to the UK and not disclose anything about
           the visa applications. I went along with this... Mohammed  Faruq
           became aware that I claimed asylum and he was angry  because  he
           had not been consulted. He was  not  someone,  however,  that  I
           would ordinarily consult with. Although he is the brother-in-law
           of my wife, my wife is close to her sister, Khurshid and not  to
           Mohammed Faruq himself. ...Nevertheless, he gave  help  whenever
           we needed it for example in interpreting or providing  financial
           support for medical reports. It was, however, Safdar who was the
           one most directly involved."

   82. This might  be  contrasted  with  what  Mehmood  Ahmed  said  in  his
       statement of 1 May 2013 [vol 4, tab A, p 5] at paragraphs 14  and  18
       [pp 8 and 9] by which  time  the  trafficking  allegation  was  being
       strenuously pursued:

           "All my wife's family was here in the UK. They offered for us to
           come to the UK. When I got this offer, I mentioned it to  Munshi
           Mohammed  and  he  said  he   could   organise   documents   for
           us...Because the way the family system was I took other peoples'
           words at face value. When I say  family  system,  I  am  talking
           about a cultural thing. If Safdar said go this way  I  would  go
           that way, if Mohammed Faruq said go this way, I  would  go  that
           way. The reason Mohammed Faruq was higher up than I was that  he
           had been in the UK for 30 years and he  was  wealthy.   Mohammed
           Faruq also organised for Safdar to come here as well. They  have
           been here longer and have more influence.  I  felt  respect  for
           them."

Trafficking - the legal basis

   83. The Council of Europe Convention on  Action  against  Trafficking  in
       Human Beings ('European Convention against Trafficking') was ratified
       by the United Kingdom government on 17 December  2008.  It  proceeded
       from the UN Palermo Protocol (to  which  the  United  Kingdom  was  a
       signatory)  which  itself  sought  to  take  measures  to  deal  with
       transnational organised crime and to  prevent,  suppress  and  punish
       trafficking in persons. The European Convention  against  Trafficking
       applies irrespective of immigration status.

   84. Article 1 of the European Convention against Trafficking explains its
       purposes:

           1. The purposes of this Convention are:

             1)    to prevent and combat trafficking in human beings,  while
                guaranteeing gender equality;

             2)     to  protect  the  human  rights  of   the   victims   of
                trafficking,  design  a  comprehensive  framework  for   the
                protection and assistance of victims  and  witnesses,  while
                guaranteeing gender equality, as well as to ensure effective
                investigation and prosecution;

             3)    to promote international cooperation  on  action  against
                trafficking in human beings."

   85. Article 2 provides that  the  Convention  applies  to  all  forms  of
       trafficking in  human  beings,  whether  national  or  transnational,
       whether or not connected with organised crime.

   86. According to Article 4:

           For the purposes of this Convention:

           (1) "Trafficking in human beings" shall  mean  the  recruitment,
           transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of  persons,  by
           means of the threat or use of force or other forms of  coercion,
           of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of  power  or
           of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving  of
           payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a  person  having
           control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation.

           (2) The consent of a victim of "trafficking in human beings"  to
           the intended exploitation set forth in subparagraph (a) of  this
           Article shall  be  irrelevant  where  any  means  set  forth  in
           subparagraph (a) have been used

           (3) The recruitment,  transportation,  transfer,  harbouring  or
           receipt  of  a child for the purposes of exploitation  shall  be
           considered trafficking in human beings even  if  this  does  not
           involve any of the means set forth in subparagraph (a)  of  this
           Article;

           (4) Child shall mean any person under eighteen years of age;

           (5) "Victim" shall mean any natural person  who  is  subject  to
           trafficking in human beings as defined in this Article.

   87. Section 4 of the Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
       etc.) Act 2004 creates various offences of  'trafficking  people  for
       exploitation'.  For this purpose, a person is exploited if:

           (4)(c) he is subject to force, threats or deception intended  to
           induce him-

                (i) to provide services of any kind,

                (ii) to provide another person with benefits of any kind, or

                (iii) to enable another person to acquire  benefits  of  any
                kind, ...

           (4)(d) a person uses or attempts to  use  him  for  any  purpose
           within sub-paragraph (i), (ii) or (iii) of paragraph (c), having
           chosen him for that purpose on grounds that-

                (i) he is mentally or physically  ill  or  disabled,  he  is
                young or he has a family relationship with a person, and

                (ii) a person without  the  illness,  disability,  youth  or
                family relationship would be likely to refuse to be used for
                that purpose.

   88. The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights presented a set
       of Trafficking  Principles  and  Guidelines  to  the  United  Nations
       Economic and Social Council which were stated to have  the  following
       effect:

           The Trafficking Principles and Guidelines are not contained in a
           treaty or similar instrument that is capable of giving  rise  to
           immediate legal obligation. As such, this  instrument  does  not
           enjoy the force of law and cannot, on its own, be identified  as
           or become a source of obligation for States. However, this  does
           not mean that the  Trafficking  Principles  and  Guidelines  are
           without legal significance. As the Commentary will  demonstrate,
           certain aspects of the Trafficking  Principles  and  Guidelines:
           (i)  are  based  upon  established  customary  rules  of  public
           international law to which all States are bound, including those
           relating to State responsibility and fundamental  human  rights;
           and/or (ii) reiterate,  or  make  specific  to  the  context  of
           trafficking,   norms   contained   in   existing   international
           agreements.  To  the  extent  that  parts  of  the   Trafficking
           Principles  and  Guidelines   embody   an   existing   rule   of
           international law, then those parts are themselves a  source  of
           legal obligation for States. It is also important to  note  that
           the Trafficking Principles and Guidelines establish a  framework
           for State  practice  that  may  itself  provide  the  basis  for
           emergent customary international law.

   89. The UN Trafficking Principles and Guidelines offer general principles
       which include:

           Principle 1 seeks to ensure that trafficked persons are accorded
           all human rights, including those to which they are entitled  as
           victims of crime as well as victims of human rights  violations.
           This Principle is applicable to all  State  agents  and  to  all
           other actors engaged in activities relating  to  the  prevention
           and punishment of trafficking and the protection of victims.

           Principle 2 confirms that  all  States,  irrespective  of  their
           place in the trafficking  cycle,  have  an  international  legal
           responsibility  to  act  with  due   diligence   in   preventing
           trafficking;    investigating    and    prosecuting    suspected
           traffickers; and providing assistance and  protection  to  those
           who have been trafficked.  The principle of State responsibility
           as it operates in the human rights  context  confirms  that  the
           State is held to a certain standard of care, even in  situations
           where it is not the primary agent of harm.

           Principle 8 states 'The particular physical,  psychological  and
           psychosocial harm suffered  by  trafficked  children  and  their
           increased vulnerability to exploitation requires  that  they  be
           dealt with separately from adult trafficked persons in terms  of
           laws, policies, programmes and interventions.'

   90.  UKBA's  own  guidance  (as  it  then  was)  for  identification   of
       trafficking victims (APG, Victims of Trafficking) states:

           "It is important to be aware of a number of  myths  relating  to
           human trafficking: ...

           Myth: The person knew what was going to happen to him or her, so
           he/she cannot be considered a victim.

           Reality: Prior knowledge may indicate complicity and does not in
           itself indicate trafficking. But  equally  individuals  may  not
           have been aware of the level  of  control  over  their  freedom,
           movement or monetary arrangements so trafficking should  not  be
           ruled out simply because some prior knowledge of events  can  be
           established. ...

           Myth: It cannot be human trafficking when organiser  and  victim
           are related or married/cohabiting/ lovers.

           Reality: Close relationships  are  often  used  to  exploit  and
           control others. ...

           Myth: A person is not a victim of trafficking  when  he  or  she
           says that he or she has a better life than previously.  Reality:
           It is likely that victims may perceive  their  life  as  better,
           particularly when the money promised to them  is  delivered.  It
           doesn't mean that they are not a victim of trafficking.

           Behaviour of potential victims of trafficking

           It should be recognised in the assessment process  that  victims
           may not be willing  to  fully  disclose  the  details  of  their
           experience on first contact due  to  fear  of  retribution  from
           their traffickers or mistrust of those trying to help. It should
           also be recognised that there may  be  an  inability  and/or  an
           unwillingness of exploited persons  to  perceive  themselves  as
           'victims'.  For  many  individuals  they  may   perceive   their
           situation as temporary and partly attributed to  their  lack  of
           knowledge in understanding the  country  or  labour  market.  It
           should be noted that some exploited persons  may  be  viewed  as
           'colluding' with  their  'employer'  in  their  illegality,  for
           instance accepting the 'cover' of  the  person  exploiting  them
           from the immigration authorities. Such 'relationships'  can  add
           to confusion when attempting to identify individuals as  victims
           of trafficking.

           Agencies may also find that people are willing to tolerate their
           situation because they may perceive it as a 'stepping stone'  to
           a better future and may  also  compare  it  more  favourably  to
           experiences at home. In this situation front-line responders and
           decision makers should consider objective indicators such as the
           seizure  of  identity  documents  or  use  of  threats  by   the
           employer/exploiter.  Such  indicators  will  facilitate  in  the
           identification of a trafficking situation. ...

           Individuals who are in a trafficking situation may be  extremely
           reticent with information,  and  may  tell  their  stories  with
           obvious errors. It is not uncommon for  traffickers  to  provide
           'stories' for victims to tell if approached by  the  authorities
           and the errors or 'lack of reality' may be because their initial
           stories are composed by others and learnt."

   91. The Child Exploitation and Online Protection Centre (CEOP) report  on
       Child Trafficking for Benefit Fraud (October  2010)  concerning  such
       child trafficking victims states at paragraph 8.2.1:

           "When talking about impact on the child, it might be  useful  to
           discuss the child's development of  identity  and  the  negative
           impact that a false or adopted identity can  have  on  a  child.
           Children who are exploited  for  benefits  may  be  given  false
           identities or be told by their exploiters  to  'role  play'  for
           various identities. This can lead to a sense of confusion  about
           their identity which may inhibit  the  child's  normal  identity
           development and have adverse effects on  the  child's  emotional
           and behavioural progress. This can result in low self-esteem and
           poor self- image. It may also cause the child to feel  complicit
           in any crime that is being committed (benefit fraud/immigration)
           and prevent the child being able to  express  themselves  or  to
           seek help.  ..The  child  may  also  develop  with  a  sense  of
           invisibility as they may feel  that  they  have  to  continually
           suppress their true identity. The child's sense of individuation
           and social belonging may be poorly developed."

   92. In Rantsev v Cyprus and Russia (2010) 51 EHRR 1, the ECtHR,  speaking
       generally between paragraphs 271 and 308,  identified  in  [284]  the
       positive nature of the obligation:

           The Court observes that  the  Palermo  Protocol  and  the  Anti-
           Trafficking Convention refer to the  need  for  a  comprehensive
           approach  to  combat  trafficking  which  includes  measures  to
           prevent trafficking and  to  protect  victims,  in  addition  to
           measures to  punish  traffickers  ....  It  is  clear  from  the
           provisions of these two instruments that the Contracting States,
           including almost all of the member  States  of  the  Council  of
           Europe, have formed the view that only a combination of measures
           addressing all three aspects  can  be  effective  in  the  fight
           against trafficking ..... Accordingly, the duty to penalise  and
           prosecute trafficking is  only  one  aspect  of  member  States'
           general undertaking to combat trafficking.  The  extent  of  the
           positive obligations arising under Article 4 must be  considered
           within this broader context.

   93. Chapter III  (Articles  10-17)  includes  "Measures  to  protect  and
       promote the rights of victims, guaranteeing gender equality". Article
       10 provides:

           1. Each party  shall  provide  its  competent  authorities  with
           persons  who  are  trained  and  qualified  in  preventing   and
           combating  trafficking  in  human  beings,  in  identifying  and
           helping victims, including children, and shall ensure  that  the
           different authorities collaborate with each  other  as  well  as
           with relevant support organisations,  so  that  victims  can  be
           identified in a procedure duly taking into account  the  special
           situation and children victims and, in appropriate cases, issued
           with residence permits under  the  conditions  provided  for  in
           Article 14 of the present Convention.

           2. Each Party shall adopt such legislative or other measures  as
           may  be  necessary  to  identify  victims  as   appropriate   in
           collaboration  with   other   Parties   and   relevant   support
           organisations. Each Party shall ensure that,  if  the  competent
           authorities have reasonable grounds to believe that a person has
           been victim of trafficking in human beings,  that  person  shall
           not be removed  from  its  territory  until  the  identification
           process as victim of an offence provided for in  Article  18  of
           this Convention has been completed by the competent  authorities
           and  shall  likewise  ensure  that  that  person  receives   the
           assistance provided for in Article 12, paragraphs 1 and 2.

Our evaluation of this issue

   94. The appellants' case is that they - collectively - were trafficked by
       Mohammed Faruq for exploitation within a wider benefit fraud and that
       Mohammed Faruq's conduct is wholly consistent  with  the  role  of  a
       trafficker. As the coercion applied by a trafficker may be subtle and
       need not be violent, victims  frequently  consent  to  travel,  hence
       benefitting from trafficking is not inimical to being a  victim.  The
       parents' deceptive conduct is consistent with their being victims  of
       trafficking. Even those with irregular  immigration  status  and  who
       have committed criminal offences  are  entitled  to  benefit,  it  is
       submitted, from the European Convention against Trafficking.

   95. In support of this, the  appellants  assert  that  the  parents  were
       unaware that Mohammed Faruq owned the  accommodation  in  which  they
       were living or  that  he  was  exploiting  them  to  obtain  bed  and
       breakfast or housing benefit payments.

   96. They point out Mohammed Faruq's worldliness,  his  great  comparative
       wealth and position and as well as the position that  places  him  as
       the principal of the biradhiri to which all the appellants  belonged;
       similarly the wives and children assert their duty to obey  and  show
       deference to their husbands and fathers. In this construction of what
       occurred,  Mohammed  Faruq  abused  his  power  and   exploited   the
       appellants'  vulnerability  in   a   sophisticated   benefit   fraud.
       Accordingly, the argument proceeds, the First-tier Tribunal failed to
       give weight to this in the proportionality exercise. The  appellants,
       as victims of trafficking, did  not  justify  classification  by  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  as  undeserving,  illegal  entrants   who   had
       unlawfully gained their presence in the United Kingdom  and  benefits
       to boot or that  this  justified  their  removal  on  proportionality
       grounds.

   97.  In  advancing  the  claim,  they  rely  heavily  on  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's  finding  that  'many  features  of  their  entry  to  and
       continued presence in the United Kingdom...accord with  many  of  the
       features of trafficking'.

   98. In adopting this  approach,  the  appellants  as  victims  have  also
       suffered greatly, they  have  been  prosecuted  and  imprisoned,  the
       children significantly distressed, the families forced to live  in  a
       state  of  legal  limbo,   'socialised   into   British   norms   and
       expectations' but 'denied the opportunity to participate or  progress
       in such system.'

   99. As part  of  a  discrete  claim,  the  appellants  contend  that  the
       Convention enshrines a system of identification which is  central  to
       the proper application of the scheme, not only for  their  protection
       but in order to secure the punishment of the trafficker. Seen in this
       light, it is contrary to law to remove  the  appellants  before  such
       identification and  investigation  has  been  undertaken  or  without
       regard to the Article 16 protections for the safety  and  dignity  of
       returning trafficking victims.

  100. Furthermore, the parents' credibility and culpability  should  itself
       be assessed in the context of their being victims of trafficking.

  101. Whilst it is not contested that Mohammed Faruq  was  central  to  the
       success of this scheme, his demonisation has to be established  as  a
       fact and there are significant difficulties in the  parents'  way  in
       achieving this when the parents have not themselves given evidence or
       submitted  themselves  for  cross-examination.   As  we  have   noted
       earlier, there are two diametrically-opposed  explanations  for  what
       took place: one, as victims whose  vulnerability  resulted  in  their
       being abused and exploited; the other, as willing participants  in  a
       scheme to gain unlawful entry into the United Kingdom, to secure free
       housing, state benefits,  free  education  and  healthcare  with  the
       realistic prospect of being granted settled status.  The  appellants'
       submissions that the evidence is consistent with the  former  is  not
       determinative, since there is compelling evidence pointing the  other
       way.   Indeed,  many  of  the  points  made  by  the  appellants  are
       equivocal.  There is no underlying inconsistency  in  the  appellants
       seeing this as an opportunity for them which they willingly  embraced
       and Mohammed Faruq benefitting from the scheme as well and even  more
       greatly.  Their present  antipathy  towards  Mohammed  Faruq  is  not
       probative of their being victims: it is hardly surprising  given  the
       fact that the scheme has fallen apart in a way which neither foresaw.



  102. The parents seek to establish their role as victims.  If  that  meant
       coming to the Tribunal and giving evidence along the  lines  we  have
       previously identified, confessing the prior deception and  attempting
       to turn a new leaf, this was a clear means of achieving that goal.

  103. As importantly, the evidence about the development of the trafficking
       claim,  as  we  have  seen,  was  not  apparent  from  the   original
       statements.  Whilst they refer  to  the  undisputed  role  played  by
       Mohammed Faruq, they do not suggest (save in the  most  oblique  way)
       that they were being exploited.  Indeed, it is difficult to  see  how
       that could have been suggested.  In Pakistan, opportunities  for  the
       parents and, more especially, the children were  limited:  they  were
       illiterate, living in relative deprivation.   It  was  not  suggested
       that  the  children  possessed  a  realistic  prospect   of   further
       education, far less tertiary education, in  Pakistan;  there  was  no
       prospect of free education,  free  housing,  state  benefits  or  NHS
       healthcare.  It is true that the decision was something of a  gamble;
       there was a prospect of failure, perhaps detection and  imprisonment,
       but the risks had to be off-set  by  the  potential  gains.   If  the
       appellants now claim that they are the victims of exploitation, we do
       not think it is improper for us  to  comment  that  they  have  never
       sought to flee from the exploitation they claim to have  suffered  in
       the United Kingdom.  There is, at the very least, a  suggestion  that
       the exploitation that they seek to establish they suffered under  the
       rod of Mohammed Faruq is  strikingly  similar  to  the  benefit  they
       currently assert they would lose if removed (and the  loss  of  which
       amounts, they say, to a violation of their human rights).

  104. The Secretary of State submitted before the First-tier Tribunal  that
       there was no  relevant  exploitation:  whilst  the  presence  of  the
       appellants in the United Kingdom in housing owned by  Mohammed  Faruq
       enabled him to claim  large  sums  of  money  to  which  he  was  not
       entitled, nothing was required of the  appellants  other  than  their
       presence here. It was submitted they had not been made  to  work,  or
       exploited in any other way (save the reference  which  we  will  deal
       with below). Further, the  Secretary  of  State  said  there  was  no
       evidence of Mohammed Faruq using fraud, force, or coercion  upon  the
       appellants.  Their  presence  involved  deception  but  it  was   not
       deception upon the appellants. They knew they were  not  entitled  to
       enter the United Kingdom in the capacity they  claimed  or  to  claim
       asylum here; the contrary is inconsistent with  the  parents'  guilty
       plea to the  conspiracy.   The  fact  that  Mohammed  Faruq  profited
       greatly is immaterial.

  105. The Secretary of State repeats those submissions before us.  The high-
       water mark of the difference between the  claim  originally  advanced
       and the  present  claim  that  the  appellants  are  the  victims  of
       trafficking is seen when comparing the latter claim and that advanced
       by Mehmood Ahmed in his statement of 3 July 2007 in which he  stated,
       'Mohammed Faruq became aware that I claimed asylum and he  was  angry
       because he had not been consulted'. This is  not  consistent  with  a
       claim to have been trafficked by Mohammed Faruq.

  106. The Secretary of State, with some justification, relies upon the date
       when the trafficking argument first emerged:

           "The appellants have been represented by specialist  and  expert
           solicitors at all stages. They have been represented by  equally
           specialist and expert  counsel  at  all  stages  of  the  appeal
           process. Yet the trafficking argument  first  emerged  in  their
           skeleton argument submitted on the Thursday before  the  [First-
           tier Tribunal] hearing was due to commence the following week.

           That was an extremely late stage for such an important  argument
           to be raised. Notably, there had never been  any  suggestion  in
           any of the statements submitted by the appellants that they  had
           been trafficked. Whilst self-identification is not essential  to
           found a trafficking claim, it is notable that not only were  the
           appellants apparently not aware of their  own  predicament,  but
           neither were their lawyers."

  107. In refuting this part of the  claim,  the  Secretary  of  State  also
       relies upon the fact that the appellants  have  not  established  the
       First-tier Tribunal  made  an  error  on  a  point  of  law  and  the
       appellants have never been given leave to argue the point.   The  new
       evidence on which they rely includes the Ghulam Rabani  statement  as
       well as one from Mehmood Ahmed's of 1 May 2013, both post-dating  the
       determination.  The First-tier Tribunal disposed of  the  trafficking
       point in paragraph 44 of its determination [vol 6, tab A, p 14] :

           "Our findings in respect of these arguments  are  that  although
           the Appellants  are  not  the  victims  of  trafficking  in  the
           conventional meaning of that term, many features of their  entry
           to and continued presence in  the  UK  with  at  the  least  the
           assistance of Mr Faruq,  and  his  subsequent  exploitation  and
           control of them after entry, accord with many of the features of
           trafficking as recited on behalf of the Appellants. However,  we
           have decided to attach little  weight  to  this  aspect  of  the
           matter. There is no evidence that any  of  the  Appellants  have
           been subjected to any physical coercion or  force,  although  no
           doubt they have been subject to other pressures. It must be  the
           case that they are not now the victims of trafficking  according
           to any definition of that term. For some years,  they  have  had
           the services of a highly competent firm of solicitors, and  they
           have not been at risk from  Mr  Faruq  since  the  prosecutions.
           There is no authority for saying that the victims of any kind of
           trafficking for  that  reason  alone  should  be  excluded  from
           immigration control including removal. There is no evidence that
           if the Appellants return to Pakistan they would be at  any  real
           risk of being trafficked again. Further,  there  is  no  medical
           evidence before us of any psychological damage suffered  by  any
           of the Appellants including the children as  a  result  only  of
           trafficking, including their exploitation whilst in the UK. This
           is particularly relevant to those Appellants who were obliged to
           maintain the deception of, for example, the death of a parent or
           the denial of siblings for  a  prolonged  period  of  time.  The
           benefits of being in the UK for all the Appellants have  already
           been referred to, and on balance it seems to be the case that if
           trafficked, the Appellants had been more  the  beneficiaries  of
           trafficking than victims. We do not therefore consider that  any
           trafficking experienced by the Appellants  is  a  compassionated
           feature which weighs heavily in their balance."

  108. We are satisfied that the appellants have failed  to  establish  they
       were the victims of trafficking.  We find this was  a  late-developed
       opportunistic attempt to re-model the claim which  cannot  have  been
       the  result  of  the  appellants  becoming  more  self-aware  of  the
       circumstances in which they  came  to  the  United  Kingdom.   In  so
       finding, we have considered the weight to be attached to the evidence
       of trafficking now provided by Ghulam Rabani. This evidence  includes
       threatening letters received by him demanding the repayment of  money
       owed under threat that he would be killed.  We  reject  his  evidence
       that he felt obliged to destroy this evidence as he did not want  the
       letters in the house and that he  was  told  to  destroy  them  after
       reading them. He must have known their  significance.   Even  at  the
       earlier hearing, he did not mention that he had been forced  to  work
       for Mohammed Faruq or that he had been told that he had to  pay  back
       the money to him. The Secretary of State correctly  in  our  judgment
       submits:

           "It is simply inconceivable that, having instructed his  lawyers
           to advance that [trafficking] argument, he  would  withhold  the
           most central information from them."

  109. We have also considered whether there is a credible  claim  that  the
       wives were trafficked by their husbands or the children trafficked by
       their fathers or parents.  This has to be assessed by the  consistent
       theme of the parents'  evidence  that  their  actions  were  directed
       towards improving their children's circumstances -  an  endeavour  in
       which they have been largely  successful.  Further,  both  wives  and
       children continue to live in the same households.  Neither  of  these
       factors indicates the relationship of parent-trafficker  and  victim.
       In the context of these proceedings, no attempt has been made as  far
       as we are aware, to seek separate  representation  to  advance  these
       claims.  The fathers for example have not admitted they are guilty of
       trafficking and the children have not levelled the allegation against
       them.  Experienced counsel such as are acting in  this  appeal  would
       not, consistent with their professional duties, continue to  act  for
       all the appellants were there to have been a  conflict  of  interest.
       This consideration  is  not,  however,  a  complete  answer  because,
       realistically, we would not expect funding to be  made  available  to
       each family member so as to proliferate, in an already complex field,
       claims and cross-claims between family members.  Nor is it  realistic
       to expect a child  (or,  in  practice,  that  child's  solicitor)  to
       advance a trafficking claim against his parent unless there was  good
       reason to do so.  Where the family  members  are  unrepresented,  the
       prospect will not cross anyone's mind.

  110. In this protean jurisdiction, the Tribunal may  have  to  exercise  a
       degree of caution and be aware of the family dynamics both as between
       adults and as between adults and  children.   That,  we  believe,  is
       something that occurs in all such cases where families are  involved,
       whether as appellants or as dependants.  This is a case  where  there
       are particular reasons why the dynamic relationships between  parents
       and children and with each other have  been  particularly  prominent;
       take, for example, the  relationship  between  those  whom  we  later
       describe as the haves and the  have-nots,  between  Jamilla  and  her
       family, between the children forced to lie and the parents (whom they
       love) who required them to do so. Nevertheless, there are  inevitable
       limitations  upon  the  Tribunal's  consideration  of   a   potential
       trafficking claim when the claim is not advanced before them  by  any
       of the parties and where the evidence  is  likely  to  be  equivocal.
       Whilst the  Tribunal  must  always  be  alert  to  the  unspoken  but
       potential pitfalls, essentially its consideration must  be  evidence-
       based.

  111. In any  event,  there  is  an  air  of  unreality  about  viewing  as
       traffickers  those  who  are  economic  migrants  seeking  to  better
       themselves in a foreign country and are bringing their children  into
       the country with them as part of that process.  We  remind  ourselves
       that Article 4 of the Convention, as we have set out in paragraph  86
       is directed towards the movement of human beings 'for the purpose  of
       exploitation'.  True it is that the  minor  children  will  have  had
       little choice, that what  their  parents  did  was  wrong,  that  the
       children might find themselves wrenched from a country in which  they
       would prefer to live  but  these  factors  alone  do  not  amount  to
       trafficking.  Nor can the negative features of the parents' design be
       assessed without having reference to  the  benefits  with  which  the
       children have  been  provided,  in  terms  of  lifestyle,  education,
       maintenance, accommodation and healthcare  or  the  prospect  of  the
       children achieving settled status if the parents' conduct  is  to  be
       classified  as  exploitative.   If  the  minor  children  have   been
       trafficked into the United Kingdom, so too were the six beneficiaries
       of the decision in Ahmad and others, some of whom  have  obtained  or
       may obtain British citizenship. It would be a curious result  if  the
       adult Ahmad children who successfully establish a right to remain are
       not victims of trafficking (and their  parents  accordingly  absolved
       from the charge of trafficking) whilst those children  who  have  not
       been successful are classified as  the  victims  of  trafficking  and
       their parents guilty of it.

  112. Nor are we satisfied that the mothers are able  to  advance  a  claim
       that they have been trafficked by their husbands for the  reasons  we
       have given.  More importantly, however, whilst there may be  cultural
       reasons why women are subjected to the influence of their husbands in
       significant areas of their lives, we would not infer from this  alone
       that a wife's decision to travel  to  the  United  Kingdom  with  her
       husband is an example of  her  being  trafficked.   The  dynamics  of
       family relationships are far too complex to draw such  an  inference.
       Even in a cultural and social background in which  the  relationships
       between husband and wife are significantly different from that  of  a
       decision-maker, a finding of improper influence is not to be left  to
       inference alone.  Where the relationship has broken down,  there  may
       be, evidentially, a wider scope for such a finding of fact  but  this
       does  not  arise  here  in  the  evidential  neutrality   of   family
       relationships which are continuing and appear, on their  face,  close
       and supportive.

  113. For the  reasons  we  have  given,  we  reject  the  claim  that  the
       appellants are the victims of trafficking but in doing so  we  reject
       the Secretary of State's claim that it  is  not  open  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal to hear and determine this point because the appellants have
       not been granted permission to appeal on this issue.   It  is  not  a
       case of the Tribunal expressly refusing permission  to  appeal  on  a
       particular ground.  Having found an error of law  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's decision, the Tribunal has  jurisdiction  to  re-make  the
       decision where it needs to do so, Kizhakudan v SSHD [2012]  EWCA  Civ
       566 and NP (Sri Lanka)  v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  906.   In  Ferrer
       (limited appeal grounds; Alvi)  [2012]  UKUT  304(IAC)  the  Tribunal
       said:

           Whatever the grounds on which permission to appeal to the  Upper
           Tribunal has been granted, once the Upper Tribunal has set aside
           the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, any  re-making  of  the
           decision under  s.12(2)(b)(ii)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
           Enforcement Act 2007 is not necessarily limited by reference  to
           errors of law identified in those grounds,  or  in  any  grounds
           that have subsequently been permitted to be  argued,  and  which
           have resulted in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  being
           set aside. Further, the ambit of the  re-making  task  will  not
           necessarily depend on whether an issue has  been  raised  before
           the First-tier Tribunal.

  114. The scope of the Upper Tribunal hearing will, of course, depend  upon
       the issues raised before it.   Where  there  has  been  no  effective
       challenge to a conclusion reached by the First-tier  Tribunal,  there
       is no requirement to re-visit it.  In all cases, the reasoning of the
       First-tier Tribunal on the  issue  will  provide  the  starting-point
       subject, inevitably, to the Upper Tribunal's findings  on  where  the
       error on a point of law and the scope of the hearing before the Upper
       Tribunal, defined either at the hearing when the  error  of  law  was
       identified or in the course of subsequent directions or at  the  time
       of re-making the decision.  In the present case,  the  scope  of  the
       appeal was determined in the way we have set out in paragraphs  51  -
       53 above.  There was no limitation imposed upon raising this issue or
       fully determining it.

  115. For the reasons we have given we agree with the First-tier Tribunal's
       conclusion on the issue but our conclusion is the result of  our  own
       deliberations.

Conclusion on trafficking

  116. We do not accept that these individuals would not have been  able  to
       articulate the pressure that was  being  exerted  upon  them  by  the
       malign influence of Mohammed Faruq.  They may not have been  able  to
       have used the expression that they were being 'trafficked' but  their
       description of events could not realistically have omitted describing
       the situation.  They could not have been oblivious to the part played
       by others in what they were doing.  They were not then  motivated  by
       wishing to protect Mohammed Faruq.

  117. The actions of the parents are capable of  being  understood  as  two
       quite different versions of events. Notwithstanding the benefits that
       Mohammed Faruq derived, they too derived significant  benefits.  They
       came from circumstances of poverty, poor  prospects  for  themselves,
       poor prospects for their children and poor health care provision.  In
       the United Kingdom they had accommodation, good education  for  their
       children and state benefits. More important still, if their plans had
       not unravelled, they would have had the  prospect  of  a  successful,
       though fraudulent, asylum claim, settled status, the real prospect of
       achieving British  nationality  for  themselves  or  their  children.
       Whilst we do not suggest that persons  living  close  to  destitution
       with an expectation of a better life in  another  country  should  be
       considered as disqualified  from  being  categorised  as  victims  of
       trafficking,  there  were  significant  advantages  which  render  it
       entirely plausible that they were willing participants in the  scheme
       which was, undoubtedly, put into effect  through  the  activities  of
       Mohammed Faruq but through which they stood to gain. The alternative,
       plausible, version of events was that these families were  trafficked
       and abused under the malign influence of Mohammed Faruq.

  118. Where there are two possible  or  plausible  explanations  for  their
       actions, it was for the appellants to establish by credible  evidence
       that it was one version of  events,  rather  than  the  other,  which
       operated. We do not see how the appellants can conceivably  establish
       the version  that  they  now  wish  to  put  forward  without  giving
       evidence. It cannot be inferred  from  the  fact  that,  undoubtedly,
       Mohammed Faruq derived benefits from the scheme (something which  the
       Secretary  of  State  has  always  accepted)  and  that  they   were,
       relatively, unsophisticated. It did not require great  sophistication
       for them to see the benefits of  illegal  entry  for  themselves  and
       their children.

Section 10(1)(c) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999

  119. As we have seen,  all  of  the  adult  Ahmad  children  succeeded  in
       establishing that, at the time the removal  decisions  were  made  in
       relation to them under s.10, they were no  longer  minors  and  could
       not, therefore, be removed  under  s.10(1)(c)  as  belonging  to  the
       family  of  the  parents  whose  removal  has  been  directed   under
       s.10(1)(b).

  120. This was  not  a  decision  on  proportionality  but  on  the  proper
       application of the Secretary  of  State's  powers  of  removal.   The
       statute upon which she relied to effect removal, absent a  definition
       which expressly permitted children (whether or not over  the  age  of
       18) to be removed, did not permit a lawful decision  to  be  made  in
       relation to them.  Accordingly, it was inevitable that administrative
       steps to effect removal on the basis of an  unlawful  decision  could
       not themselves be lawful.

  121. The appellants seek to extend this  principle  by  identifying  three
       children - Sulva Bi (Qadir  Ahmed's  family),  Arfan  Ahmed  (Mehmood
       Ahmed's family) and Idris Mohammed (Rungzaib  Mohammed's  family)   -
       who were aged under 18  at  the  time  that  the  s.10(1)(c)  removal
       decisions were taken, but who are now aged over 18.

  122. The decisions made in their cases were lawful at the time  they  were
       made.  On any view, they were to be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the
       family  of  the  parents  whose  removal  had  been  directed   under
       s.10(1)(b).  Whatever definition of 'family'  might  apply  to  their
       elder siblings, the decision in relation to them was  lawfully  made.
       Indeed, we would not  understand  the  appellants  to  be  contending
       otherwise.  Thus, in contrast to their elder brothers and sisters, no
       argument can be advanced that removal is prevented by reason  of  the
       illegality of the underlying decision at the time that it was made.

  123. The means by which the appellants seek to achieve  their  end  is  to
       argue that the decisions to remove them, once lawful, are  no  longer
       lawful and accordingly the appeals against the  decisions  to  remove
       them should be allowed.  The principle  of  a  decision  once  lawful
       becoming unlawful is, at best, an elusive concept.  Its converse  has
       the benefit of being readily comprehensible: if we apply the  law  as
       it stands when we make a decision, the decision  is  correct  in  the
       sense that it is lawful. That decision remains a lawful  decision  if
       circumstances change or if the law is  altered.   That  decision  was
       lawful, is now lawful and will always be  lawful.  It  is  immaterial
       that a different decision would now  be  made  applying  the  current
       circumstances and the law as it now exists.  We are bound to ask  the
       question  how  many  decisions  made  over   the   years   based   on
       circumstances as they existed and the legal  system  as  it  is  then
       applied would be the same if the decisions were made  now?  If  these
       decisions are not  now  merely  wrong  but  have  to  be  treated  as
       unlawful, the purpose of decision-making would be rendered futile. If
       the purpose of a decision made by  a  decision-maker  is  to  provide
       certainty, this purpose would be entirely lost. No-one would be  able
       to regulate his affairs on the  basis  of  decisions  that  had  been
       lawfully made because what was lawful then might not remain so. It is
       for this reason that the Secretary of  State  describes  this  is  'a
       recipe for administrative chaos.' In our judgment  the  effect  would
       not simply be  administrative  chaos  but  would  percolate  down  to
       nullify, potentially, almost every decision made anywhere.

  124. Nor does it seem to us to be a principle that might apply in  a  more
       limited sense and only in relation to decisions made  in  respect  of
       children.  The rights of children acquired by  operation  of  law  by
       reason of their being children do not become retrospectively unlawful
       at the moment they reach their majority,  although  the  law  may  no
       longer permit them to continue to  enjoy  some  of  those  rights  as
       adults.

  125. It is the inevitable corollary of the appellants' argument  that,  as
       night follows day, the removal of  the  minor  children  will  become
       unlawful provided, always, those children survive to their  majority.
       This is not retrospective invalidity but prospective invalidity.   If
       a person can identify a foreseeable invalidity, is  he  permitted  to
       rely upon it now?  The minor appellants may be removed in  accordance
       with lawful decisions but the remaining children (save H who is a  UK
       and EEA national) are now aged between 14 and 17.  The  Secretary  of
       State points out with some force that if the case reaches  the  Court
       of Appeal, it is possible these appellants or some of them will  then
       have reached the age of majority. Even H, now aged 9, will  be  there
       in 9 years time.  This raises the question: during what period does a
       prospective illegality prevent removal?

  126. The basis for the claim is the passage in the decision of  the  Upper
       Tribunal in Ahmad and others when the Tribunal  was  considering  the
       wider ambit of s. 5(4) of the 1971 Act, and the  limitations  on  who
       should be regarded as family members in  deportation.   The  Tribunal
       said at paragraph 39:

           "We do not need to decide  whether  the  failure  to  apply  the
           definition in s.5(4) to paragraph 10A of Schedule 2 to the  1971
           Act has the effect of widening the ambit of  family  members  in
           that paragraph.  We are strongly inclined to the  view  that  in
           context and  having  regard  to  the  legislative  history,  the
           limitations should apply  and  we  are  faced  with  a  drafting
           error."

  127. The appellants rely upon this as supporting their case that  the  now
       adult children should be subject to the same limitation on removal as
       their elder siblings. However, the decision in Ahmad  was  predicated
       on the sharp distinction drawn  by  the  appellants'  representatives
       between those who were adult children at the time  the  decision  was
       made and those who were  not.   Were  there  to  have  been  no  such
       distinction, it is at least possible that those children, now  adult,
       would have sought an acknowledgment of their position at the date  of
       the hearing, 10 May 2012, when Sulva, Idris and Arfan would then have
       been aged 18.

  128. Whilst the appellants rely on all of the arguments that were advanced
       on behalf of the appellants in Ahmad that led the Upper  Tribunal  to
       that view, the submission fails to distinguish between the underlying
       unlawfulness of the decisions as  they  relate  to  the  adult  Ahmad
       children on the one hand with the fact that the decisions in relation
       to the children now  adult  were  lawful.   Nor  does  the  principle
       properly distinguish between the distinct stages in  the  process  of
       removal  between  the  removal  decision,  that  is  the   appealable
       immigration decision, and the administrative steps taken  to  enforce
       it, if and when those steps are taken.

  129. In GH (Iraq) v. SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1182, (Court  of  Appeal)  Scott
       Baker LJ stated:

           "24. Normally the removal  directions  are  quite  separate  and
           distinct from the immigration decision. Ordinarily  they  follow
           the prior decision to remove in principle. It  is  a  two  stage
           process. As Laws LJ pointed out in R (Mahmood)  v  Secretary  of
           State for the Home Department [2001] 1 WLR 842, 852, para 29,

           "Where, as here, the court is required to review the legality of
           an administrative decision already made it is generally no  part
           of its duty to  go  further  and  review  also,  as  a  distinct
           exercise, the legality  of  the  decision-maker's  carrying  the
           decision into effect at some future date. Any other  view  would
           submit the court's public law jurisdiction  to  undesirable  and
           possibly insupportable distinctions. In any given  case,  within
           and without the immigration field, there may be many reasons why
           a public  decision  maker  might  not  carry  into  execution  a
           decision which he has earlier announced; or he might give effect
           to it subject to modification or qualification."

  130. No removal directions have been set.  The legality  of  delaying  the
       issue of removal  directions  beyond  the  date  of  the  immigration
       decision has been authoritatively stated in Patel & Ors v SSHD [2013]
       UKSC 72 (20 November 2013). The appellants' argument is  a  disguised
       or covert challenge to the legality of prospective removal directions
       which have not yet been made by way of  an  overt  challenge  to  the
       lawfulness of the s.10 removal decision which was  itself  lawful  at
       all material times. This flies in the face of  what  Scott  Baker  LJ
       said in paragraph 47 of GH (Iraq).

           What I do not think the present legislation permits is an appeal
           against entirely freestanding removal directions as would be the
           case when they are made separately on a later occasion. In  such
           circumstances the remedy for  unlawful  directions  would  be  a
           judicial review. [...]

  131. The Secretary of State  in  categorising  this  approach  as  one  of
       retrospective  invalidity  highlights  what  are  said  to  be  three
       perceptible flaws in the appellants' argument.

  132. First, it is said by the respondent, the appellants must  demonstrate
       an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's determination  which  is
       impossible as the three now adult appellants were under the age of 18
       at the time of the hearing. The respondent therefore asserts what she
       describes as 'the absurdity' of a decision  made  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal which was lawful but which becomes unlawful in an  error  of
       law jurisdiction by the time the appeal reaches the Upper Tribunal.

  133. Secondly, the Secretary of State relies upon  the  disapproval  of  a
       principle of retrospective invalidity as expressed by  the  Court  of
       Appeal in Patel v. SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 741 in which an  issue  arose
       as to whether a variation  decision  was  invalidated  by  the  later
       failure to take  a  removal  decision.  Lord  Neuberger  MR  said  at
       paragraphs 50 and 51:

           "50. Thirdly, if the Secretary of State fails to decide  whether
           to make a removal direction either  at  the  same  time  as,  or
           within a short time of, refusing an extension application, in  a
           case where she ought to have done so (for public  law  or  human
           rights reasons), I find  it  hard  to  accept  that  this  could
           invalidate an otherwise unexceptionable decision to  refuse  the
           extension application. As a matter of logic, even if a statutory
           scheme has what Sedley LJ called in Mirza's case "a  generalised
           practice" that two decisions should be taken at the same time, I
           am not quite sure why one of those decisions should be  unlawful
           just because it is taken on its own, given  that  it  cannot  be
           contingent or even dependent on the other.

           51. ...There are  obvious  problems  with  concluding  that  the
           rejection of an extension application becomes invalid  unless  a
           decision  to  make  a  removal  direction  is   made   "promptly
           thereafter" or within "a short  period"  thereafter"  (to  quote
           from Sapkota's case and Mirza's case respectively). Not only  is
           it  both  intellectually   unattractive   and   administratively
           inconvenient  for  an  executive  decision  to  be   potentially
           retrospectively invalidated, but there is  inevitable  room  for
           doubt and argument about what constitutes "promptly" or "a short
           period" in a particular case."

  134. The respondent further relies on the decision of the Supreme Court in
       MS (Palestinian Territories) v. SSHD [2010] UKSC  25  submitting  the
       appellants were seeking to  'dissolve  the  distinction'  between  an
       appeal against a  removal  decision  and  judicial  review  of  later
       removal directions giving  effect  to  the  earlier  decision.   Lord
       Dyson, giving the judgment of the Court, said:

           "27. Fifthly, it is (rightly) common ground  that  there  is  no
           right of appeal against removal directions under the 2002 Act.

  135. Odelola v. SSHD [2009] UKHL 25 affords the appellants no  assistance.
       Odelola establishes that applications under  the  Rules  fall  to  be
       considered  according  to  the  Rules  in  force  at  the  time   the
       application is determined,  not  at  the  time  of  application.  The
       children, now adult, were considered by reference to the  legislative
       framework that applied to them at the date of decision and, in  doing
       so, the Secretary of State did as she was then required to do.

  136. Whilst Article 8 requires the  proportionality  of  the  decision  to
       remove the appellants to be considered, this has to  be  assessed  by
       reference to a lawful decision and not an unlawful one.  It  is  easy
       to see how an unlawful decision is carried into  the  proportionality
       balance  as  affecting  the  public  interest   in   removal.    That
       consideration finds no purchase where the decision is a lawful one.

  137. The Secretary of State argues that the appellants are  not  permitted
       to raise this argument as it was not the  subject  of  the  grant  of
       permission.  We do not consider there is such a  clog  on  the  Upper
       Tribunal's jurisdiction, based as it is in this appeal on the  agreed
       finding that the First-tier Tribunal's decision disclosed an error on
       a point of law and that it required re-making.  The scope of the  re-
       making has already been determined by  us  in  paragraphs  51  to  53
       above.  However, we dismiss this  ground  for  the  reasons  we  have
       given.

  138. This argument does not benefit the remaining adult  children  without
       indefinite leave to remain since  they  can  be  removed  as  illegal
       entrants in accordance with paragraph 9 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act
       and thus we could not allow their appeals on the basis  commended  to
       us as a consequence of the operation of  s.86(4) of the 2002 Act.

Delay

  139. The parties have each adopted a highly polarised view  of  delay  and
       the effect it should have on the outcome, the appellants  attributing
       the fact that they have  not  been  removed  to  the  fact  that  the
       Secretary of State has been at fault in her conduct of  the  process,
       reducing the public interest element in removal to little or nothing.

  140. Conversely, the Secretary of  State  (and  the  First-tier  Tribunal)
       approached the delay in broad terms  (and  only  implicitly)  on  the
       basis that the appellants have maintained a case based on a continued
       pattern of deception and that, as the appellants never had a right to
       be in the United Kingdom, no legitimate complaint can be made  as  to
       time accrued in the United Kingdom since the  appellants  should  not
       have been here in the first place.

  141. We consider that the position is more finely nuanced.   All  that  we
       say on delay is predicated by the fact  that  the  passage  of  time,
       irrespective of its cause, is highly relevant.  Any consideration  of
       delay must begin with the words of Lord Bingham in EB (Kosovo) v SSHD
       [2008] UKHL 41, [2009] 1 AC 1159:

           Delay

           13. In Strbac v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 848,  [2005]  Imm  AR  504,
           para 25, counsel for the applicant was understood to contend, in
           effect, that if the decision on  an  application  for  leave  to
           enter or remain was made after the  expiry  of  an  unreasonable
           period of time, and if the application would probably  have  met
           with success, or a greater chance of success,  if  it  had  been
           decided within a reasonable time, and if the  applicant  had  in
           the meantime established a  family  life  in  this  country,  he
           should be treated when the decision is ultimately made as if the
           decision had been made at that earlier time. For  reasons  given
           by Laws LJ, the Court of Appeal rejected  this  submission,  for
           which it held Shala v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 233, [2003] INLR  349
           to be no authority. While I consider that  Shala  was  correctly
           decided on its facts, I am satisfied that the  Court  of  Appeal
           was right to reject this submission. As  Mr  Sales  QC  for  the
           respondent pointed out, there  is  no  specified  period  within
           which, or at which, an immigration decision must  be  made;  the
           facts, and with  them  government  policy,  may  change  over  a
           period, as they did here; and the duty of the decision-maker  is
           to have regard to the facts, and any policy in force,  when  the
           decision is made. Mr Drabble QC, for the appellant, did not make
           this submission, and he was right not to do so.

           14. It does not, however, follow that  delay  in  the  decision-
           making process is necessarily irrelevant  to  the  decision.  It
           may, depending on the facts, be relevant in  any  one  of  three
           ways. First, the applicant may during the period  of  any  delay
           develop closer personal and social  ties  and  establish  deeper
           roots in the community than he could  have  shown  earlier.  The
           longer the period of the delay, the likelier this is to be true.
           To the extent that it  is  true,  the  applicant's  claim  under
           Article 8 will necessarily be strengthened. It is unnecessary to
           elaborate this point since the respondent accepts it.

           15. Delay may be relevant in a second,  less  obvious,  way.  An
           immigrant without  leave  to  enter  or  remain  is  in  a  very
           precarious situation, liable to be  removed  at  any  time.  Any
           relationship into which such an applicant enters  is  likely  to
           be, initially, tentative, being entered into under the shadow of
           severance by administrative order. This is the more  true  where
           the other party to the relationship is aware of the  applicant's
           precarious position. This has been treated as  relevant  to  the
           quality of the relationship. Thus in R (Ajoh) v SSHD [2007] EWCA
           Civ 655, para 11, it was noted that "It was reasonable to expect
           that both [the applicant] and her husband would be aware of  her
           precarious immigration status".  This  reflects  the  Strasbourg
           court's listing of factors relevant to  the  proportionality  of
           removing an immigrant convicted of crime:  "whether  the  spouse
           knew about the offence at the time when he or she entered into a
           family relationship" see Boultif v Switzerland  (2001)  33  EHRR
           50, para 48; Mokrani v France (2003) 40 EHRR  123,  para  30.  A
           relationship so entered into may well be imbued with a sense  of
           impermanence. But if months pass without a  decision  to  remove
           being made, and months become years, and year succeeds year,  it
           is to be expected that this sense of impermanence will fade  and
           the expectation will grow that if the authorities  had  intended
           to remove the applicant they would have taken steps  to  do  so.
           This result depends on no legal doctrine but on an understanding
           of how, in some cases, minds may work  and  it  may  affect  the
           proportionality of removal.

           16. Delay may be  relevant,  thirdly,  in  reducing  the  weight
           otherwise to be accorded to the requirements of  firm  and  fair
           immigration control, if the delay is shown to be the result of a
           dysfunctional system which  yields  unpredictable,  inconsistent
           and unfair outcomes. In the present case the appellant's cousin,
           who entered the country and applied for asylum at the same  time
           and whose position is not said to be materially  different,  was
           granted exceptional leave to remain, during the two-year  period
           which it took the respondent to correct its  erroneous  decision
           to  refuse  the  appellant's  application  on  grounds  of  non-
           compliance. In the case of JL (Sierra Leone), heard by the Court
           of Appeal at the same time as the  present  case,  there  was  a
           somewhat similar pattern of facts. JL escaped from Sierra  Leone
           with her half brother in 1999, and claimed asylum. In  2000  her
           claim was refused  on  grounds  of  non-compliance.  As  in  the
           appellant's case this decision was erroneous, as the  respondent
           recognised eighteen months later.  In  February  2006  the  half
           brother was granted humanitarian  protection.  She  was  not.  A
           system  so  operating  cannot  be  said  to   be   "predictable,
           consistent and fair as between one applicant and another" or  as
           yielding  "consistency  of  treatment   between   one   aspiring
           immigrant and another". To the extent that this is shown  to  be
           so, it may have a bearing on the proportionality of removal,  or
           of requiring an applicant to  apply  from  out  of  country.  As
           Carnwath LJ observed in Akaeke  v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  947,
           [2005] INLR 575, para 25:

                "Once it is accepted that unreasonable delay on the part  of
                the Secretary of  State  is  capable  of  being  a  relevant
                factor, then the weight to be given to it in the  particular
                case was a matter for the tribunal"

  142. In this well-known passage,  different  examples  of  delay  and  its
       effect are identified.  It is not permissible to argue the 'if  only'
       point, ("if only a decision had been made earlier, I would  have  met
       the requirements"): normally, there is no duty  to  make  a  decision
       within a specified time. Delay in the first of the  three  categories
       identified is delay only in the sense of the passage of  time.   This
       is  obviously  relevant  in  the  context  of  these  appeals  where,
       irrespective of who is responsible for the delay, members of a family
       have developed a social and domestic life  in  the  UK,  particularly
       outside the family, which has become so embedded in their identity so
       as to create a stark contrast between their position and that of  the
       new arrival or the mere visitor.  That contrast  cannot  be  ignored.
       The development of closer personal, social, domestic,  financial  and
       other ties within the UK and the establishment of deeper roots in the
       community are what we mean by the effect of the passage of time.

  143. Even, however, where the entrant has no substantive right  to  remain
       and  knows  it,  inaction  on  the   part   of   the   decision-maker
       understandably raises hopes and expectations which if established  as
       real or genuine (although not having the character  of  a  legitimate
       expectation) amount to an established fact which cannot be ignored in
       the decision-making process.

  144. The third category is one based on principles of fairness under which
       general heading arbitrary decision-making of whatever form  falls  to
       be assessed.  The  one  example  provided  in  paragraph  16  of  the
       judgment is of two similar claimants, a sister and her  half-brother,
       who arriving at the same  time  made  similar  claims  one  of  which
       succeeded and one of which failed.  This has particular resonance  in
       the circumstances of the present appeals.   However,  what  is  clear
       from the quoted words of Carnwath LJ (as he then  was)  is  that  how
       these factors play in the balance is a matter for the Tribunal.

The appellants' claim to benefit from the Secretary of State's delay

  145. The appellants' contentions set out in paras 6.1  to  6.38  of  their
       skeleton argument is that by July 2003, the Secretary  of  State  had
       concluded that the appellants, who had been recognised  as  refugees,
       had obtained refugee status by deception and should be  removed.   It
       then took the Secretary of State until April and May 2009, about  six
       years, to make lawful removal  decisions,  in  the  sense  of  making
       decisions that were not legally or procedurally flawed.   That  delay
       was attributable to the Secretary of State.

  146. The chronology separating those two  dates  involves  the  making  of
       decisions beginning in July 2004 to remove the appellants which  were
       withdrawn  in  response  to  complaints  against  them  made  by  the
       appellants' representatives as to their legality. The withdrawal of a
       decision necessarily contained a concession that the decision was, or
       might arguably be, unlawful.  The Secretary of  State  accepted  that
       the complaints were sufficiently well founded to  warrant  withdrawal
       of the decisions.

  147. The first decisions made against some of the appellants in July  2004
       followed their arrest for the offences  for  which  they  were  later
       convicted. The decisions were not lawful ones because those  who  had
       been granted leave to remain (as refugees  or  otherwise)  could  not
       then be given directions  for  their  removal  as  illegal  entrants.
       Further, the notices failed to comply with the Immigration  (Notices)
       Regulations 2003 because they  incorrectly  informed  the  recipients
       that they could only appeal after  removal  and  failed  to  address,
       amongst other things, the fact that some or all had  been  recognised
       as refugees.

  148. The Secretary of State responded by withdrawing those decisions on  9
       May 2005 and acknowledging:

           "The Immigration Service  is  seeking  to  revoke  your  clients
           existing refugee status via the offices  of  the  UNHCR  on  the
           grounds that these were obtained by deception.  I  confirm  that
           should the grant of refugee  status  be  so  revoked  then  your
           client's [sic] would be entitled to exercise an in country right
           of appeal."

  149. At about the same time,  the  Secretary  of  State  put  the  refugee
       appellants on notice of her intention to cancel their refugee status.
        This resulted in a complaint from the appellants' solicitor that the
       action was unfair and precipitate and did not  properly  engage  with
       the circumstances  of  the  children,  whilst  admitting  to  certain
       deceptions but maintaining the core of the asylum claim.

  150. The Secretary of State cancelled the appellants' refugee status on  7
       March 2006 at which point she considered the children's circumstances
       not to be relevant.

  151. Further immigration decisions were made  on  15  March  2006  wrongly
       stating there was no in-country right of appeal and without regard to
       their impact upon the children.  A letter of 29 October 2007 from the
       Treasury Solicitor conceded as such:

           'I am instructed that having reviewed this matter further and in
           the light of your various concerns, in particular the  continued
           allegations of unfairness in  relation  to  the  procedure  with
           which refugee status  was  cancelled,  that  fact  that  certain
           members of  the  immediate  families  (i.e.  spouses  and  minor
           children) were not party to the appeal, and the fact that  there
           were  outstanding  human  rights  issues  arising  out  of   the
           immigration decisions, my  client  has  decided  that  the  most
           appropriate course in all the circumstances is to  withdraw  the
           decisions to  cancel  refugee  status  and  to  reconsider  your
           clients'  submissions   afresh.    The   immigration   decisions
           consequent upon the decision to cancel refugee status are hereby
           also withdrawn and you will be notified of  this  separately  by
           the BIA'.

  152. The letter repeated that  it  was  still  the  Secretary  of  State's
       intention, subject to representations, to cancel refugee  status  and
       once the outcome of the cancellation process was known, and if it was
       to cancel refugee status, the Secretary of State would then  consider
       human rights and other relevant issues, providing the appellants with
       an opportunity for an interview if the  appellants  so  wished.   The
       decisions were withdrawn by the Secretary of  State  on  19  February
       2008,  nearly  2  years   after   they   had   been   made.   Further
       representations were made.  The  parents  were  interviewed  in  June
       2008.

  153. Between September 2008 and  January  2009,  the  Secretary  of  State
       cancelled the refugee status of all the parents and their dependants.
        As part of the  process,  consideration  was  given  to  the  impact
       removal would have upon the children.  This was the first  time  this
       had been done.

  154. Whilst decisions to give removal directions under s. 10 of  the  1999
       Act were made on 10 October  2008,  inexplicably  those  relating  to
       Noreen Shakila Bi and Ghulam Mehboob  Rabani,  Rungzaib  Mohamed  and
       Qadir Ahmed were said to be appealable  in-country  whilst  those  in
       relation to Noreen Shakila Bi and Ghulam Mehboob  Rabani's  children,
       Nasreen Bi (Qadir Ahmed's wife) and the  children  were  said  to  be
       appealable only after removal.

  155. This anomaly was without any apparent effect  as  in-country  appeals
       were  launched  in  the  Tribunal,  without  protest,  by  all  those
       affected, whether or not the right of appeal had been expressed to be
       exercisable out of country.

  156. Decisions to give removal directions under s. 10 of the 1999 Act were
       made in respect of Mehmood Ahmed, Fazal Jan and their children  on  5
       February 2009 said to be appealable only after removal, and withdrawn
       on 29 April 2009.

  157. In late April and early May 2009 further immigration decisions, under
       s. 10 of the 1999 Act, appealable in-country, were made in respect of
       all of the appellants. It is  against  these  decisions  the  present
       appeals are brought.  The dates of the  relevant  removal  decisions,
       insofar as they concern the children, are set out in square  brackets
       on page 4 of this determination.

  158. The First-tier Tribunal, speaking of this history, wrote:

           49. It is true to say that  the  Respondent  made  a  number  of
           errors which have resulted in the passage of time.  However,  we
           do  not  describe  those  errors  as  being  the  product  of  a
           dysfunctional system, and we are not satisfied  that  they  have
           resulted  in  a  final  outcome  which  can  be   described   as
           unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair.  The errors were more of
           a technical nature in that the original decisions  made  by  the
           Respondent are substantively the same as he now relies on, being
           to cancel the refugee status and indefinite leave to  remain  of
           those Appellants to whom it  was  granted,  and  to  remove  all
           Appellants on the basis that they have no right to be in the  UK
           as their status was as a result of deception.

  159. We would not classify errors in this process  as  being  'more  of  a
       technical nature'.  Instead, a series of decisions  were  made  which
       were, on  any  view,  seriously  flawed.   This  had  the  effect  of
       requiring  the  decisions  to  be  re-made  until,  finally,   lawful
       decisions were made in April and May 2009.

  160. There was little impact as a result of the decisions  which  notified
       the appellants that they had no in-country rights  of  appeal,  since
       the appellants' representatives  were  aware  that  this  was  simply
       wrong.  Nevertheless, it resulted in incurring  further  legal  costs
       and delaying the process.  Decisions expressed to carry no in-country
       rights of appeal limited the scope of appeal rights to exclude asylum
       issues.   However, since the appellants knew  they  had  no  arguable
       asylum claim, they cannot realistically assert they  were  prejudiced
       thereby.  These decisions also prevented human  rights  issues  being
       raised.  However, the appellants' representatives were  not  for  one
       moment fooled by this and were  quick  to  point  out,  properly  and
       correctly, that this was simply incorrect.   Whilst,  therefore,  the
       pattern of flawed decision-making  was  not  to  the  credit  of  the
       respondent, the consequences of it were limited in effect, save  that
       the passage of time strengthened the development  of  these  families
       lives in the UK.  We readily infer  that  this  resulted  in  further
       uncertainty  but  the  appellants  themselves  knew  both  that   the
       Secretary of State was intending to remove them (there has never been
       the slightest indication that the respondent  has  ever  faltered  in
       this regard) and that they always knew they had no substantive  right
       to remain under the Immigration Rules or as refugees or as persons at
       risk of serious harm.  The uncertainty that  was  generated  by  this
       long-drawn  out  process  almost  certainly  raised  hopes,   getting
       stronger as time passed, that they might find a way of remaining  but
       such hopes were always set against a background that their entry  was
       unlawful and nothing had happened since that might  give  rise  to  a
       claim of a right to remain.

  161. Additionally, the appellants assert that  the  Secretary  of  State's
       repeated adoption of an unlawful process to secure their removal from
       the  UK  is  indicative  of  'a  dysfunctional  system  which  yields
       unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes'  in  Lord  Bingham's
       words taken from EB (Kosovo) and set out at length above.

  162. The appellants further assert that the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
       architect of this statutory framework which, by generating  confusion
       and obscurity is inimical to the rule of law  that  creates  systemic
       dysfunction.  We are bound  to  question  where  this  submission  is
       designed to lead.  If it  is  suggested  that  the  entire  statutory
       framework should be disregarded  by  the  Tribunal,  we  reject  that
       submission  without  feeling  the  necessity  of  providing  anything
       further by way of reasoning.  If it is confined to  cases  where  the
       claimants' applications have been refused, it would suggest that  all
       appeals should be allowed.  If it is confined simply to these  cases,
       we do not see how it advances the appellants' claims  beyond  a  more
       intelligible plea of unfairness.

  163. We consider that the elusive search for the dysfunctional  system  is
       unhelpful.  We have described the errors made by a number of decision-
       makers in the various appeals before  us.   They  have  been  clearly
       identified and  whether  they  are  then  classified  as  a  systemic
       dysfunction makes them no better and no worse.   A  finding  of  fact
       that there is a dysfunctional system is not  a  legal  test  nor,  we
       suggest, was Lord Bingham seeking to create one.  The  crucial  words
       are not the existence of a dysfunctional system but the  creation  of
       unfairness in the sense of spawning 'unpredictable, inconsistent  and
       unfair outcomes'.

  164. For reasons which arise from the way these appeals have been  argued,
       the  inconsistency  in  decision-making  has  been  identified  as  a
       separate challenge and we shall therefore deal  with  it  separately.
       However, the  trilogy  of  'unpredictable,  inconsistent  and  unfair
       outcomes' can properly be assessed  by  reference  to  its  essential
       characteristic, that  is,  whether  the  delay  in  making  a  lawful
       decision has resulted in unfairness.

  165. The appellants contend that by  rejecting  the  shortcomings  in  the
       process of decision-making as being technical in nature, the Tribunal
       attached too little weight to this element of the  case  and  thereby
       attributed too much weight to the deceit used by or on behalf of  the
       appellants stating, according to paragraph 40 of  the  determination,
       'the overriding factor is that the  Appellants  never  had  a  lawful
       right to enter the UK as family visitors, nor to remain  as  refugees
       with their dependants'  and  according  to  paragraph  53  'the  only
       exceptional feature of the case was  the  depth  and  extent  of  the
       deception used by the Appellants without which they  would  not  have
       gained entry to the UK and  remained  for  so  long  at  considerable
       public expense' and according to paragraph 54, 'it was  only  on  the
       basis of such sophisticated, cynical and persistent  deceptions  that
       the Appellants have remained for so long in the UK'.

  166. The appellants go on to contend that their continued presence in  the
       UK is not attributable to deception. Rather their presence  is  owing
       solely to the Secretary of State's failure to  make  decisions  until
       April 2009 and thereafter, the appeal  process.  It  follows,  it  is
       said, that the appellants'  continued  presence  cannot  properly  be
       attributed  to   their   'sophisticated,   cynical   and   persistent
       deceptions' as the First-tier Tribunal found.    .

  167. The First-tier Tribunal's irrational conclusion, it is said, resulted
       in excessive and unreasonable weight and significance being given  to
       the deceptions involved in the case on  the  one  hand  and,  on  the
       other, insufficient weight being given to  the  deficiencies  in  the
       Secretary of State's decision making process.

Our analysis of the effect of delay.

  168. Without seeking to  summarise  the  detailed  response  made  by  the
       Secretary of State to the issue of delay and set out over  paragraphs
       193 to 227 of her skeleton argument, the respondent broadly  contends
       that the First-tier Tribunal was correct and delay  has  no  material
       part to play in the assessment of  the  proportionality  of  removal.
       The respective positions of the parties are poles apart.

  169. There are however, a number of points  which  merit  attention.   The
       appellants conceded that they were not  entitled  to  refugee  status
       only a matter of  days  before  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. In seeking to resist the Secretary  of  State's  contention
       that they were  not  entitled  to  refugee  status  and  seeking  the
       opportunity to be interviewed, the respondent asserts the  appellants
       cannot now take advantage of the time spent by the Secretary of State
       in resisting, and responding to, those challenges.  Whatever  may  be
       alleged against the Secretary of State as having  caused  delay,  the
       appellants have spent time and  effort  pursuing  claims  for  asylum
       which have been found to be unmeritorious.

  170. We find that the appellants have lied about their origins  in  Indian
       Kashmir and that their refugee claims were false. Even were we to  be
       wrong on this, the appellants have failed to establish  this  element
       of the claim even to the lower standard of proof but  have  continued
       to advance that case notwithstanding the 'professional decision'  not
       to call evidence from the parents (or indeed the adult children whose
       credibility has not been challenged) to support it.

  171. Either way, the promotion of claims that the appellants  have  failed
       to establish and the respondent's decision  based  on  a  justifiable
       rejection of those claims has resulted in  an  outcome  which  cannot
       ultimately be classified as conspicuously unfair.  Indeed, insofar as
       this process has, eventually  and  without  the  cooperation  of  the
       parents, resulted in a correct assessment of the claims, we would say
       that the process has been just.  Whilst fairness and justice may  not
       always be synonymous, it must be rare for a  just  result  to  be  an
       unfair one.  Whilst the appellants maintain  that  the  Secretary  of
       State has been guilty of delay, the efforts by the appellants to foil
       her labours to find the truth inevitably, in  our  judgment,  lessens
       the weight attached to this factor if  the  underlying  justification
       for the principle is one of fairness.  Hence the First-tier  Tribunal
       was essentially correct when it voiced its opinion in paragraph 49 of
       the determination that  the  final  outcome  could  not  properly  be
       described as unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair:

           "...the  original  decisions  made   by   the   Respondent   are
           substantively the same as he now relies on, being to cancel  the
           refugee  status  and  indefinite  leave  to  remain   of   those
           Appellants to whom it was granted, and to remove all  Appellants
           on the basis that they have no right to be in the  UK  as  their
           status was as a result of deception."

  172. It cannot be said that in the course of  the  passage  of  time,  the
       expectation of the appellants to be allowed to remain in the  UK  has
       developed  because,  from  the  outset,  it  was  apparent  that  the
       respondent intended to remove the appellants, and  she  persisted  in
       that intention by issuing new decisions substantively the same as the
       original ones. Any delay has not caused the appellants any prejudice.
       They have not lost any rights as a result of it, and now face largely
       the same issues as they did at the outset.  There has  been  nothing,
       of course, to prevent a voluntary return at any time.

  173. Whilst the appellants attribute responsibility  for  their  continued
       presence in the UK to the default and neglect  of  the  Secretary  of
       State, it might also be said that, once an appellant knows he has  no
       right to remain and is made the subject of  a  removal  decision,  he
       should leave the United Kingdom.  It matters not that the decision is
       flawed,  since  he  knows  the  intention  of  the   United   Kingdom
       authorities.  If he does not do so, his  continued  presence  in  the
       United Kingdom has little to do with the action or  inaction  on  the
       part of the Secretary of State but  his  own  efforts  to  secure  an
       advantage to which he knows he is  not  entitled.   Once  again,  the
       passage  of  time  undoubtedly  has  a  bearing  on  the   issue   of
       proportionality but that is quite distinct  from  a  claim  that  the
       applicant should secure an additional benefit  from  delay  which  is
       occasioned by the inefficiency of the Secretary of  State  but  which
       cannot properly be relied upon as establishing the Secretary of State
       gave up  interest  in  the  rigorous  implementation  of  immigration
       controls.

  174. A consideration of whether the appellants' removal in  2014  has,  by
       reason of the time it has taken to reach the conclusion, resulted  in
       an outcome which is unfair or unjust  is  a  holistic  assessment  of
       benefits and disadvantages.  It is undoubtedly correct  that  if  the
       appellants had been removed in 2006, this would have been the optimum
       resolution  of  the  appeals.   No-one  at  that  stage  could   have
       complained that the parents or their children had established a right
       to remain under any of the routes available to them.  The substantive
       merits  of  their  claims  have  remained  unaltered:   an   unlawful
       conspiracy to enter and a claim to be at risk  which  was  fabricated
       or, at best, which  the  appellants  failed  to  establish.   In  the
       intervening years the families have been provided with accommodation,
       with state benefits, some of the  children  have  been  afforded  the
       right to remain, some have been permitted to work, all have  had  the
       opportunity to receive free healthcare and all of the  children  have
       received a good education.

  175. Far from being prejudiced, it cannot reasonably be  argued  that  the
       appellants have not gained by their presence in the  United  Kingdom.
       The essential complaint is that it is unfair that the families should
       now no longer  be  permitted  to  continue  the  enjoyment  of  those
       benefits indefinitely.  There is in our judgment a clear  distinction
       between the development of a protected private and family  life  when
       this has been acquired by a person  who  is  settled  in  the  United
       Kingdom or reasonably considers himself to  have  been  settled,  and
       those who have never  been  settled  and  who  have  developed  their
       private and family life in the teeth (as it were)  of  opposition  to
       their presence.  This is not  a  legal  distinction  but  the  simple
       identification of a material fact.

  176. Given our findings of fact as  to  the  circumstances  in  which  the
       parents came to the United Kingdom and the fact that the evidence  of
       their integration into the community is limited, the  delay  has  not
       significantly impacted upon their lives.  Hence,  the  focus  of  the
       claim for delay centres upon the impact on the children of  the  fact
       that they have been in the United Kingdom since 2001  or  2002.   The
       responsibility for the presence of the children in the United Kingdom
       is, therefore, primarily that of the parents and  the  complaint  now
       made is that the Secretary  of  State  should  have  taken  steps  to
       prevent  the  parents  from  continuing  their  wrongful  conduct  by
       removing them sooner and that the failure to do so should  no  longer
       be seen as the responsibility of the parents but  the  responsibility
       of the Secretary of State.

  177. The appellants rely on paragraph  53  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
       determination as  evidencing  a  misclassification  of  the  parents'
       conduct. In it, the First-tier Tribunal said that the 'sophisticated,
       cynical and persistent deceptions'  was  the  only  reason  that  the
       appellants had remained in the  United  Kingdom  for  so  long.   The
       appellants cavil at this,  stating  their  deceptions  were  directed
       towards  their  initial  entry  and  that,  thereafter,  no   further
       deception was maintained.  However, that suggests that, upon arrival,
       the parents' presence was essentially innocent.   We  do  not  agree.
       The parents knew they had no right to remain.  The conspiracy on  the
       part of the  male  parents  acknowledges  they  knew  they  were  not
       entitled to receive benefits.  Each week they remained in the  United
       Kingdom, the parents knew they had no right to  remain.   Each  week,
       they  received  benefits  in  funds,  accommodation,  education   and
       healthcare, to which they knew that they were not entitled as persons
       lawfully entitled to a right of settlement on the basis of the  claim
       they had originally put forward.   Accordingly, we would regard it as
       academic whether there was a continuing deception.  It is  sufficient
       that the parents knew of their original deception as leading to their
       presence in this country and the consequences this had for  the  life
       that they enjoyed here since their arrival.

  178. In respect of the period since the First-tier  Tribunal  refused  the
       appeals, the precariousness of the appellants'  ongoing  presence  in
       the UK remains a material factor in assessing any further development
       of family and private life ties developed in this time. In AO  [2009]
       CSOH 168, Lord Menzies in the Outer House of Sessions considered  the
       effect of delay arising from a period  of  nearly  six  years  during
       which the petitioner in  that  matter  pursued  an  appeal  that  was
       subject to long delays at various stages of  the  appellate  process.
       Lord Menzies, said at paragraph 19:

           "There has been no undue delay on the part of the respondent  in
           dealing with any applications made to the  respondent.  For  the
           most part, elapse of time has occurred because of the procedures
           of independent tribunals or courts, the timescale of  which  was
           outwith the control of the respondent. This case is far  removed
           from the sort of case envisaged by Lord Bingham of Cornhill  [in
           EB (Kosovo)], whereby no decision to remove is taken and  months
           become years and year succeeds year. The decision to  remove  in
           this case was taken in 2001, and has  been  robustly  maintained
           since  then.   The   petitioner   can   have   been   under   no
           misapprehension about the respondent's intention to  remove  him
           from the United Kingdom when this was open to him.  Any  private
           life developed by  the  petitioner  in  the  intervening  period
           requires to be seen against this background."

  179. Whilst the delay in AO was identified as being  attributable  to  the
       law's delay, the Secretary of State  submits  consistently  with  AO,
       that the precarious nature  of  the  appellants'  status  here  is  a
       particular feature of these cases. At no  stage  had  the  appellants
       been led to believe that the Secretary of  State  would  do  anything
       other than cancel their refugee status and their ILR. The  respondent
       refers to Konstatinov v. the Netherlands (16351/03) [2007] ECHR  336,
       in which the Court in Strasbourg decided that a delay of seven years,
       (attributable to the state having lost the applicant's file), did not
       render the decision to refuse  a  residence  permit  disproportionate
       where the ultimate decision reached was well-founded.  By  parity  of
       reasoning, the Secretary of State contends that,  even  if  she  bore
       responsibility for delay  in  decision-making,  the  appellants  were
       never entitled to refugee status. It must follow that the substantive
       decisions were correct. Accordingly, and in  line  with  Konstatinov,
       the respondent submits the appeals should fail on the issue of delay.



  180. In Konstatinov v. the Netherlands the applicant  submitted  that  she
       had been living for 21 years in the Netherlands, where  she  met  and
       married Mr G., where their son was born, raised and attended  school.
       All three had strong ties with the Netherlands; both the  applicant's
       husband and son held a Netherlands residence  permit.  The  applicant
       left Yugoslavia at the age of seven and only spoke Dutch and  Romani.
       Since 1991, she had been trying to  obtain  a  Netherlands  residence
       permit, but her request  had  been  refused  on  income  grounds  and
       because she had a criminal record. She claimed her expulsion from the
       Netherlands would not only entail a separation from her  husband  and
       son, but also from her husband's and her own relatives.

  181. An important consideration was whether family life was created  at  a
       time when those involved were aware that the  immigration  status  of
       one of them was such that the continuation of family life within  the
       host State  was  precarious  from  the  outset.  The  Court  said  at
       paragraphs 48 and 49:

           The Court has previously held that where this is the case it  is
           likely only to be in the most exceptional circumstances that the
           removal of the non-national  family  member  will  constitute  a
           violation of Article 8.

           Turning to the circumstances of  the  present  case,  the  Court
           notes  that  the  applicant  has  never   held   a   Netherlands
           provisional  admission  or  residence   title   and   that   the
           relationships relied on by  her  were  created  at  a  time  and
           developed during a period when the persons involved  were  aware
           that the applicant's immigration status was precarious and that,
           until Mr G. complied with the minimum income  requirement  under
           the domestic immigration rules, the persistence of  that  family
           life within the Netherlands would remain precarious. This is not
           altered by the fact that the applicant's second  request  for  a
           residence permit for stay with Mr G. filed on  1 November  1991
           was left undetermined for a period  of  more  than  seven  years
           because her file had been mislaid by the responsible immigration
           authorities, as - like in 1990 in respect of her  first  request
           for a residence permit for stay with Mr G. -  one  of  the  main
           reasons why this second request was rejected on 27 November 1998
           by the Deputy Minister was because Mr  G.  failed  to  meet  the
           minimum income requirement.

  182. In Nnyanzi v United Kingdom (21878/06) [2008] ECHR 282 the Strasbourg
       Court rejected Ms Nnyanzi's reliance on Article 8  in  the  following
       terms stating in paragraph 78 of its judgment:

           "The Court does not consider it necessary to  determine  whether
           the applicant's accountancy studies, involvement with her church
           and friendship of unspecified duration with  a  man  during  her
           stay of almost  ten  years  in  the  United  Kingdom  constitute
           private life within  the  meaning  of  Article  8  �  1  of  the
           Convention. Even assuming this to be the case, it finds that her
           proposed removal to Uganda is "in accordance with the  law"  and
           is motivated by a legitimate aim,  namely  the  maintenance  and
           enforcement of immigration control. As to the necessity  of  the
           interference, the Court finds that any  private  life  that  the
           applicant has established during her stay in the United  Kingdom
           when  balanced  against  the  legitimate  public   interest   in
           effective immigration control would not  render  her  removal  a
           disproportionate interference. In this regard, the  Court  notes
           that, unlike the applicant in the case of  �ner  (cited  above),
           the present applicant is not a settled  migrant  and  has  never
           been granted a right to remain in the respondent State. Her stay
           in the United Kingdom, pending the determination of her  several
           asylum and human rights claims, has at all times been precarious
           and her removal, on rejection of those claims, is  not  rendered
           disproportionate by  any  alleged  delay  on  the  part  of  the
           authorities in assessing them."

  183. We accept that these cases show the significance of the  fact  of  an
       applicant knowing he has  no  substantive  right  to  remain  in  the
       country in which he seeks to establish a protected private and family
       life and the clog this presents to his being able to argue  that  the
       Secretary of State may no longer rely upon the weight to be  attached
       to firm  immigration  control  by  reason  of  the  failure  to  take
       effective steps to remove him.  The passage of time, that  is,  their
       length of stay, is a matter in favour of each  of  these  appellants.
       Yet the length of stay is the product of the  parents'  promotion  of
       claims that ultimately had no merit. For the last nine years  or  so,
       the parents have known their situation to be precarious; indeed, they
       knew that better than anyone  else.  Their  situation  resembles  the
       claims made in Nnyanzi and Konstatinov.  We  do  not  therefore  find
       that, separate and apart from the passage  of  time,  the  appellants
       have established their case is significantly strengthened by delay on
       the respondent's part.

Delay by the Tribunal

  184. The appellants rely upon a second and distinct form  of  delay.   The
       appellants' appeals were dismissed by the First-tier  Tribunal  by  a
       decision promulgated in March 2010.   Permission  to  appeal  to  the
       Upper Tribunal was granted during the following month.  Only now  are
       the appeals being determined in the Upper  Tribunal,  notwithstanding
       requests for a hearing to take place.  It is therefore said that  the
       weight properly attributable to the requirements  of  firm  and  fair
       immigration  control  is  necessarily  diminished.   The   appellants
       therefore submit:

           This submission  will  present  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  some
           considerable  difficulty.   The  submission  is  one  in   which
           culpability  for  significant  and  material  delay  is  alleged
           against the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  these  circumstances  it  is
           difficult to see how, if the tribunal rejects the submission, it
           can do so without being actually or apparently biased since  the
           tribunal's own interests (in avoiding culpability and criticism)
           are put in issue.

  185. We are bound to  say  we  do  not  consider  ourselves  in  any  such
       difficulty as that identified by the appellants.

  186. The Tribunal is not prepared to undertake an exercise in  attributing
       fault to the time the legal process has taken to  reach  the  current
       position, nor should we.  As we have repeatedly said, the  fact  that
       the passage  of  time  has  inevitably  affected  the  assessment  is
       sufficient in itself.  The panel does not need to recuse  itself  for
       the delay for which its members are not personally  responsible;  nor
       could we recuse the Tribunal itself  from  performing  its  statutory
       function by reason of the delay (even if fault were made out).

  187. The notion of  attributing  fault  to  the  Tribunal  as  part  of  a
       proportionality  exercise  is  a  novel  one.   This  is  bi-partisan
       litigation.  The Tribunal is  not  a  party  to  that  process.   The
       Secretary of State's delay is significant because  the  Secretary  of
       State is asserting a public interest in seeking the immediate removal
       of those not entitled to remain.  The strength of  that  argument  is
       diminished if the party asserting it has, by her inaction, acted in a
       way that is inconsistent with the stated position.  That argument has
       no traction at all when delay is occasioned by the legal system.  The
       Tribunal or the Courts do not assert their right to advance  a  claim
       that there is a public interest in the removal of  these  appellants;
       their function is to determine the lawfulness  of  the  Secretary  of
       State's decision in relation to which a delay in the legal process is
       irrelevant.

  188. Further, were the Tribunal required to consider the effect of its own
       fault-based delay (in addition to the effect of the passage of  time)
       it is impossible to say how that should affect the outcome as between
       the parties.  The appellants' submission implicitly assumes that  the
       effect must operate in favour  of  the  appellants  in  strengthening
       their claim to remain.  The respondent, however,  might  equally  say
       that delay has operated to strengthen  the  public  interest  in  the
       removal of persons who continue to benefit from being present in  the
       United Kingdom without any underlying right to remain.   Both parties
       have a legal right to have their case determined;  neither  side  has
       the monopoly.  During the appeal  process  the  passage  of  time  is
       material; the reason for it is not, unless the delay is  attributable
       to the parties.

Inconsistency in decision-making

  189.  Mr  Jones,  on  behalf  of  all  the  appellants,  identified  three
       significant inconsistencies in the approach adopted by the  Secretary
       of State. First, he drew  our  attention  to  the  relatively  benign
       consequences for  Mohammed  Faruq,  dubbed  'the  evil  genius'  when
       compared with the appellants before us.  The power to remove  persons
       from the United Kingdom had to be exercised consistently and  fairly.
       It is not consistent or fair if the appellants were to be removed but
       other families involved in and prosecuted for  the  same  immigration
       deceptions are permitted to remain in the United Kingdom and Mohammed
       Faruq, his wife Khurshid, his  brothers  and  their  wives  whom  the
       sentencing court had held to be directly involved  in  arranging  the
       frauds and deceptions and to have secured their and others' leave  to
       remain by deception suffer no immigration consequence.  Secondly,  he
       referred to the inconsistency in the system  of  immigration  control
       that permitted those children over the age of  18  to  avoid  removal
       pursuant to s. 10(1)(c). Indeed, relying on the  appellants'  general
       submission that all of the children now over the age of 18 cannot  be
       removed, he pointed out  the  sharp  distinction  between  the  adult
       children and the five  minors.  Thirdly,  he  relied  upon  the  very
       different outcome in the case of the family of Zafar Iqbal and Shazia
       Kausar who obtained discretionary leave to remain  under  the  legacy
       programme. Their position, he submitted, was  identical  to  that  of
       these appellants and even, perhaps, less meritorious.

  190. In AA (Somalia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1040, Carnworth  LJ  described
       the issue facing the Court as: "In  X's  asylum/human  rights  appeal
       what weight, if any, should be given to a finding of fact made in Y's
       favour which assists X and which was made by a tribunal when allowing
       an asylum/human rights appeal in respect of Y?" He went  on  to  deal
       with consistency as a principle of public law in these terms:

             1. As I understand his submissions, Mr Kovats for the Secretary
                of State does not accept that a previous decision should  be
                given any particular weight, at least in a case involving  a
                different appellant. The tribunal may have regard to it, but
                it is not obliged to follow it, whether or not there is  new
                evidence; its duty is simply to decide the case on  its  own
                merits on the evidence before it.

             1. I could understand this submission on the basis of  the  law
                as it stood before Ocampo.  The  normal  principle  is  that
                previous tribunal decisions do  not  establish  a  precedent
                (see Mukarkar  v  Home  Secretary  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045).
                "Country guidance" cases  are  a  well-recognised  exception
                (see S v Home Secretary [2002] EWCA Civ 539). In  Otshudi  v
                Home  Secretary  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  893,  a  case  involving
                inconsistent  decisions  arising  out  of  appeals  by   two
                brothers. Sedley LJ noted that no legal submission had  been
                based on the discrepancy as such, and commented:

                    "This is not the class of case which involves what  Laws
                    LJ has called a "factual  precedent"  -  for  example  a
                    finding about the political situation in a given country
                    at a given moment. It is an illustration, if an alarming
                    one, of the fact that two conscientious  decision-makers
                    can come to opposite or  divergent  conclusions  on  the
                    same evidence. But it is no more material to  the  legal
                    soundness of the  present  adjudicator's  decision  than
                    hers  would  be  to  the   soundness   of   the   second
                    adjudicator's decision...." (para 11)

                As he made clear later in the judgment,  he  regretted  that
                position:

                    "The discrepancy between the two decisions, while giving
                    rise to no legal challenge, must be a matter of concern.
                    If the second adjudicator  is  right,  this  appellant's
                    life too is at risk. If he is wrong, of course,  neither
                    brother may be at risk; but asylum law - for example  by
                    demanding  something  less   than   proof   positive   -
                    deliberately errs on the side of caution...." (para 23)

                He noted that normally arrangements would have been made for
                such linked cases to be heard together. He invited the  Home
                Office to reconsider the case on humanitarian grounds.

             1. That, however, was before the decision in TK (Georgia), that
                the Devaseelan  principles  could  be  extended  to  such  a
                situation, and before that extension had  been  approved  by
                this court in Ocampo. In the light of that decision I do not
                see how we can accept  Mr  Kovats'  argument.  I  note  that
                Hooper LJ, who was  himself  a  party  to  Ocampo,  takes  a
                different view of its significance.  Respectfully,  however,
                the reasoning of Auld LJ's judgment seems  to  me  carefully
                considered  and  entirely  clear.  Whether  or  not  it   is
                technically binding, I would not think it  right  to  depart
                from it unless I thought it clearly wrong, which I do not.

  191. In  R(Hussain) v SSHD [2012] EWHC 1952 (Admin), the Deputy High Court
       Judge was considering  a  claim  for  judicial  review  by  an  Iraqi
       national who was one of the hijackers of a Sudan Airways Airbus which
       arrived at Stansted airport on 27 August 1996. He contended  that  he
       feared being seized by the Sudanese authorities and returned  to  the
       former Iraqi regime, which had sentenced him to death. He  challenged
       the decision made by the Secretary of State as being unlawful on  the
       grounds that it was inconsistent with the approach taken  by  her  in
       relation to other persons involved in the hijacking  who  were  in  a
       similar position.  The Deputy Judge said in paragraph 50:

           "I readily accept the proposition that the principle  that  like
           cases should be treated alike does  not  mean  that  a  decision
           maker needs  to  trawl  through  other  cases  looking  for  the
           possibility that there might be a relevant decision to consider.
           Lawful decision making should not  become  either  formulaic  or
           difficult to achieve. I also accept that conscientious  decision
           makers, applying their minds to  the  same  set  of  facts,  may
           sometimes come to different conclusions (a  graphic  example  of
           which occurred in the case of Otshudi v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 893
           to which Ms Broadfoot referred me). However  this  is  not  that
           case. In this case the Claimant arrived in the UK with  6  other
           persons involved in the hijacking. This  is  not  a  significant
           pool with which to compare his  situation.  There  is  no  undue
           burden in requiring a consistency of decision making in relation
           to the treatment of applications for ILR made by the hijackers."



  192. The Judge found that the respondent's decision was flawed  by  reason
       of the failure to consider the cases of the  other  persons  involved
       with the hijacking who had been granted  ILR,  thereby  not  treating
       like cases alike; as well as a failure to  consider  the  applicant's
       claim to have acted under duress.

  193. The Secretary of State contends that this finding  is  wrong  because
       the decisions in other cases  involving  different  individuals  with
       different individual characteristics cannot  be  used  as  a  factual
       precedent for the determination of the  Article  8  merits  of  these
       appellants' appeals. The respondent relies on  an  analogy  with  the
       position in respect  of  different  Tribunal  Judges'  approaches  to
       different but related cases and Sedley LJ's comments  in  Otshudi  v.
       SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 893,  cited  in  paragraph  190,  it  being  'an
       illustration, if an alarming one, of the fact that two  conscientious
       decision-makers can come to opposite or divergent conclusions on  the
       same evidence.'

  194. Divergent results suggest that the Home Office should look  again  at
       the case. Otshudi was applied in MJ (Iran) v. SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
       564.  In the skeleton argument the respondent sets out  her  position
       in these terms:

           "In the present appeals, the Secretary of State is aware of  the
           position of the other individuals referred to by the Appellants.
           The Secretary of State is now investigating the circumstances of
           their cases. Whatever the outcome of that investigation, she has
           taken into account their position in  deciding  how  to  proceed
           with the present Appellants' cases and  remains  firmly  of  the
           view that their removal would  not  involve  a  disproportionate
           interference with their Article 8  rights.  That  is  consistent
           with the analogous approach in Otshudi, MJ (Iran)  and  Hussain.
           The present cases have been carefully considered  on  their  own
           facts and the conclusion reached is lawful."

  195. We do not regard  the  position  of  Mohammed  Faruq  as  capable  of
       shedding any light  on  issues  of  fairness  in  relation  to  these
       appellants because his  position  is  substantially  different.  Most
       importantly, he is a British citizen whom we understand has  been  in
       the United Kingdom for 50 odd years. It has always been accepted that
       he is at the centre of the conspiracy but no comparison can  properly
       be drawn because a British national cannot be deported. It would,  of
       course, have provided a legal symmetry for the Secretary of State  to
       have taken steps to revoke Mohammed Faruq's citizenship in  order  to
       place him in a  similar  position  as  these  appellants  but  it  is
       impossible for the Tribunal to make an assessment in relation to  the
       merits of this course of  action  or  the  legal  obstacles  (and  we
       anticipate  that  there  would  be  some)  in  the   way.   In   such
       circumstances there is no parallel that can safely be  drawn  between
       his position (and those of members of his family)  and  that  of  the
       appellants.

  196. Where the decision in one  case  sheds  light  on  the  Secretary  of
       State's thinking, an inconsistent decision  may  establish  that  the
       Secretary of State has failed to apply her own conventional  approach
       resulting in unfairness. Where, however, no useful  guidance  can  be
       gleaned from the approach conventionally adopted by the Secretary  of
       State and an inconsistent decision adds  little  or  nothing  to  our
       understanding of the underlying reasoning  behind  the  Secretary  of
       State's decision (and may simply be a maverick) we see no  reason  in
       principle why the Secretary of State should, thereafter, be  required
       to make similar maverick decisions in order to preserve the principle
       of consistency at the expense  of  common  sense  or  good  decision-
       making.

  197. We do not regard the fact that the adult children who benefited  from
       the decision of the Tribunal  in  Ahmad  and  others  demonstrates  a
       systematic inconsistency because, as adults when the  decisions  were
       made, they did not fall within the  category  of  persons  who  might
       lawfully be made the subject of the relevant removal  decisions.  The
       fact, however, that the adult Ahmad children have  been  or  will  be
       granted settled status is a material factor in the assessment of  the
       private and family lives of those subject to removal decisions but is
       not an example of inconsistency.  The  Immigration  Rules  frequently
       draw distinctions between a person under the age of 18 and  a  person
       over the age of 18.  So, too, will a distinction be found between the
       requirements to be met by a person who is under the age  of  65  when
       compared with the person over 65. These distinctions do not amount to
       inconsistencies; rather, that different  legal  provisions  apply  to
       different categories of people. Accordingly, the fact that  a  person
       over the age of 18 is to be treated differently from a minor, leading
       perhaps to different outcomes, will not lead to inconsistent outcomes
       such as to render those decisions unfair. Indeed, in many cases it is
       the minor child who is able  to  reap  the  advantages  of  his  age,
       leaving the adult child to meet the requirements of a  more  exacting
       immigration category. In  our  judgment,  it  would  be  perverse  to
       suggest that these differentials should be removed for  the  sake  of
       consistency or, where such a differential  arises,  the  person  less
       favourably treated should be given the benefits of his more  favoured
       comparator in order to maintain consistency.

  198. We would also point out, as was said in paragraph  39  of  Ahmad  and
       others, that there was a distinct possibility that the  Tribunal  was
       'faced with a drafting error' and no more.  A drafting error  in  the
       legislation cannot be treated as  drawing  a  principled  distinction
       upon which others can properly rely.

  199. There is, however, no  doubt  that  the  principle  of  inconsistency
       applies most strikingly in the case of the family of Zafar Iqbal  and
       Shazia Kauser.  It appears that their cases were treated  as  falling
       within the Legacy Programme identified in the decision in R(Hakemi  &
       Ors) v SSHD [2012] EWHC 1967 and the  numerous  subsequent  decisions
       that have followed it including R(Jaku & Ors) v SSHD [2014] EWHC  605
       (Admin)  which  reviews  many  of  them.   It  is  not  part  of  the
       appellants' case that they had a right to  be  considered  under  the
       Legacy Programme and therefore  to  reap  the  benefits  of  it.  The
       appellants have not sought to pursue a  judicial  review  seeking  to
       enforce any rights they believed themselves to have under the  Legacy
       Programme and they cannot, therefore, establish that they had a right
       to be treated in the same way as the family of Zafar Iqbal and Shazia
       Kauser.

  200. Furthermore, there is nothing before us to suggest that the decisions
       in the case of the family of Zafar Iqbal and Shazia Kauser were  made
       as a result of a careful analysis of the principles with which we are
       concerned and which  will  in  due  course  form  the  basis  of  our
       assessment of proportionality. If  we  reach  sustainable  decisions,
       affording due respect to the Article  8  interests  of  each  of  the
       appellants, we will have fulfilled our obligations to  them  and  the
       respondent. In such circumstances, there can be no rational basis for
       reaching a different conclusion by reason only of the outcome in  the
       case of the family of Zafar Iqbal and Shazia Kauser being  different.
       Once again, such a result would render consistency in decision-making
       a determinative factor, preserving the principle  of  consistency  at
       the expense of an otherwise proportionate outcome.

The Zambrano issue

  201. H, the son of Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan, was  born  in  the  United
       Kingdom on 24 April 2004, at a time when his  father  had  Indefinite
       Leave to Remain here. It is not  in  dispute  that  H  is  a  British
       citizen by virtue of  the  operation  of  s.1(1)(b)  of  the  British
       Nationality Act 1981.

  202. On 12 May 2011 Mehmood Ahmed, and all other members of his  immediate
       family - his wife,  Fazal  Jan,  and  their  children  Wasim,  Arfan,
       Atteqa, Adeel and H - made an application to the Secretary of State:

           "...for leave to remain on the  basis  of  their  minor  British
           family member [H] and the recent European Court of Justice (ECJ)
           case of Zambrano v ONEm (Case C-34/0)"

  203. These applications were determined against each family member by  way
       of decisions dated 1 May 2013, supplemented by  reasons  given  in  a
       further decision of 31 May 2013. These decisions gave rise to  rights
       of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant to  regulation  26  of
       The  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006   (SI
       2006/1003) (2006 EEA Regulations); a right which each of  the  family
       members has sought to exercise. The appeals have yet to come  on  for
       hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

  204. We are, of course,  hearing  appeals  in  the  Upper  Tribunal;  such
       appeals having been brought before the First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant
       to s. 82 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  against
       decisions made by the Secretary of State in 2009. We are not  sitting
       at first instance hearing the appeals brought pursuant  to  the  2006
       EEA Regulations against the decisions of the Secretary  of  State  to
       refuse to issue Derivative Residence Cards. However, it is plain  and
       was agreed by the parties that, in respect of Mehmood Ahmed  and  his
       immediate family, the issue of whether they have EEA  derived  rights
       as  a  consequence  of  their  relationship  with  H  is  a  relevant
       consideration in our assessment of Article 8(2) ECHR issues.

  205. For this reason, the parties agreed, and we concur, that despite  the
       appellants  having  an  outstanding  appeal  before  the   First-tier
       Tribunal on  the  issue  of  their  EEA  derived  rights,  we  should
       nevertheless consider that issue for ourselves within the context  of
       Article 8(2) ECHR.  In this regard, we have taken into  account  that
       an appeal against a decision shall be  treated  by  the  Tribunal  as
       including an appeal against any decision  in  respect  of  which  the
       appellant has a right of appeal under s.82(1).  We do not  understand
       that this require us to determine the appeal against the refusal of a
       derivative residence card  when  that  decision  is  the  subject  of
       discrete proceedings before the Tribunal.  If we are  wrong  on  this
       and statute requires us to determine this issue, the findings that we
       are about to make are likely to determine the outcome of that appeal,
       bearing in mind the Upper Tribunal's powers pursuant  to  s.11(4)  of
       the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

The decision in Zambrano

  206. Article 20 of the Treaty on the Functioning  of  the  European  Union
       ("TFEU") is in the following terms:

           "1. Citizenship of the Union is hereby established. Every person
           holding the nationality of a Member State shall be a citizen  of
           the Union. Citizenship of the Union shall be additional  to  and
           not replace national citizenship.

           2. Citizens of the Union shall enjoy the rights and  be  subject
           to the duties provided for in the  Treaties.  They  shall  have,
           inter alia:

                (a) The right to move and reside freely within the territory
                of the Member States;

           ... These rights shall  be  exercised  in  accordance  with  the
           conditions and  limits  defined  by  the  Treaties  and  by  the
           measures adopted thereunder."

  207. Article 21(1) TFEU provides:

           "Every citizen of the Union shall have the  right  to  move  and
           reside freely within the territory of the Member States, subject
           to the limitations and conditions laid down in the Treaties  and
           by the measures adopted to give them effect."

  208. In Ruiz Zambrano v Office National de l'Emploi (ONEm) [2012] QB  265,
       the Grand Chamber of the CJEU confirmed that Article 20 TFEU  confers
       the status of citizen of  the  Union  on  every  person  holding  the
       nationality of a Member State.

  209. Zambrano concerned the  denial  of  work  and  residence  permits  to
       Colombian national parents of Belgium nationals living in Belgium. Mr
       Zambrano lost his employment, which he had been  undertaking  without
       the required work permit. He was refused  unemployment  benefits.  He
       sought to argue before the courts in Belgium that Articles 20 and  21
       TFEU required Belgium, as  a  Member  State,  to  grant  him,  as  an
       ascendant relative upon whom his minor EEA citizen children depended,
       an exemption from the obligation to hold a work permit.

  210. The Grand Chamber, on a reference from the  Tribunal  du  travail  de
       Bruxelles, concluded as follows:

           "41. As the Court has stated several times, citizenship  of  the
           European Union is intended  to  be  the  fundamental  status  of
           nationals of member states...

           42. In those circumstances, Article 20 TFEU  precludes  national
           measures which have the effect  of  depriving  citizens  of  the
           Union of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of their  rights
           conferred by virtue of their status as citizens of the Union...

           43. A refusal to grant a right of residence to a  third  country
           national with dependent minor children in the member state where
           those children are nationals and reside, and also a  refusal  to
           grant such a person a work permit, has such an effect.

           44. It must be assumed that such  a  refusal  would  lead  to  a
           situation where those children, citizens  of  the  Union,  would
           have to leave the territory of the Union in order  to  accompany
           their parents. Similarly, if a work permit were not  granted  to
           such a person, he would risk not having sufficient resources  to
           provide for himself and his family, which would  result  in  the
           children, citizens of the Union, having to leave  the  territory
           of the Union. In those  circumstances,  those  citizens  of  the
           Union would, as a result, be unable to exercise the substance of
           the rights conferred on  them  by  virtue  of  their  status  as
           citizens of the Union.

           45. Accordingly, the answer to the question referred is that art
           20 TFEU is to be interpreted as  meaning  that  it  precludes  a
           member state from refusing a third country national  upon  which
           his  minor  children,  who  are  European  Union  citizens,  are
           dependent, a right of residence in the member state of residence
           and nationality of those children, and from refusing to grant  a
           work permit to that third country national, in so  far  as  such
           decisions deprive those children of the genuine enjoyment of the
           substance of the rights attaching  to  the  status  of  European
           Union citizens."

Decisions after Zambrano

  211. The principles set out in the Zambrano  decision  have  been  further
       considered by the CJEU in  Dereci  v  Bundesministerium  f�r  Inneres
       [2011] EUECJ C-256/11,  [2012]  All  ER  (EC)  373;  O,  S  and  L  v
       Maahanmuuttovirasto (Immigration Office) [2012] EUECJ C-356/11 and C-
       357/11; Youshikazu Iida v Stadt Ulm [2013] 1 C.M.L.R. 47 and Alokpa v
       Ministre du Travail Case 86-12 and Ymerega v Ministre du Travail Case
       C-87/12.

  212. From the decisions cited above we draw the following principles:

             i) All nationals of a Member State are EU Citizens;

            ii) It is for each Member State to determine how nationality  of
                that state may be acquired;

           iii) A Union citizen who has never exercised his right of freedom
                of movement and has always resided  in  a  Member  State  of
                which  he  is  a  national  cannot  benefit  from  Directive
                2004/38, and in normal circumstances a family member of that
                EU national  cannot  derive  rights  from  the  EU  national
                pursuant to Directive 2004/38 - Dereci at [54 and 55][1];

            iv) A hypothetical prospect of exercising the right  of  freedom
                of movement does not establish a sufficient connection to EU
                law to justify the application of that  law's  provisions  -
                Iida at [77]

             v) A Union citizen is entitled to enjoy the  substance  of  the
                rights attached to such status - Zambrano at [42];

            vi) The Treaty provisions on citizenship of  the  Union  do  not
                confer any autonomous rights on third country nationals, and
                any rights conferred  on  third  country  nationals  by  the
                Treaty provisions on Union citizenship are derived from  the
                rights of a Union citizen - Iida at [66];

           vii) The purpose and justification of those  derived  rights  are
                based on the fact that a refusal to allow them would be such
                as to interfere with the Union citizens freedom of  movement
                by discouraging him from exercising his rights of entry into
                and residence in the EU, including the host Member  State  -
                Iida at [67 and 68];

          viii) Article 20 TFEU precludes national measures which  have  the
                effect of depriving citizens of the  Union  of  the  genuine
                enjoyment of the substance of such rights attached  to  such
                citizenship. This relates to circumstances whereby the Union
                citizen has, in fact, to leave not only the territory of the
                Member State  of  which  he  is  a  national  but  also  the
                territory of the Union as a whole. This is a matter of  fact
                for the national courts to determine - Dereci at [66]

  213. Turning to the domestic authority, Damion  Harrison  (Jamaica)  &  AB
       (Morocco) v SSHD [2012] EWCA  Civ  1736  was  a  case  in  which  the
       appellants were the subject of deportation proceedings and  each  had
       British citizen children. In each case it was found as a fact that if
       the appellant were to be removed from the United Kingdom, their Union
       citizen children would not be compelled also to leave.

  214. The appellants submitted that if they were to be removed  this  would
       adversely affect  the  quality  of  life  of  their  British  citizen
       children and that, consequently, Article 20 TFEU, and  "the  Zambrano
       principle", would be engaged. In rejecting this submission Elias  LJ,
       giving the judgement of the Court said:

           63. ... [T]here is really no basis  for  asserting  that  it  is
           arguable in the light  of  the  authorities  that  the  Zambrano
           principle extends to cover anything short of a  situation  where
           the EU citizen is forced to leave the territory of  the  EU.  If
           the EU citizen, be it the child or wife, would not  in  practice
           be compelled to leave the country if the  non-EU  family  member
           were to be refused the right of residence, there is in  my  view
           nothing in these authorities to suggest that EU law is  engaged.
           Article 8 rights may then  come  into  the  picture  to  protect
           family life as the court recognised in Dereci, but  that  is  an
           entirely distinct area of protection...

           66. Even if the non-EU national is not relied  upon  to  provide
           financial support, typically there will be strong emotional  and
           psychological ties within the  family  and  separation  will  be
           likely significantly to rupture those ties, thereby  diminishing
           the enjoyment of life of the family members who remain.  Yet  it
           is plainly not the case, as Dereci makes clear  and  Mr  Drabble
           [Counsel for the appellant] accepts, that this consequence would
           be sufficient to engage EU law.  Furthermore,  if  Mr  Drabble's
           submission were correct, it would jar with  the  description  of
           the  Zambrano  principle  as  applying   only   in   exceptional
           circumstances, as the Court in Dereci  observed.  The  principle
           would regularly be engaged.

           67. As to the submission that  EU  law  might  develop  in  that
           direction, I accept that it is a general  principle  of  EU  law
           that conduct which materially impedes the exercise of an EU  law
           right is in general forbidden by EU law in  precisely  the  same
           way as deprivation of the  right.  But  in  my  judgment  it  is
           necessary to focus on the nature of the right in  issue  and  to
           decide what constitutes an impediment. The right of residence is
           a right to reside in the territory of the EU. It is not a  right
           to any particular quality of life or to any particular  standard
           of living. Accordingly, there is no impediment to exercising the
           right to reside if residence remains possible  as  a  matter  of
           substance, albeit that the quality of  life  is  diminished.  Of
           course, to the extent that the quality or standard of life  will
           be seriously impaired by excluding the non-EU national, that  is
           likely in practice to infringe the  right  of  residence  itself
           because it will effectively compel the EU  citizen  to  give  up
           residence and travel with the non-EU national.  But  in  such  a
           case the Zambrano principle would apply  and  the  EU  citizen's
           rights would have to be protected (save for the possibility of a
           proportionate deprivation of rights). Accordingly, to the extent
           that the focus is on protecting the substance of the right, that
           formulation of the principle already  provides  protection  from
           certain interferences with the enjoyment of the right."

United Kingdom provisions - Zambrano principle

  215. By Article 4(3) of the Consolidated Version of the Treaty on European
       Union, each member state is required to take appropriate measures  to
       ensure fulfilment of its obligations arising out of the  Treaties  or
       resulting from the acts of the institutions of the Union.

  216. The United Kingdom has sought to fulfil its obligations  arising  out
       Article 20 TFEU and the Zambrano decision with the  insertion  by  SI
       2012/2560, from 8 November 2012, of Regulations 15A (4A)  (and  other
       consequential amendments to regulations 11 and 15A) into the 2006 EEA
       Regulations, which now read:

           15A. Derivative right of residence

             4)    A person ("P") who  is  not  an  exempt  person  and  who
                satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4),  (4A)  or
                (5) of this regulation is entitled to a derivative right  to
                reside in the United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies  the
                relevant criteria.

           ...

           (4A)   P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

                 a) he is the primary carer of  a  British  citizen  ("  the
                    relevant British citizen")

                 b) the relevant British citizen is residing in  the  United
                    Kingdom; and

                 c) the relevant British citizen would be unable  to  reside
                    in the UK or in another EEA state if P were required  to
                    leave.

           (6)    For the purpose of this regulation -

                ...

                (c)    "an exempt person" is a person -

                    ...

                    (iv)   who has indefinite leave to enter  or  remain  in
                        the United Kingdom.

           (7)    P is to be regarded  as  a  "primary  carer"  of  another
                person if -

                ...

                (a)    P is a direct relative or a legal  guardian  of  that
                    person; and

                (b)    P -

                    (i)    is the person who has primary responsibility  for
                        that person's care; or

                    (ii)    shares  equally  the  responsibility  for   that
                        person's care with one other   person who is not an
                        exempt person

           (7A) Where P is to be regarded as a  primary  carer  of  another
           person  by  virtue  of  paragraph  (7)(b)(ii)  the  criteria  in
           paragraphs (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) and (4A)(c) shall  be  considered
           on the basis that both P and the person with whom responsibility
           is shared would be required to leave the United Kingdom.

           (8) P will not  be  regarded  as  having  responsibility  for  a
           person's care for the purpose of paragraph (7) on the sole basis
           of a financial contribution towards that person's care.

           (9) A person who otherwise satisfies the criteria  in  paragraph
           (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5) will not be entitled to a  derivative
           right to reside in the United Kingdom  where  the  Secretary  of
           State has made a decision under regulation  19(3)(b),  20(1)  or
           20A(1)."

  217. Regulation 18A of the 2006 EEA Regulations (added  by  SI  2012/1547)
       requires the Secretary of State to issue a person with  a  Derivative
       Residence Card on application and production of a valid passport,  or
       EEA identity card, and proof that  the  applicant  has  a  derivative
       right of residence under regulation 15A of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

  218. Part 4 of the 2006 Regulations  (regulations  19  -  21B)  is  headed
       'Refusal of Admission and Removal etc'. Regulation 19(3), inter alia,
       provides power to the Secretary of State to remove the family  member
       of an EEA national if that persons removal is justified on grounds of
       public policy, public security or public health  in  accordance  with
       regulation 21. Regulation 20 provides that the Secretary of State may
       refuse to issue a residence card on the same basis.  In  relation  to
       rights of residence arising under, inter alia, regulation  15(4A)  of
       the 2006 EEA Regulations references to a matter  being  justified  on
       grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public  health  in
       accordance with regulation 21 must be read as referring to  a  matter
       being "conducive to the public good".

Application of 2006 Regulations

  219. It is first necessary for us to consider whether Mehmood  Ahmed,  and
       his immediate family, benefit from the domestic  legislation  brought
       in to give effect to the Zambrano principle.

  220. The Secretary of State maintains that Mehmood  Ahmed  is  an  'exempt
       person' for the purposes of reg. 15A of  the  2006  EEA  Regulations,
       because he has Indefinite Leave to Remain (reg. 15A(6)(iv)) and that,
       therefore, he cannot derive  any  rights  as  a  consequence  of  H's
       European Union citizenship.

  221. Section 10 (8) of the 1999 Act reads:

           "10(8) - Where a person is notified that  a  decision  has  been
           made  to  remove  him  in  accordance  with  this  section,  the
           notification invalidates any leave to enter or remain in  United
           Kingdom previously given to him".

  222. The immigration  decision  of  the  29  April  2009,  in  an  express
       application of s.10(8), informing Mr Ahmed of the decision to  remove
       him states, at footnote 1, as follows:

           "Where a decision to remove has been  made  under  s.10  of  the
           Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 any leave previously granted  is
           invalidated by the service of this notice (s.10(8) of  that  act
           (as amended))."

  223. The focus of the parties' submissions on this aspect  of  the  appeal
       related to the effect of s.3D of the Immigration  Act  1971;  Mehmood
       Ahmed asserting that  invalidation  of  his  leave  took  place  upon
       service of the immigration decision of 29 April 2009  and  that  such
       leave was not further extended  by  s.3D  upon  the  bringing  of  an
       appeal, whereas the respondent submitted that Mr  Ahmed's  Indefinite
       Leave to Remain continues while his appeal against the s. 10 decision
       is pending, as a consequence of the operation of s. 3D.

  224. Section 3D of the 1971 Act states:

           3D - Continuation of leave following revocation

           (1)    This section applies if a  person's  leave  to  enter  or
                remain in the United Kingdom -

                (a)    is varied with the result that he  has  no  leave  to
                    enter or remain United    Kingdom, or

                (b)    is revoked.

           (2)    The person's leave is extended by virtue of this  section
                during any period when -

                 a) an  appeal  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
                    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 could be brought,  while
                    the  person  is  in  the  United  Kingdom,  against  the
                    variation or revocation...

                 b) an appeal under that section against  the  variation  or
                    revocation, brought while the appellant is in the United
                    Kingdom, is pending...

  225. It  is  immediately  apparent  upon  reading  s.  3D  that  the  term
       'invalidates', used in s. 10(8), does not appear therein.  One effect
       on a person who has been served with notice of a s. 10(1) decision is
       that, on service, any leave to enter  or  remain  is  brought  to  an
       immediate end. This consequence  is  identical  in  practice  to  the
       Secretary of State making a decision to  vary  a  person's  leave  to
       enter or remain in the United Kingdom such that  when  the  variation
       takes effect the person has no leave to enter or remain.

  226. The appellants argue that  the  decision  refusing  Mehmood  Ahmed  a
       residence card is erroneous because it  is  wrong  to  treat  him  as
       having continuing leave under s. 3D of the  1971  Act.  This,  it  is
       alleged, is because his leave to remain was "invalidated" whereas  s.
       3D  only  provides  for  the  continuation  of  leave  to  remain  in
       circumstances where the person's leave is "varied with the result  he
       has no leave to enter or remain" or is "revoked".  It  is  said  that
       leave does not continue under s. 3D where it is  invalidated.  It  is
       also argued in the alternative that it is "mendacious" (by  which  we
       take it to mean that it is unlawful) to treat temporary leave  deemed
       to operate prior to a removal decision as  protective  of  a  British
       citizen child's residence and citizenship rights under Zambrano.

  227. As the Secretary of State points out the appellants' primary argument
       is a surprising one. The purpose of s. 3D  of  the  1971  Act  is  to
       perform a protective function for those whose leave to remain in  the
       UK has been brought to an end by an appealable  immigration  decision
       in that it avoids that person becoming an unlawful overstayer. If the
       appellants' submission is correct, then Mehmood  Ahmed  is  (and  has
       been at all times  since  the  making  of  the  immigration  decision
       against  which  he  appeals)  an   overstayer.     In   the   unusual
       circumstances of this appeal, this may suit Mehmood Ahmed because  he
       manages to avoid falling into the category of an exempt  person,  but
       it would be highly undesirable for  most  whose  leave  is  otherwise
       brought to an end by a s.10 decision. The Secretary of State  further
       points out that, as  overstayers,  they  would  not  be  able  to  be
       employed during the currency of their appeal  proceedings.  Employers
       would be at risk of unwittingly employing someone without  leave  and
       the related criminal sanctions. Their welfare entitlement would  also
       be adversely affected  because  they  would  no  longer  be  lawfully
       present in the UK. As the present proceedings demonstrate, that is  a
       state of affairs which can, in some cases, last some time.

  228. The decision which brought Mehmood Ahmed's indefinite leave to remain
       to an end was a removal decision under s.10 of the 1999 Act which  on
       notification by virtue of s.10(8) invalidated  the  leave  previously
       granted to him were it not for the protection granted by s.3D of  the
       1971 Act which applies where a person's leave is varied to the extent
       that he has no leave to remain. The Secretary of State  accepts  this
       is not a revocation case. We are, however, satisfied  that  it  is  a
       variation case. Where leave is invalidated by operation of law, there
       is a change from the situation where he has leave  to  the  situation
       where he has no leave.  That must be a variation.

  229. If it is linguistically a  variation,  it  also  has  the  fortuitous
       result of protecting those many persons whom s. 3D  was  designed  to
       protect.  As the Secretary of State points  out,  her  interpretation
       protects those immigrants who are being required to leave the UK.  If
       their appeals succeed, they are not subsequently  burdened  with  the
       consequences of a period of  unlawful  residence  which  would  often
       prejudice a future application for further leave. It permits them  to
       continue their lives during the appeal process in the confidence that
       they continue to have permission to remain in the country. Whilst the
       difference in language between s. 3D of the 1971 Act and s. 10 of the
       1999 Act permits the possibility of a  distinction  being  drawn,  it
       does not necessarily create meanings which are mutually exclusive.

  230. We construe s. 3D as giving  Mehmood  Ahmed  a  continuation  of  his
       leave.  That  is  sufficient  to  engage  the   operation   of   reg.
       15A(6)(c)(iv) of the 2006 Regulations such  that  he  is  an  "exempt
       person" and he does not, therefore, qualify for a derivative right of
       residence.

  231. The appellants, in their attempt to persuade us to take  a  different
       view, placed significant reliance on the decisions of  the  Court  of
       Appeal in R (Lim) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 773 and RK  (Nepal)  v  SSHD
       [2009] EWCA Civ 359, but we have found such decisions to be of little
       assistance in our considerations.

  232. In Lim the Secretary of State appealed against a  decision  that  the
       respondent, Mr Lim, a Malaysian citizen, was entitled to challenge by
       way of judicial review the legality  of  removal  directions  imposed
       against him following a finding of fact that he had failed to observe
       a condition of his leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.  It  was
       asserted that Mr Lim had breached a condition of his leave,  and  the
       Secretary of State proposed to remove him pursuant  to  s.10  of  the
       1999 Act. Although the judge at first instance had  reminded  himself
       that judicial review was a remedy of last resort  to  be  entertained
       only where there was no suitable statutory appeal, he  had  found  Mr
       Lim's case to be exceptional and that the alternative  remedy  of  an
       out-of-country appeal to the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  under
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 s.82 did not provide
       fair, adequate or proportionate protection. The appeal to  the  Court
       of Appeal turned  on  the  propriety  of  using  judicial  review  to
       challenge the factual basis of a removal direction against  which  an
       out-of-country appeal lay. The  Secretary  of  State  submitted  that
       there was no proper foundation for the  High  Court  judge's  finding
       that the immigration appeals system was not equipped to deal with the
       particular features of the case. The Secretary  of  State  maintained
       that the hardship of losing one's job, income and home to  pursue  an
       out-of-country appeal was an inevitable  consequence  of  the  system
       and, while distressing, was  neither  unusual  nor  exceptional.  The
       Court of Appeal allowed the Secretary of  State's  appeal  ostensibly
       for the reasons she put forward.

  233. In RK (Nepal), the applicants were sisters and  nationals  of  Nepal.
       Each applied for permission to appeal against the  refusal  of  their
       application for judicial review  of  a  decision  of  the  respondent
       Secretary of State to remove them to Nepal. The applicants  had  been
       granted leave to enter or remain as students. It had been found  that
       they had been working for more than the 20  hours  a  week  that  was
       permitted during term time to non-British citizens with  such  leave.
       The issue was whether the applicants had the right to  an  in-country
       appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to remove them.  The
       answer to that question depended on whether the Secretary of  State's
       decisions fell within the scope of  s.82(2)(e)  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

  234. In refusing the application, the Court used "as its  starting  point"
       the decision in Lim and concluded:

           "33. The importance of that decision lies in its emphasis on the
           appeal structure that Parliament has laid down in the  2002  Act
           with respect to various types  of  "immigration  decision".  The
           courts must  respect  that  framework,  which  is  not  open  to
           challenge in the courts by way of judicial review  unless  there
           are "special or exceptional factors" at play. Therefore,  except
           when such "special or exceptional factors" can  successfully  be
           invoked so as to give rise to a right to  judicial  review,  the
           court must accept that an out of  country  right  of  appeal  is
           regarded by Parliament as an adequate safeguard  for  those  who
           are removed under section 10 of the 1999 Act .

           34. It is plain in this case that the immigration decisions made
           against the applicants was one under  section  10(1)(a)  of  the
           1999 Act. That is what was stated in the form  IS151A  that  was
           served on each of the applicants. There is no  issue  concerning
           their non - British citizenship. It is also clear, as  a  matter
           of fact, that  the  reason  for  the  removal  from  the  UK  in
           accordance with directions given by an  immigration  officer  is
           that they both obtained limited leave to enter and remain in the
           UK and that this leave was  subject  to  conditions.  They  have
           broken those conditions in the manner I have already  described.
           Those facts falls all squarely within section  10(1)(a)  of  the
           1999 Act."

  235. In neither of these decisions did the court consider the  application
       of s.3D of the 1971 Act, the focus of each being on the structure  of
       the appeal rights laid down by parliament in s.82 of  the  2002  Act.
       Our conclusions do not offend the ratio  of  either  decision,  given
       that  s.3D(2)(a)  specifies  that  it  is  of  application  only   in
       circumstances where a person has an in-country right of appeal. There
       is, therefore, no prospect of a persons leave being extended pursuant
       to s.3D after they  have  left  the  United  Kingdom  and  thereafter
       exercised a right of appeal against a s.10 removal decision.

  236. Having concluded that Mehmood  Ahmed's  indefinite  leave  to  remain
       continues  during  the  course  of  this  appeal  process  and  that,
       consequently, he  is  an  'exempt  person'  and  not  entitled  to  a
       Derivative Residence Card pursuant to regulation 18A of the 2006  EEA
       regulations', Fazal Jan's application under  regulation  15A  of  the
       2006 EEA regulations must also fall to be refused.  She  is  not  the
       primary carer of H for  the  purposes  of  that  regulation.  Such  a
       contention, if it were to be made, would not lie easily with  Mehmood
       Ahmed's claim to share responsibility for H's care  with  Fazal  Jan.
       Fazal Jan does not share responsibility for H's care  with  a  person
       who is not an exempt person because we have found that Mehmood  Ahmed
       is an 'exempt person'.

  237. Our interpretation of s. 3D does not,  in  its  application,  stretch
       outside the scope of EU law in such a way as to be unwarranted.  Were
       we to construe the Zambrano principle otherwise, it would distort the
       clear legislative intention of the section.

Zambrano - Consideration outwith the 2006 EEA Regulations

  238. The conclusions above only bring to an end our consideration  of  the
       application of the Zambrano principle if the 2006 Regulations  afford
       the same scope of protection as is afforded by the case law;  in  our
       judgment they clearly do not.

  239. Although Mehmood Ahmed is  an  exempt  person  for  the  purposes  of
       regulation 15A of the 2006 EEA Regulations,  because  his  indefinite
       leave to remain continues during the course of these proceedings, the
       stated intention of the Secretary  of  State,  as  reflected  by  the
       notification of the s.10 decision, is to remove him, and  Fazal  Jan,
       from the territory of the European Union.

  240. It is not disputed that if H's parents are removed from the EU then H
       would be compelled also to leave the territory.  It  cannot,  in  our
       view, be sensibly said that the prospect  of  H  being  compelled  to
       leave the EU is purely hypothetical as a consequence of  his  father,
       Mehmood Ahmed, currently having indefinite leave to remain by  virtue
       of the operation of s.3D of the 1971 Act. To this end, H's,  Zambrano
       rights are, prima facie, engaged.

Abuse

  241. It is the Secretary of State's case that no Zambrano  rights  can  be
       derived from H's British citizenship by  the  other  members  of  the
       Mehmood Ahmed family as a consequence of such citizenship having been
       "obtained as a result of fraud by the British child's  parents"  i.e.
       Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan

  242. In support of submissions the Secretary of State places  reliance  on
       the general proposition of EU law, detailed by the ECJ  in  Diamantis
       v. Elliniko Dimosio (Greek State) (Case C-367/96) [1998] ECR  I-2843,
       that [33]:

           "...community law cannot be relied on for abusive of  fraudulent
           ends."

  243. A principle enunciated in such broad form is not, however, by itself,
       a useful instrument  for  assessing  whether  a  right  arising  from
       community law is being exploited abusively.

  244. The Secretary of State makes more nuanced submissions on  this  issue
       in paragraphs 274- 277  of  her  skeleton  argument,  which  read  as
       follows:

           274. The effect of a fraudulently obtained residence card on the
           enjoyment  of  rights  arising  in  EU  law   was   specifically
           considered in Case C-285/95 Kol v. Land  Berlin  [1997]  ECR  I-
           3069. The case concerned a Turkish national who entered  into  a
           marriage of convenience with a German national. He was initially
           given a  residence  permit  of  limited  duration.  Following  a
           declaration by him that he lived with his wife as man  and  wife
           in the matrimonial home, he was granted a  residence  permit  of
           unlimited duration. The declaration was false as his  wife  had,
           by that stage, already commenced  divorce  proceedings  and  the
           spouses had ceased to co-habit  some  time  previously.  He  was
           later  convicted  of,  and  fined  for,  having  made  a   false
           declaration in order to procure a residence permit. His wife was
           convicted of aiding and abetting him. The  national  authorities
           made an expulsion order against him. Having considered its case-
           law on the legality of residence for the purposes of the Turkish
           Association Agreement, which established  that  residence  could
           not be lawful where it was not  possible  to  establish  that  a
           person had a stable and legal right to  reside,  the  CJEU  held
           that:

                25. A fortiori that interpretation must apply in a situation
                such as that in  the  main  proceedings  where  the  Turkish
                migrant worker obtained  a  residence  permit  of  unlimited
                duration  in  the  host  Member  State  only  by  means   of
                inaccurate declarations in respect of which he was convicted
                of fraud.

                26. Periods of employment after a residence permit has  been
                obtained only be means of fraudulent conduct which  has  led
                to a conviction cannot be regarded as legal for the purposes
                of application of Article 6(1) of Decision  No  1/80,  since
                the Turkish national did not fulfil the conditions  for  the
                grant of such a permit which was, accordingly, liable to  be
                rescinded when the fraud was discovered.

                28. Furthermore, employment under a residence permit  issued
                as a result of fraudulent conduct which has led, as in  this
                case, to a conviction, cannot give rise  to  any  rights  in
                favour of the  Turkish  worker,  or  arouse  any  legitimate
                expectation on his part."

           275. In Kol� legal residence was  a  requirement  before  rights
           under Decision 1/80 could arise. Fraud in obtaining a  residence
           permit was sufficient to prevent  the  later  derivative  rights
           under Decision 1/80 from arising. A similar result  obtained  in
           Case C-63/99 R v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex
           parte  Gloszczuk  [2001]  ECR  I-6393.  In  that   case,   false
           representations on entry about the purpose of a visit meant that
           the person "place[d] himself outside the  sphere  of  protection
           afforded to  him  under  the  [Polish]  Association  Agreement":
           paragraph 75. Such a breach was considered sufficiently  serious
           to justify the refusal of a right of residence on the  basis  of
           establishment: paragraph 82.

           276.  Accordingly,  it  is  well-established  in  EU  law   that
           fraudulent conduct cannot be used to establish EU law rights. In
           particular, fraud in obtaining a residence permit  "cannot  give
           rise to any rights" on the part of the  party  which  has  acted
           fraudulently: Kol, paragraph 28. A person who has used deception
           on entry "places himself outside the sphere  of  protection"  of
           the EU rules invoked:  Gloszczuk,  paragraph  75.  No  EU  right
           arises.

           277. That principle  applies  in  the  present  case  so  as  to
           disentitle the Mehmood Ahmed family from establishing rights  of
           residence based on Zambrano..."

  245. The exact parameters of the principle of abuse in Community  law  are
       difficult to synthesise from the authorities.

  246. In Kafelas [1998] ECR I-2843, a case involving an action  brought  by
       shareholders for a declaration that the  increase  in  capital  of  a
       public limited company in financial trouble was invalid, in which the
       shareholders were alleged to have improperly used rights derived from
       community law, the court concluded  that  a  person  abuses  a  right
       conferred on him if he exercises it unreasonably to  derive,  to  the
       detriment of others, an improper advantage manifestly contrary to the
       objective by the legislator in conferring that particular right on an
       individual.

  247. The case of Centros Ltd v Erhvervs-  og  Selskabsstyrelsen  (Case  C-
       212/97) [2000] Ch 446 involved a private limited  company  registered
       in the United Kingdom (Centros). The company applied  to  register  a
       branch in Denmark from where it was trading. The national authorities
       refused that application, contending that such registration was a way
       of avoiding national rules on the paying up of minimum share capital.
       The refusal, it was  claimed,  was  justified  in  order  to  protect
       creditors and to try  to  prevent  fraudulent  insolvencies.  Centros
       contended that it was entitled to set up a branch  in  Denmark  under
       the freedom of establishment conferred by the EC Treaty. The question
       was referred to the ECJ for a preliminary ruling.

  248. In coming to its conclusions the court  concluded,  as  a  matter  of
       principle, that the fact that a person (or, on the facts of the case,
       a company) knowingly placed himself [itself]  in  a  situation  which
       causes a right deriving from Community law  to  arise  in  his  [its]
       favour, in  order  to  avoid  the  application  of  certain  national
       legislation unfavourable to him [it], does not constitute, in itself,
       a sufficient basis for the community  provision  relied  upon  to  be
       rendered inapplicable [27].

  249. In a case more familiar to those who work in this jurisdiction,  Chen
       v SSHD [2005] QB 235, the ECJ considered a situation in which  C,  of
       Chinese nationality, entered the United Kingdom from China  when  she
       was six months pregnant, and travelled to Belfast where her daughter,
       Z, was born in 2000. By virtue of a law in the Irish Republic whereby
       any person born in the island of Ireland was at that time entitled to
       Irish nationality, Z acquired such nationality and thereby  became  a
       citizen of the European Union. Having  shortly  thereafter  moved  to
       Cardiff, C applied for a permit for long-term residence in the United
       Kingdom for Z and herself; however this was refused. On  C's  appeal,
       the Immigration Appellate Authority sought a preliminary ruling  from
       the ECJ. In its decision the ECJ, inter alia, said:

           34. The United Kingdom Government contends,  finally,  that  the
           applicants are not entitled to rely on the Community  provisions
           in question because Mrs Chen's move to Northern Ireland with the
           aim of having her  child  acquire  the  nationality  of  another
           member state constitutes an attempt improperly  to  exploit  the
           provisions of Community law. The aims pursued by those Community
           provisions are not, in its view, served where a  national  of  a
           non-member country wishing to reside in a member state,  without
           however moving or wishing to  move  from  one  member  state  to
           another, arranges matters in such a way as to give  birth  to  a
           child in a part of the host member state to which another member
           state applies its rules  governing  acquisition  of  nationality
           jure soli. It is, in their view, settled case  law  that  member
           states are entitled to take measures to prevent individuals from
           improperly taking advantage of provisions of  Community  law  or
           from attempting, under  cover  of  the  rights  created  by  the
           Treaty, illegally to circumvent national legislation. That rule,
           which is in conformity with the principle that rights  must  not
           be abused, was in their view reaffirmed by the Court of  Justice
           in Centros Ltd v Erhvervs- og Selskabsstyrelsen (Case  C-212/97)
           [2000] Ch 446 .

           35. That argument must also be rejected.

           36. It is true that Mrs Chen admits that the purpose of her stay
           in the United Kingdom was to create a  situation  in  which  the
           child she was expecting would be able to acquire the nationality
           of another member state in order thereafter to  secure  for  her
           child and for herself a long term right to reside in the  United
           Kingdom.

           37. Nevertheless, under international law, it is for each member
           state, having due regard to  Community  law,  to  lay  down  the
           conditions for the acquisition and loss of nationality: see,  in
           particular, Micheletti v Delegaci�n del  Gobierno  en  Cantabria
           (Case C-369/90) [1992] ECR I-4239 ,  4262,  para  10,  and  R  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Manjit Kaur
           (Case C-192/99) [2001] ECR I-1237 , 1265, para 19."

  250. During the course of his opinion in Halifax Plc v Customs and  Excise
       Commissioners (Case C-255/02)  [2006]  ECR  I-1609,  Advocate-General
       Maduro sought to draw  together  the  learning  from  the  Luxembourg
       court's decisions on the issue of abuse, his analysis  later  meeting
       with the approval of the Court of Appeal (Dyson and Maurice-Kay  LJJ)
       in Sonmez and Others [2009] EWCA  Civ  582  and  one  which  we  have
       accordingly applied to our deliberations of this issue.

  251. Halifax was a case which concerned transactions entered into for  the
       purpose of gaining a tax advantage in relation to the right to deduct
       input VAT. In paragraph  63  of  his  opinion  the  Advocate  General
       observed that the notion of abuse had been analysed by  the  European
       Court in two main contexts:

           "First, when the Community law provisions are abusively  invoked
           in order to evade  national  law.  Second,  when  Community  law
           provisions are abusively relied upon in order to gain advantages
           in a manner which conflicts with the purposes and aims of  those
           same provisions."

  252. Then, at paragraph 68, the Advocate General  summarises  the  Court's
       position on the notion of abuse in the following way:

           "In essence there is a consistent pattern in the  abovementioned
           case-law on the notion of abuse (not always referred  to  as  an
           abuse of rights) whereby the assessment of the abuse is based on
           whether the right claimed is consonant with the purposes of  the
           rules that formally give rise to  it...The  person  claiming  to
           have the right is barred from invoking it only to the extent  to
           which the Community law provision formally conferring that right
           is relied upon for the achievement of  'an  improper  advantage,
           manifestly contrary to the objective of that provision..."

  253. The case of Kol, relied upon as being of  some  significance  by  the
       Secretary  of  State,  pre-dates  the  establishment  of  the   abuse
       principle in its more developed form, and was decided  on  the  basis
       that the condition required to acquire the claimed right in the first
       place had not been fulfilled (in that case the right being  conferred
       under the Turkish Association Agreement), not the disentitlement of a
       person to rely on a right  as  a  consequence  of  their  abuse  and,
       consequently, we found it to be of little assistance.

  254. Turning now to the facts of the instant appeal. It is  a  matter  for
       individual member states to lay down conditions for  the  acquisition
       and maintenance of citizenship, (Zambrano, at paragraph  20).  It  is
       undisputed that H has  not  engaged  in  any  fraudulent  or  abusive
       conduct. It was by operation of UK  law  that  he  became  a  British
       Citizen, despite the fact that his father obtained  indefinite  leave
       to remain by fraudulent means  and  that  this  indefinite  leave  to
       remain was one of the precedent facts that enabled H  to  obtain  his
       British citizenship. In Community law it is  not  an  abuse  to  take
       advantage of a national law, (Chen).

  255. In such circumstances we must proceed on the basis that H has British
       citizenship and that he has acquired the rights attached thereto  and
       simultaneously acquired the rights attached to his citizenship of the
       European Union, including those conferred by Article 20 TFEU.

  256. Turning to the question of whether H's parents can, prima facie, rely
       upon Zambrano rights derived from H's European citizenship, given the
       fraud perpetrated by Mehmood Ahmed in the obtaining of his indefinite
       leave to remain; we must first consider the purpose of the  principle
       from which the right relied upon is derived. Such purpose  is  clear,
       that is to prevent the deprivation of the substance  of  the  genuine
       enjoyment of  rights  conferred  on  H  by  virtue  of  his  European
       citizenship, including his right to reside within  the  territory  of
       the Union, (Zambrano, paragraph 45).

  257. In our conclusion it is plain that once it has been established  that
       H has acquired, and is entitled to rely upon, EU citizenship  rights,
       reliance by his parents on a Zambrano right derived therefrom is  not
       manifestly contrary to the purpose of the principle from  which  that
       right is derived; indeed quite  the  opposite  is  true.  It  is  H's
       ability to enjoy his right of residence, obtained as a consequence of
       his Union citizenship, which is at the heart of the considerations in
       this aspect of the appeal, and the denial caused to that right by his
       parents' removal. H must be treated as a citizen of the Union, and he
       is entitled  to  rely  upon  all  of  the  rights  attached  to  that
       citizenship, including in this case the rights set out in Article  20
       of the TFEU.

Derogation and the Zambrano right

  258. It is asserted by H's parent's that the rights they derive  from  H's
       Union citizenship are absolute and  non-derogable.  In  summary  they
       submit that:

        i. The decision in Zambrano does not accord with  a  diminution  of
           the protection given to  the  substance  of  the  rights  of  EU
           citizen children, such as that which regulation 21A(3)(a) of the
           2006 EEA Regulations seeks to justify;

       ii. H has a constitutional right of abode in the United  Kingdom  by
           operation of law and a right to move and  reside  freely  within
           the EU;

      iii. The Upper Tribunal was correct in its  approach  in  Sanade  and
           Others (British Children - Zambrano - Dereci [2012]  UKUT  00048
           (IAC) for the reasons it gave;

       iv. The Treaties and the European Communities Act 1972 do not permit
           national measures restricting the exercise of Treaty rights;

        v. In any event, refusing H's parents derivative residence cards is
           not proportionate and neither  can  it  be  justified  as  being
           conducive to the public good or public policy grounds.

  259. The Secretary of State takes a  contrary  position  asserting,  inter
       alia:

        i. The Zambrano derivative right of residence  is  not  autonomous,
           but derives  from  the  child's  citizenship  and  rights  under
           Article 20 TFEU;

       ii. There was no consideration of the impact of the conduct  of  the
           carers of an EU citizen in Zambrano or in any of the cases  that
           have followed it in the CJEU. The Upper Tribunal  have  provided
           divergent views on the issue in Omotunde [2011] UKUT 00247 (IAC)
            and Sanade. The conclusions in Omotunde are correct  and  those
           in Sanade are wrong.

      iii. It was common ground between the parties in  Harrison  that  the
           issue of whether the state can ever justify refusing to grant to
           the non-EU national the right to reside even though  the  effect
           will be to deprive the  EU  citizen  of  his  or  her  right  of
           residence is not acte clair. However because the Zambrano  right
           did not apply, the Court was not required to deal  further  with
           the area of common ground;

       iv.    There is no principle of  international  law  that  a  citizen
           cannot be expelled from their own state in any circumstances and
           even if there were such a principle, it does not apply  to  dual
           nationals;

       v. In the context of considering Article  8(1)  ECHR,  Baroness  Hale
           suggested that there is  no  absolute  prohibition  against  the
           deportation of the foreign parent of a child who is a citizen of
           the deporting state: Naidike - v - Attorney General of  Trinidad
           [2005] 1 AC 538, at [75]. In EU  Law  a  similar  principle  was
           identified by the CJEU in Gloszczuk Case C-63/99).

  260. Whether Zambrano rights are derogable is a matter of Community law.

  261. In Harrison the parties agreed [55(4)] that in circumstances where  a
       person has acquired a Zambrano right the issue of whether a state can
       ever justify refusing to grant to such person a right to reside  even
       though the effect will be to deprive the EU citizen  of  his  or  her
       right of residence is not acte clair.

  262. In this appeal neither party has sought a reference to the CJEU.

  263. There is limited domestic consideration of the  issue  of  whether  a
       Zambrano right is derogable.

  264. In Omotunde the Upper Tribunal (President and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Gleeson) considered an appeal against a deportation decision taken on
       the basis that the  appellant  was  a  foreign  criminal  within  the
       meaning of s.32 of the UK Borders  Act  2007.  The  appellant  had  a
       British national son. His  appeal  was  allowed  on  Article  8  ECHR
       grounds. When coming to its  conclusions  the  tribunal  observed  as
       follows:

           31. We further recognise that Tolu's British nationality is  not
           merely an aspect of what his best interests are,  but  may  also
           afford him a right to reside in his own country in both national
           and European Law see Case C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano where the  Court
           of Justice in its ruling concluded:

                Article 20 TFEU is to be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  it
                precludes a Member  State  from  refusing  a  third  country
                national upon whom his  minor  children,  who  are  European
                Union citizens, are dependent, a right of residence  in  the
                Member State of residence and nationality of those children,
                and from refusing to grant  a  work  permit  to  that  third
                country national, in so far as such decisions deprive  those
                children of the genuine enjoyment of the  substance  of  the
                rights attaching to the status of European  Union  citizen."
                [Emphasis added]

           32. As a result of this decision  national  courts  must  engage
           with the question whether removal of a  particular  parent  will
           'deprive [the child] of the genuine enjoyment of  the  substance
           of  the  rights  attaching  to  the  status  of  European  Union
           citizen'. We conclude that either  requiring  Tolu  to  live  in
           Nigeria or depriving him or his primary  carer  would  undermine
           his rights of residence. The Court of Justice did  not  have  to
           consider how Article 20 would be applied if  there  were  strong
           public interest reasons to  expel  a  non-national  parent.   We
           would conclude (subject to any further guidance from the CJEU or
           the Court of Appeal) that any right of residence for the  parent
           is not an absolute one but  is  subject  to  the  Community  Law
           principle of  proportionality.  We  doubt  whether  there  is  a
           substantial difference between the human rights based assessment
           of proportionality of any interference considered by  Lady  Hale
           in ZH (Tanzania) and the approach required by Community law.

  265. The issue was once again addressed by the Upper  Tribunal  (President
       and Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan) in its decision in Sanade and Others
       (British Children - Zambrano -  Dereci);  this  again  being  a  case
       involving appeals (including from an appellant  later  considered  by
       the Court of Appeal in Harrison) against decisions made under s.32 of
       the 2007 Act, and again each of the appellants had a British  Citizen
       child living in the United Kingdom.

  266. On this occasion the Tribunal engaged more fully with the question of
       whether any of the appellants  had  acquired  a  Zambrano  right  and
       concluded that they had not; as a consequence of the fact that in all
       of the appeals before it deportation of the appellant would not  have
       led to the deprivation  of  the  genuine  substance  of  the  British
       Citizen child's EU rights, each being able to remain living in the UK
       with their respective mothers.

  267. During the course of its discussion of this issue the  Tribunal  said
       as follows:

           80. ...If exceptions exist  in  EU  law,  it  is  illogical  and
           inconsistent  with  principle  for  those  restrictions  to   be
           determined nationally. The respondent's submission seems  to  us
           inconsistent with virtually everything the Court of Justice  has
           had about the need for an EU interpretation of Treaty rights.

           81. We  note  that  in  cases  of  rights  afforded  to  Turkish
           Nationals under the Ankara Agreement,  the  European  Court  has
           required that public policy derogation be  strictly  interpreted
           and precluded purely deterrent measures that might otherwise  be
           available in national law. Thus in C-340/97 Nazli [2000] ECR  I-
           957 at [59] the Court said:

                The Court has thus concluded that  Community  law  precludes
                the expulsion of a national of a  Member  State  on  general
                preventive grounds, that is to say an expulsion ordered  for
                the purpose of deterring other aliens (see,  in  particular,
                Case 67/74 Bonsignore v Stadt K�ln [1975] ECR 297, paragraph
                7), especially where that measure has automatically followed
                a criminal conviction, without any account  being  taken  of
                the personal conduct of the offender or of the danger  which
                that conduct  represents  for  the  requirements  of  public
                policy (Calfa, cited above, paragraph 27).

           82. It is inconceivable that lesser  standards  would  apply  to
           derogations from Treaty rights  afforded  to  European  Citizens
           themselves. In practice we  would  anticipate  that  Article  27
           Citizens Directive would have to apply. It states:

                Measures  taken  on  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
                security shall comply with the principle of  proportionality
                and shall be based exclusively on the  personal  conduct  of
                the  individual  concerned.  Previous  criminal  convictions
                shall not in themselves constitute grounds for  taking  such
                measures. The personal conduct of the  individual  concerned
                must represent a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
                threat affecting one of the fundamental interest of society.
                Justifications that are isolated from the  particular  facts
                of the case  or  that  rely  on  considerations  of  general
                prevention shall not be accepted.

           83. If the residence right is only afforded to  the  non-citizen
           parent where otherwise the child would be forced  to  leave  the
           European Union, it seems difficult to justify  that  consequence
           by reason of the criminal wrongdoing of the parent.  It  is  one
           thing to justify the exclusion of an EU national from  one  part
           of the Union requiring him or her to return to  their  state  of
           nationality, and quite another to require that person  to  leave
           the Union altogether. It seems to us that the Court  of  Justice
           was applying the principle of international law that  a  citizen
           cannot be expelled from their own state in any circumstances, to
           citizenship of the European Union and concluding that a  measure
           that required an EU citizen to leave the Union would be contrary
           to EU law.

           84. In Zambrano, there was no suggestion that  the  children  as
           Belgian citizens, could be expelled from Belgium. Nor, as  Union
           citizens, could they be expelled from the Union as a whole  and,
           had there been a decision made by  the  Belgian  authorities  to
           that effect, it would have been  justiciable  by  the  Court  of
           Justice.  But the Court went further:  the  expulsion  of  their
           Colombian parents (not citizens of the Union)  amounted  to  the
           children's constructive expulsion from the Union. The Court  was
           not therefore directly applying Article 20 but  granting  rights
           to non-Union citizens necessary to give effect to the rights  of
           Union citizens. However, if the collateral  right  of  residence
           afforded to the parents is a narrow one  and  limited  to  cases
           where it is necessary to enable the child to enjoy  his  or  her
           rights, it may very well be  that  there  is  no  room  for  any
           derogation at all,  and  our  assumptions  to  the  contrary  in
           Omutunde at paragraph 32... should not be regarded as  sound  in
           the absence of a decision of the Court of Justice on  the  point
           in a case that raised the issue." [Emphasis added]

  268. As identified above, in Harrison it was agreed  between  the  parties
       that the issue was not acte clair. As it turned out the issue was not
       live before the Court because it found the Zambrano right not  to  be
       engaged. Nevertheless, at paragraph 67  of  his  judgement  Elias  LJ
       (with whom Pitchford and Ward LJJ agreed) said, [emphasis added]:

           "... [T]he right of residence is the  right  to  reside  in  the
           territory of the EU. It is not a right to any particular quality
           or  [sic]  life  or  to  any  particular  standard  of   living.
           Accordingly, there is no impediment to the exercising the  right
           to  reside  if  residence  remains  possible  as  a  matter   of
           substance, albeit that the quality of  life  is  diminished.  Of
           course, to the extent that the quality or standard of life  will
           be seriously impaired by excluding the non- EU national, that is
           likely in practice to infringe the  right  of  residence  itself
           because it would effectively compel the EU citizen  to  give  up
           residence and travel with the non-EU national.  But  in  such  a
           case the Zambrano doctrine would  apply  and  the  EU  citizen's
           rights would have to be protected (save for the possibility of a
           proportionate  deprivation  of  rights).  Accordingly,  to  that
           extent the focus is on protecting the substance  of  the  right,
           that formulation of the principle  already  provides  protection
           from certain interferences with the enjoyment of the right."

  269. There is no  further  domestic  consideration  of  this  issue.  Such
       domestic consideration as there has been is  obiter,  and  the  Upper
       Tribunal has come to differing views in the two cases in which it has
       considered the issue, albeit the former President was sitting in both
       constitutions of the Tribunal.

  270. Despite Mr Blundell's oral submissions to the contrary, we find  that
       the CJEU in Zambrano did not itself consider the question of  whether
       the rights derived  by  the  Zambrano  parents  were  derogable.  His
       attempt to persuade us otherwise in reliance on paragraph 45  of  the
       judgment is unarguable. The use in that paragraph of the  phrase  'in
       so far as such  decisions  deprive  those  children  of  the  genuine
       enjoyment of the substance of the rights' is not a  recognition  that
       such rights are derogable.  It is a recognition that any action by  a
       Member State which has  a  consequence  short  of  depriving  the  EU
       citizen child of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of his/her EU
       rights is not precluded by Articles 20 or 21 TFEU.

  271. Neither do we accept the appellants' submission that  the  fact  that
       the Court did not consider the issue for itself provides support  for
       the contention that the derived rights of the Zambrano  parents  were
       considered to be absolute. The Court set out the  questions  referred
       to it for preliminary ruling in the following terms [36]:

           "By  its  questions,  which  it  is  appropriate  to  considered
           together, the referring Court  asks,  essentially,  whether  the
           provisions of the Treaty on  the  Functioning  of  the  European
           Union on European Union citizenship are  to  be  interpreted  as
           meaning that they conferred on a relative in the ascending  line
           who is a third country national, on whom his minor children, who
           are European citizens, are dependent, a right  of  residence  in
           the member state of which they are nationals and in  which  they
           reside, and also exempt him from having to obtain a work  permit
           in that member state."

  272. It is readily identifiable from the above citation that the Court was
       only asked to consider whether a right was conferred on the  Zambrano
       parents, not whether such right was absolute. The fact that the Court
       did not therefore consider the latter  issue,  even  though  Advocate
       General Sharpston did in her opinion, cannot possibly  be  indicative
       of it having taken a particular view.

  273.  The  Advocate  General's  opinion  in  Zambrano  [2012]  QB  265  is
       extensive. In paragraphs 104 and 108 of her opinion she  first  asks,
       and then answers, the question: Can the  interference  be  justified?
       Concluding:

           "108. In my view, therefore,  the  potential  interference  with
           European Union citizenship rights that arise  if  the  ascendant
           family member does not enjoy an automatic  derivative  right  of
           residence  in  the  European  Union  citizens  member  state  of
           nationality is acceptable in principle. However, it may not be a
           permissible   interference   in   certain   circumstances    (in
           particular, because it may not be proportionate)."

  274. Immediately thereafter [109 to 122] the Advocate General goes  on  to
       consider the issue of whether interference would  be  permissible  in
       the context of the facts of that case. When doing so  she  states  at
       [100]:

           "Here, as so often, the situation is one that involves  exercise
           of a right and a potential justification  for  interfering  with
           (or derogating from) that right; and the question comes down  to
           one  of   proportionality.   Is   it   proportionate,   in   the
           circumstances of this case, to refuse to recognise  a  right  of
           residence for Mr Ruiz  Zambrano,  derived  from  his  children's
           rights  as  European  Union  citizens?  ...  the   decision   on
           proportionality is  (as  usual)  ultimately  a  matter  for  the
           national court..."

  275. No further assistance can be drawn  on  this  issue  from  subsequent
       cases in which the CJEU has considered the Zambrano principle.

  276. As  we  have  identified  above,  the  parties  have  adopted  wholly
       divergent positions on this issue. We remind ourselves that  this  is
       exclusively a question of Community law. We consider that the correct
       answer is not definitively provided by the Treaty, or the  subsequent
       CJEU, or domestic, jurisprudence.

  277. Article 267 TFEU provides:

           "The  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  shall   have
           jurisdiction to give preliminary rulings concerning:

                 a)  the interpretation of the Treaties....

                    Where such a question is  raised  before  any  Court  or
                    Tribunal of a Member State, that Court or Tribunal  may,
                    if it considers that  a  decision  on  the  question  is
                    necessary to enable it to  give  judgment,  request  the
                    Court of Justice to give a ruling thereon."

  278. We have awaited the promulgation of this determination to  await  the
       outcome of the Tribunal's decision in CS v Secretary of State for the
       Home Department (DA/00416/2013), on which  one  of  our  members  sat
       (President and Upper Tribunal Judge  O'Connor).   We  note  that  the
       Tribunal has now made a reference to the CJEU on this  issue.   On  6
       June  2014,  the  Court  registered  the  reference  as   (C-304/14).
       However, we do not consider, for the reasons we set out  below,  that
       the decision on this issue before the Court of Justice  is  necessary
       to enable us to determine this appeal.

Qadir Ahmed and Nasreen Bi's family

  279. Qadir Ahmed's family came to the United  Kingdom  in  2001,  some  12
       years ago.  In his latest statement of  7  March  2013,  Qadir  Ahmed
       confirmed as true his earlier statement as to  the  circumstances  in
       which he came to the United Kingdom.

  280. As a result of the fact that he and his wife made separate claims  in
       which different children  were  cited  as  dependents,  the  family's
       claims resulted in different decisions, one successful and the  other
       not. No criticism can be made of the respondent for that. The effect,
       however, was that the eldest, Toukeer, born on August  1988,  now  25
       years old, as a dependent on his mother's claim was not  given  leave
       to remain. In contrast, however, Tousif, a dependant on his  father's
       claim, born 10 February 1990, now aged 23, was granted refugee status
       and was, accordingly, provided with the benefits associated with  the
       right to remain. Indeed, we were provided  with  a  letter  dated  30
       August 2013, in the form of an invitation to  Tousif  to  attend  his
       Citizenship Ceremony on 26 September  2013  to  mark  his  successful
       application  for  British  Citizenship.  Nothing,  therefore,   could
       contrast the outcome better than this.  As a result of the outcome of
       the appeal in Ahmad and others, his position  is  secure.  His  elder
       brother's is not.

  281. The effect of this can easily be imagined.  Tousif has been  at  UCK,
       the London College, since 2011 studying business  and  working  part-
       time. This course will by now  have  finished.  He  has  successfully
       completed the course work. He would like to continue his  studies  at
       Royal Holloway. He  has  developed  in  confidence  and  is  able  to
       contribute to the family's finances. In  contrast  Toukeer,  although
       older than Tousif, is not able to continue in education or to  obtain
       work. This, inevitably, has affected his confidence and his domestic,
       social and career prospects.

  282. In his statement, Toukeer speaks of the fact that he has grown up  in
       Oxford, has friends there who visit  each  others'  homes.  He  plays
       cricket. Although he would have liked to study mechanics, he was  not
       able to do so because of his lack of immigration status.  Unlike  his
       brother, Tousif, he cannot drive.

  283. Their daughter Sulva finished at Oxford Spires Academy  in  2012  and
       has not been able to find work. She was born on 20 April 1994 and was
       a minor at the date of the decision in May  2009.  Consequently,  the
       removal directions made against her (or her younger sister) were  not
       affected by  the  decision  in  Ahmad  and  others.   However,  as  a
       dependent on her father's claim, she was granted refugee  status  and
       leave to remain. Her mother tells us that she has started helping  at
       East Oxford Primary School doing unpaid  work  and  has  difficulties
       with her memory. She lacks confidence.

  284. Sulva's younger sister, Salma, was born on 10 December 1998. She is a
       minor. She was 2� years old on arrival and is now aged  14.  Because,
       serendipitously, she was a dependant  on  her  mother's  unsuccessful
       claim for asylum, she has never been given leave. However, it appears
       that she is doing well at school. She is studying for her  GCSEs  and
       would wish to continue in her education.  Unlike  her  elder  sister,
       Sulva (who was given leave), Salma is unable  to  advance  the  claim
       that her sister advanced that removal under s.10(1)(c)  was  unlawful
       because that submission is dependent upon the applicant having  leave
       to remain. However, for the reasons we have given, Sulva is not  able
       to benefit from the decision in Ahmad and  others  and  consequently,
       that distinction does not arise.

  285. Each member of the family expresses a strong wish not  to  leave  the
       United Kingdom.

  286. Sulva and Salma claim the benefit of paragraph 276 ADE (iv) or (v).

Ghulam Rabani and Noreen Shakila's family

  287. Ghulam Rabani's family arrived in the United Kingdom in  2000.  Three
       of his children, Mohammed  Atif,   Mobushara  and  Furah  Begum  were
       dependents on their mother's successful  claim  for  refugee  status.
       Accordingly, they were granted leave to remain. Mohammed Atif was  14
       years old on entry and 23 years old at the date when the decision was
       made to issue a removal notice in May 2009. His sister Mobushara  was
       11 years old on entry and 20 at the date of  decision.   Furah  Begum
       was 10 years old on arrival and 19 at the date of decision. They  are
       now aged 27, 24 and 23 respectively.  Each of them benefited from the
       decision in Ahmad and others.  We are told that  they  are  obtaining
       advice on applying to become British citizens.

  288. Their three siblings were joined  as  dependents  of  their  father's
       unsuccessful claim and were not, therefore, granted leave to  remain.
       Had Nusrat Bi been joined to her mother's claim, she, too, would have
       been granted leave to remain. She was born on 2 January 1987 and  was
       13 years old at the date of entry. She is, in fact, the second oldest
       of Ghulam Rabani's six children. She was 21 at the date  of  decision
       and is now aged 26.

  289. The remaining two children Mohammed Rustam and Zahra Bi were  aged  8
       and 7 respectively on  arrival  in  United  Kingdom  and  16  and  15
       respectively at the date of decision. They are now aged 21 and 19.

  290. Once again, there is a sharp contrast between those  associated  with
       their mother's successful, though unjustified, asylum claim and those
       associated with their father's unsuccessful claim.  Mohammed Atif and
       Mobushara are working, as they are allowed to do, and help to support
       the family.  Mobushara works as the Duty Manager in the Co-op  hoping
       to progress to assistant manager. She also works for TK Maxx.  It  is
       apparent that Mobushara is a competent  and  independent  woman.  She
       compares this with the situation that would have been the  case  were
       she to be in Pakistan.

  291. Furah Begum, a beneficiary  of  Ahmad  and  others,  suffers  from  a
       disability and has the assistance of a support worker.   Her  sister,
       Mobushara, describes how  Furah  can  now  dress  and  bath  herself.
       Furah's family have taught her how to use the  bus  and  to  pay  for
       things. Mobushara spoke of the  support  that  was  provided  by  the
       Children's Society.

  292. All of the children continue to live with their  parents  in  Oxford.
       Of the three  children  who  are,  accordingly,  subject  to  removal
       decisions, Rustam was unable to continue  with  his  college  studies
       because as a student aged 21 without settled status, he was  required
       to pay fees which the family could not afford. He obtained some GCSEs
       and wanted to study engineering.  He has no permission to work.   His
       recent statement seethes with anger  and  resentment.   There  was  a
       statement produced by Alex Barratt of the Harbour Project on 28  June
       2007 which spoke of Rustam's  unsettled  school  life,  expressed  in
       inappropriate classroom behaviour  and  lack  of  concentration.  His
       mother tells us that he plays football and cricket and goes out  with
       his friends. Both Nusrut  and  Rustam  are  bored  because  they  can
       neither work nor study.

  293. Zahra, who works with children, goes to college for two or three days
       a week and works, as part of her course, for a further two days.  She
       is studying child care NVQ level 3 at Oxford Cherwell Valley  College
       in a 2-year course which would qualify her  to  teach  in  a  primary
       school or as a nursery teacher.  She has  progressed  well  from  the
       days when Alex Barratt was counselling her when  her  father  was  in
       prison.

  294. In a statement he made in July 2007, [Bundle 2, Tab C, p.275  @  279]
       Ghulam Rabani conceded  the  responsibility  he  felt  for  what  has
       happened:

           "I would, however, add that it was myself who directed  that  my
           children had to go along with the pretence that we were  single-
           parent families and about our journey to England. They would not
           question this and simply went along with it. Nevertheless all of
           this has caused a great deal of harm and distress to them.  Some
           of them are understandably upset and indeed angry at what myself
           and my wife have done. At the  time  it  was  done  without  any
           explanation to them. They were simply expected to go along  with
           what I was telling them. Whatever problems have been  caused,  I
           must take responsibility for that. But I have  tried  to  stress
           upon them that I did it with their interest in mind and not  for
           any other reason."

  295. In the same statement he accepted that none of his children had  been
       provided with the opportunity of any education before they arrived in
       the United Kingdom. Since then, doubtless with some pride, he  speaks
       of them all having done 'remarkably well'.

  296. Rustam and Zahra claim the benefit of paragraph 277 ADE (iv) or (v).

Rungzaib Mohamed and Jamila Kauser's family

  297. Rungzaib Mohamed and his wife Jamila Kauser and  their  six  children
       arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 August 2000, some  13  years  ago.
       Once again, three of the children were named as dependants  on  their
       father's claim and it was this  claim  that  proved  successful.  The
       remaining  three  were  placed  as  dependants  on   their   mother's
       unsuccessful  claim.  The  father's   dependants   were   recognised,
       unjustifiably, as refugees and granted leave to remain  whilst  their
       mother's dependants were not.

  298. The result has been that the eldest child, Kamran who was born  on  3
       October 1985 and was 15 at the date of entry and 23 at  the  date  of
       decision was not entitled to benefit from the decision in  Ahmad  and
       others because he entered as a dependent of his mother's unsuccessful
       claim and did not have leave to  remain.  By  contrast,  his  younger
       brother, Jehan Mohammed born on 3 January 1988, was the recipient  of
       leave to remain on the basis of his father's claim.. Accordingly,  he
       was one of the successful appellants in Ahmad and others. He was aged
       12 on entry and 21 at the date of decision and is now  aged  25.  His
       younger sister, Ishrut Tonzeela Begum, born 12 January 1990, aged  10
       on entry and 19 at the date of decision in May 2009 and now  aged  23
       was also a beneficiary of the decision in Ahmad and others.

  299. Idris Mohammed was born on 10 February 1993, was aged 7 on entry  but
       remained a minor (aged 16)  at  the  date  of  decision.  Although  a
       dependant on his father's successful claim, the removal decision made
       against him in May 2009 was a lawful one since he was then under  18.
       Thus, although the subject of a grant of leave to remain, he did  not
       benefit from the decision in Ahmad and others.  Although his  counsel
       sought to argue that he benefited from the operation of s.  10(1)(c),
       we have rejected that submission.

  300. Mohammed Alam ("Alam") was born on 6 January 1992. He was aged  8  on
       arrival in the United Kingdom in August  2000;  17  at  the  date  of
       decision. He is now 21.

  301. His younger sister, Hina Bi, was born on the 20 May 1997 was  aged  3
       on arrival and remains a minor, aged 16. Neither she  nor  Alam  have
       been granted leave to remain.

  302. Rungzaib Mohamed describes how there is much in  the  United  Kingdom
       that he would miss, were he required to leave.  He  describes  it  as
       peaceful:

           "There is no violence and you do not  need  to  be  afraid  that
           someone will break into your house.  There  is  good  healthcare
           here, and the children's education is very good. In this country
           they value people, and the people here are good.  I  would  miss
           that. In this  country  I  can  work  hard  and  look  after  my
           children."

  303. Doubtless that is a sentiment  which  is  shared  by  all  the  other
       parents. The family speak a mixture of  Punjabi,  Urdu  and  English.
       Rungzaib regularly attends the mosque.

  304. Kamran, Rungzaib Mohamed and Jamila's eldest child,  attended  Oxford
       Community School between 2000 and 2005 obtaining  GCSEs  in  English,
       Maths, Double  Science  and  Urdu.  He  continued  his  education  at
       Blackbird Leys College but was unable to  continue  because,  without
       settled status, he was required to pay fees that the family could not
       afford. Like some others, he is not permitted to study or work as  he
       has no immigration status. He plays cricket and has attended a course
       on cricket coaching.

  305. His younger brother and sister, Jehan and  Ishrut,  both  work.  Both
       support the family financially. Jehan is a driver for Royal  Cars  as
       well as working in the company's office, and is an accredited  driver
       on school runs. According to a statement Ishrut made on  7  May  2013
       [Bundle 3, Tab A, p.16] she continues to work for TK Maxx  part-time.
       In paragraph 10 [p.18] she said:

           "I know that I have won my appeal. I want to stay in the  UK  as
           this is my home, and where I see my future. I do not want to  go
           to Pakistan. I hear that women are not given much freedom there,
           and that they are treated badly. I also  cannot  think  what  it
           would be like for some of our family  to  have  to  go  back  to
           Pakistan when others are allowed to stay in the UK.  That  would
           be horrid. We are a family."

  306. Pausing here, it was submitted that we should infer from this passage
       that Ishrut would return to Pakistan were other members of her family
       to be removed.  However, Ishrut did not give evidence and the  stance
       adopted by her, set out above, is equivocal.  In  any  event,  Ishrut
       could not have been aware of the outcome of  these  appeals  and,  in
       particular, the position adopted by the Secretary  of  State  in  the
       course of the hearing in relation to Alam. As she is not  subject  to
       removal and may well be granted leave to remain or,  indeed,  British
       Citizenship, we are not prepared to speculate  on  what  she  or  her
       brother, Jehan, will do.  Jehan is in a similar position  to  Ishrut,
       having benefited from the decision in Ahmad and others  and  standing
       in line to receive settled status.

  307. Idris studied at Oxford Spires Academy until 2010  sitting  GCSEs  in
       six subjects and a BTEC in Business Level II. Since finishing school,
       he has had a variety  of  temporary  jobs  for  Domino's  pizzas  and
       Chicken Hut. He had hoped to study  carpentry  at  college  and  then
       complete an apprenticeship but was unable to afford the fees.

  308. Idris, Alam and Hina claim the benefit of paragraph 277 ADE  (iv)  or
       (v).

  309. Alam is currently seriously ill. In a report dated 26 November  2009,
       Dr Andrew Clark of the Greater Manchester West NHS  Foundation  Trust
       provided an opinion about Alam who was then detained under ss.48  and
       49 of the Mental Health Act 1983. These provisions  permit  a  person
       who has been remanded in custody or detained  under  the  Immigration
       Act 1971 and who is suffering from a mental  disorder  requiring  his
       detention  in  a  hospital  for  urgent  medical  treatment,  to   be
       transferred to  hospital  and  made  the  subject  of  a  restriction
       direction preventing him from leaving. He was at that  time  detained
       in a medium secure forensic adolescent  mental  health  unit,  having
       been remanded in custody on  charges  of  criminal  damage,  assault,
       robbery and wounding. He was treated with  anti-psychotic  medication
       but did not accept he was suffering from any mental disorder or  that
       he should be in hospital or receiving medication.  He  was  initially
       admitted on 8 September 2009 in an aggressive paranoid state accusing
       others of reading his mind.  He was showing hostility towards  staff.
       His original condition was sufficiently serious to require the  first
       10 days of his admission in isolation. He was then 17 years  old.  He
       has remained in a secure hospital accommodation  for  the  last  four
       years.

  310. Doctor Clark considered that Alam  presented  as  suffering  from  an
       emerging psychotic illness. The  natural  outcome  of  any  psychotic
       episode was difficult to predict, suggesting that in the majority  of
       cases it presages an enduring or relapsing and remitting illness such
       as schizophrenia. He was fit to plead. There is a further,  and  much
       lengthier, report of 19 March 2010 at which time  Alam  was  awaiting
       sentence at Oxford Crown Court on 26  March  2010.  He  was  then  an
       inpatient at an adolescent forensic inpatient unit in Southampton. In
       his report, Dr Oliver White spoke of Alam  suffering  from  paranoia,
       delusions and auditory hallucinations which,  whilst  improved,  were
       replaced by various negative symptoms including poor insight into his
       illness and its treatment.

  311. His psychotic illness appears to have been precipitated by  extensive
       cannabis smoking as well as the use of cocaine but his illness  could
       not be attributed  solely  to  drug-induced  psychosis.  He  met  the
       criteria for a diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia from which he  was
       apparently suffering at the time of the index offences. It  was  then
       difficult to predict the outcome. 20% of patients  fully  recover.  A
       further 40% will  regain  full  functionality  although  experiencing
       episodes of relapse in future. The remaining 40% will not attain full
       recovery and have long-term, ongoing symptoms.  There  were  positive
       prognostic factors in Alam's case but these were  overshadowed  by  a
       number of negative prognostic factors including the fact that  he  is
       male, was of a very young age at the onset of his illness,  had  only
       partially responded to medication and had developed negative symptoms
       relating to his poor insight into both illness and treatment. A s. 41
       restriction order was recommended.

  312. More recently, Dr Suzanne Coghlan prepared a report on 27 March  2013
       in which she concluded Alam had an established diagnosis of  paranoid
       schizophrenia. Dr Coghlan  is  a  specialist  registrar  in  forensic
       psychiatry.  Although, by then, some 3� years had elapsed  since  the
       August 2009 offences, he was still detained but making good progress.
       She was concerned about a potential adverse effect  upon  his  mental
       health if returned to Pakistan. Having reviewed the medical evidence,
       it  was  her  view  that  Alam   required   ongoing   treatment   and
       rehabilitation both  as  an  inpatient  and  as  an  outpatient.  The
       prognosis envisaged many months of  escorted  leave  (permission  for
       which was then being sought) which, if successful, would progress  to
       conditions of low security. Were he  to  be  discharged,  a  suitable
       placement in the community would need  to  be  identified,  requiring
       intensive input from a community forensic mental health team. Ongoing
       antipsychotic medication, random drug testing and the  imposition  of
       conditions for his release would be  required.  She  considered  that
       there were numerous negative prognostic factors, one of which appears
       to be his reluctance to take psychotropic medication voluntarily.

  313. In a report dated 11 April 2013, Kate Helsby, a Senior Social  Worker
       at Littlemore Mental Health Centre provided information  about  Alam.
       He had been able to make some escorted visits  to  the  family  home.
       Although his family would  like  to  live  with  them,  Alam  remains
       ambivalent about this and, we suspect, particularly in  view  of  his
       mother's conduct. The next step would be a move  to  Lambourn  House,
       Littlemore, an open pre-discharge unit  where  patients  become  more
       independent in preparation for leaving hospital. A discharge back  to
       his family would require an application to a Mental  Health  Tribunal
       or the Ministry of Justice, probably on the basis  of  a  conditional
       discharge with conditions of residence and treatment. Members of  the
       forensic community mental health team  would  be  involved  including
       weekly visits from a social worker and outpatient  appointments  with
       reporting to the Ministry of Justice.  Alam  has  most  contact  with
       Ishrut and Jehan whom we know both have leave to remain. She stated:

           "In this complex situation that Mr Mohammed  finds  himself  in,
           his older siblings have become his main family support and  link
           between him and his  parents.  If  separated  from  any  of  his
           siblings, particularly the older ones, in my view,  Mr  Mohammed
           would struggle emotionally... He needs to remain in hospital for
           a longer period to ensure that his mental health stabilises  and
           he  can  be  tested  in  the  community  without  escorts.  Once
           discharged, he will  be  closely  supervised  and  monitored  to
           manage any risk he might present and with the aim of  supporting
           him to remain mentally well. Without this  support  and  without
           adequate treatment, in my view, Mr Mohammed would be at risk  of
           relapse and possible further offending and  would  then  require
           further treatment in hospital...To remain here  would  give  him
           the best chance of good mental health and opportunities for  the
           future."

  314. In a further report dated 29 April  2013,  Kate  Helsby,  the  Senior
       Social Worker involved in Alam's care also provided information about
       Jamila.  Ms Helsby first met Jamila in December 2009. At the  meeting
       she presented herself as very distressed, refusing to accept that her
       son had a mental disorder or that he had committed any  offences.  It
       was not possible to 'move her on' from this. On the  second  meeting,
       following Alam's admission to the Oxford Clinic, she behaved in  much
       the same way. Her visits to Alam have  been  very  emotional.  Having
       reviewed the earlier medical evidence in relation to her, it  appears
       that her present mental state was precipitated by Alam's admission to
       hospital. She refused to take medication. Her son, Kamran,  explained
       that she was reluctant to attend medical appointments and was subject
       to patterns of bizarre behaviour, tearing up documents and  shouting.
       This behaviour occurs both inside and outside the house.

  315. In the course of 2012, concern for her mental health  increased.  Her
       behaviour included making inappropriate efforts to see her son, Alam,
       in hospital and, when refused, becoming agitated  and  distressed  to
       the extent that consideration was given to calling  the  police.  The
       family were -  and  remain  -  reluctant  to  involve  mental  health
       professionals in making any assessment under the  Mental  Health  Act
       fearing  that  she  might  be  involuntarily  admitted  to  hospital.
       Attempts  to  liaise  with  Kamran  proved  unsuccessful.  Ms  Helsby
       concluded:

           "In summary, it seems likely that  Jamila  Kauser  is  suffering
           from some sort of mental disorder but  it  is  not  possible  to
           fully assess her. There is evidence of  emotional  distress  and
           some disturbed thinking but insufficient evidence to  suggest  a
           formal mental illness."

Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan's family

  316. The single most significant factor  about  Mehmood  Ahmed  and  Fazal
       Jan's family is that, alone amongst the other  children  involved  in
       these appeals, their son H was born in the United Kingdom at  a  time
       when his father had succeeded in obtaining recognition as  a  refugee
       and, on the strength of this, obtained settled status.  He  was  born
       in the United Kingdom on 24 April 2004 and  has  remained  here  ever
       since. He is now aged 9�.  Accordingly, H became, by the operation of
       s. 1(1)(b) of the British Nationality Act 1981,  a  British  citizen.
       On the strength of this, and applying Zambrano principles, the entire
       family, including the parents, assert that their removal is  unlawful
       because its effect would be to deprive  H  of  the  benefits  of  his
       British nationality.

  317. This factor apart, Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan's family exhibit  some
       of the same divisions that we  have  seen  elsewhere.   None  of  the
       children, however, were capable of benefitting from the  decision  in
       Ahmad and others because all of their children  were  minors  at  the
       date of decision in April 2009. It was Mehmood Ahmed's  asylum  claim
       that was successful,  whilst  Fazal  Jan's  was  not.   Hence,  Wasim
       Mohammed, being a dependant on her claim, failed to obtain  leave  to
       remain.   In  contrast,  Arfan  as  a  dependant  to   his   father's
       successful, though unjustified, claim was not.  This is the  paradigm
       example: Wasim and Arfan are twins. Both were born on 12  April  1993
       and are now aged 20.  It was the appellants' case that, because Arfan
       had been granted leave to remain, he was  entitled  to  benefit  from
       their submissions as to the effect of  s.  10(1)(c).   It  was  never
       suggested that Wasim could similarly benefit.   For  the  reasons  we
       have  given,  we  do  not  consider  that  such  a   distinction   is
       permissible, far less that it would be desirable.

  318. Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan have 5 children.  Between the twins and H
       are Atteqa Safdar and Adeel Ahmed,  both  minors.  It  is  said  that
       Atteqa Safdar was adopted by Fazal Jan's brother, Safdar, who brought
       her into the United Kingdom in 2000 as a  dependent  to  her  uncle's
       claim. She was granted indefinite leave to remain in or about 2001 in
       line with the claim of her  uncle  which  grant  was  invalidated  by
       service of a removal direction on 29 April 2009.  Atteqa  Safdar  was
       aged 4 on entry into the United Kingdom and was 12 at the date of the
       decision in April 2009. She is now aged 17.

  319. Her younger brother, Adeel Ahmed, was born on 25  June  1997.  It  is
       also said that he was adopted but, in his case, by Mohammed Zafar. He
       too was granted leave to remain (ELR) until 30 January  2005  as  his
       dependant. He has no continuing leave. He was aged 3 on entry and was
       aged 11 at the date of decision to remove him on 29 April  2009.   He
       is now aged 16.

  320. All of the  children  of  Mehmood  Ahmed  and  Fazal  Jan  rely  upon
       paragraph 276ADE,  save  for  H  who,  as  a  British/European  Union
       citizen, relies upon his nationality to prevent removal.

  321. Arfan was not able to benefit from the decision in Ahmad and  others.
       He was not entitled to funding as a  settled  migrant  and  was  not,
       therefore, entitled to  continue  his  education  at  Oxford  Brookes
       University. His father considers this to be unfair.  Arfan  completed
       his A-levels in 2012 very successfully, obtaining two 'A' grades  for
       Business Studies and a 'C' grade  for  Information  Technology.   His
       immigration  status  prevented  him  from  obtaining   funding   and,
       unsurprisingly, he is frustrated.

  322. Atteqa has both hearing and learning difficulties. She  has  finished
       her schooling and has not gone on to further education.  Her  brother
       describes her as being behind in her development  compared  to  other
       children of her age.

  323. Adeel is studying for his GCSEs. According to his statement, he plans
       to go into the sixth form and study either business or economics  and
       then to go on to college. He would like to be  involved  in  cars  or
       motor engineering and understands that apprenticeships are  available
       in this area.

  324. None in the family is permitted to work and,  apart  from  occasional
       casual work carried out by Mehmood Ahmed, the family are dependent on
       benefits.

  325. Wasim has been most affected. After finishing school he chose a  very
       occasional course in carpentry at Kidlington Ace College  in  Oxford.
       He completed the first half of the two-year course in the  summer  of
       2012 but gave it up suffering from depression. He went to his GP  who
       prescribed medication. He continues in the hope that he can  commence
       a different course, this time in plumbing.

The evidence of the professional witnesses

  326. None of the appellants gave oral  evidence.  The  oral  evidence  was
       provided only by professional witnesses.

Diane Jackson's evidence

  327. Diane Jackson, an independent social worker, provided a report  dated
       8 May 2013, [Bundle 6, Tab D, p. 56].  She conducted interviews  with
       members of each  of  the  four  families.  The  interviews  were  not
       designed to be an in-depth interview  with  each  individual.  Rather
       they were interviews with the whole  families,  albeit  some  of  the
       discussion took place without all  members  being  present.  She  was
       attempting to understand the effects on  family  members  and  family
       life of the differential  restrictions  arising  from  the  differing
       immigration  status  of  the  individuals  concerned.  She  was  also
       concerned about the children's integration into  the  community.  She
       focused upon the children, both minor and adult.

Rungzaib Mohamed and Jamila Kauser's family

  328. Diane Jackson described the bizarre behaviour of Jamila Kauser in her
       report. At paragraph  4.15,  she  described  how  the  interview  was
       disrupted by her behaviour and Jamila's repeated actions  in  pushing
       small pieces of paper at her with her son's name,  Alam,  written  on
       them and declaring that he was a good son. She kept repeating  things
       over and  over  again.  The  family  obviously  found  her  behaviour
       embarrassing and distressing but, as Kamran said, "We  have  to  live
       with it." He also told Diane Jackson of his mother's fixation on Alam
       coming home. Although Jamila keeps house, she no longer prepares food
       for  guests,  apparently  because  she  blames  everyone  for  Alam's
       absence. Although the family had tried to encourage Jamila to  see  a
       doctor, she had refused to visit her general practitioner and when  a
       psychiatrist and social worker visited with  a  view  to  her  formal
       admission to a psychiatric hospital, she refused to communicate  with
       them. All members of the family appear to think that she would become
       well once again were Alam to return home.

  329. According to Diane Jackson, all of the family go  to  visit  Alam  in
       hospital. Rungzaib Mohamed visited his son some three  months  before
       her report of May 2013 but he speaks to him on the telephone and  was
       pleased that Alam had had two escorted visits home. It is Kamran  who
       takes responsibility  for  attending  the  regular  meetings  at  the
       hospital regarding Alam's progress.  Ms Jackson said:

           4.22 [68] "I formed the opinion that the family did not  have  a
           clear understanding of mental illness and live in hope that Alam
           and his mother would simply recover if he were released."

  330. It is apparent that Diane Jackson says nothing to  associate  herself
       with that opinion. In her oral evidence she described this  as  "hope
       over experience".

  331. Jamila was outside the house of Ghulam Rabani and  Noreen  Bi  during
       the course of Diane Jackson's interview with them.  She  was  talking
       loudly and Mobushara advised Ms Jackson that it was the better course
       to ignore her. At one stage Jamila pushed the end of  a  garden  hose
       (unattached to a water supply) through the front window  but,  having
       been ignored, left the premises.  Ms Huyg spoke of Jamila "ranting at
       her in her own language".

Ghulam Rabani and Noreen Bi's family

  332. According to Diane Jackson's report, Nusrut was allowed  to  stay  at
       school until she was 20  years  old,  having  commenced  her  English
       education at the age of 13 with no previous education and no English.
       She described how she had lost confidence as she cannot drive or work
       or plan for her future.

Qadir Ahmed and Nasreen Bi's family

  333. Salma was described by the head of House in a  letter  dated  28  May
       2012 as  "one  of  the  most  mature,  intelligent  and  hard-working
       students we have in year 9"

  334. Sulva  was  described  to  Diane  Jackson  by  Johanna  Huyg  of  the
       Children's Society as capable but anxious.

Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan

  335. It is quite obviously impossible to summarise a 44-page report  in  a
       few sentences. However, if there is a single recurring theme,  it  is
       the fact that both parents and children want, above all, to remain in
       the United Kingdom where the children, in particular,  feel  at  home
       and want the uncertainty of their present situation to be resolved in
       favour of their remaining. Inevitably, they wish to be able  to  move
       on but it is also clear that they only wish to do so by remaining  in
       the United Kingdom without the limitations that are placed upon  them
       restricting their ability to work or to study or  to  pursue  further
       training or to be able to drive. Although the parents  were  prepared
       to admit the mistakes they had made, it is a consistent  thread  that
       the children were not responsible for  their  parents'  mistakes  and
       that because it has been so long since their arrival, they should  be
       allowed  to  remain  and  the  restrictions  that  exist  upon   them
       developing their lives should be removed.

Generally

  336. Although Diane Jackson is not a country expert, she described how the
       children have lived as "English children" for most if not  all  their
       childhood and adolescence and that  the  identities  that  they  have
       fashioned are strong ones and the  relocation  would  be  to  a  very
       different and more restrictive society in Pakistan. As a result,  she
       considered  this  would  cause  confusion,  and  no  doubt,  loss  of
       confidence and likely depression. It was her view that the  children,
       collectively, were intelligent, articulate, talented and  delightful.
       She considered that their  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would
       result in their suffering bereavement by their departure from what is
       obviously a familiar environment.

  337. In the oral evidence, Diane  Jackson  spoke  of  the  elder  children
       thinking of themselves  as  first  generation  British  Asians.  They
       respect their parents and their values but  are  moving  on  and,  in
       doing so, taking their parents with them. The younger ones have  been
       educated totally in the  United  Kingdom.  They  present  as  British
       children, speak with a local accent and engage  normally  with  other
       people in the area. She considered that the children would  suffer  a
       loss of identity were they to be returned  to  Pakistan.  They  would
       lose that which is familiar to them and be  required  to  acclimatise
       themselves to a culture that is relatively alien to them. Their hopes
       and plans would be unfulfilled  and  they  would  suffer  a  kind  of
       bereavement. They would experience anger  both  with  themselves  and
       their parents or other family members for what has happened to  them.
       She described how she thought they would be better and that there was
       "no future" for them. It would seem so unfair  to  them.  Indeed  she
       went to far so far as to say that she did not think they  could  "re-
       forge" their identity because their identity is built  on  a  society
       that they know. Children, she  said,  had  a  very  strong  sense  of
       fairness: as suggested in the phrase so often used by  children:  "It
       is not fair".

  338. This would be  particularly  difficult  for  anybody  suffering  from
       mental health problems. In the case  of  Wasim,  removal  could  only
       exacerbate his mental health  problems  and  his  depression,  if  it
       existed, could only get  worse.  She  considered  that  some  of  his
       depression related to what he was schooled to lie about. Indeed,  she
       went so far as to say that she thought it could  cause  him  to  have
       some suicidal intention. We note however, there was no medical report
       expressing a view as to suicidal ideation.   When  cross-examined  on
       this, Diane Jackson said she thought she had read it somewhere.   She
       did not ask Wasim and he did not volunteer the information.   It  was
       not an in-depth interview.

  339. In general terms she thought that the family units were operating and
       that they were very strong families working out a way in  which  they
       could survive. Those children who worked did so and those  who  could
       not work (which she described as the result of the vagaries resulting
       from rights to stay arising from their original  claims)  helped  out
       with money. She described how everyone was pulling together and  that
       the children had the ability to attend further education but were not
       able to do so. She was  filled  with  praise  for  the  benefits  the
       children have received from the agencies, particularly the Children's
       Society. She spoke of the impact of the differential positions of the
       various children involved of how those children who are able to  work
       and earn money have found their confidence had increased whilst those
       who could not do so feel they cannot pull their weight. Those who are
       unable to work appear fed up, occasionally depressed and not able  to
       adapt so much. They are, however, grateful for the  help  offered  by
       their siblings but would find it difficult to adapt if some of  their
       siblings were not to return. Whilst those remaining would be  pleased
       that they could stay, the impact would be serious. It would result in
       leading much more separate lives.

Johanna Huyg's evidence

  340. In her statement [Bundle 6  Tab D p.45], Ms Huyg  describes  how  she
       has been working in a supportive role with young  people  since  1999
       and in January 2009 started working for the Children's Society  as  a
       project worker based at Oxford Spires Academy.  In another  statement
       [Bundle 1, Tab G, p. 19], she describes how  the  service  at  Oxford
       Spires Academy provides drop-in access  enabling  her  to  see  young
       people on a daily basis and to get to know them well. She acts as  an
       advocate for  young  people,  a  job  built  around  creating  strong
       trusting relationships. She sees young people in a range of different
       settings including during lessons, on a  personal  basis  in  drop-in
       sessions and during school activities trips and meetings.

  341. She told us that she has had specific responsibilities in relation to
       Sulva and Salma Bi of Qadir Ahmed and Nasreen Bi's family;  Zahra  Bi
       of Ghulam Rabani and Noreen Bi's family; Wasim  Mohammed  of  Mehmood
       Ahmed and Fazal Jan's family and Arfan of  Mehmood  Ahmed  and  Fazal
       Jan's family.  She  gave  her  view  that  removing  them  from  home
       surroundings - friends, roots, their identity based around  Oxford  -
       would be highly detrimental.

  342. She gave evidence [Bundle 4, Tab, F p.4] in relation to  Arfan.   She
       commenced work with him in September 2010 and simply supported  Arfan
       in his progression from  school  to  university.  He  was  unable  to
       progress this because he no longer had leave to remain. She described
       how Arfan had worked hard at school and  thought  that  he  would  be
       eligible for the same support as any other young person. It was  hard
       for him to find out that his progress  was  halted  indefinitely  and
       that his future potential is held in a state of limbo. She  had  seen
       how his friends had moved on and how much they had gained and changed
       through accessing higher education. He has  real  academic  potential
       and it would be detrimental to him that this should be  stunted.  She
       told Ms Cronin that it was difficult when he was told that there  was
       no financial support available. He  had  planned  to  remain  in  the
       United Kingdom and none of this could be achieved if he were removed.

  343. In relation to Bundle 4, Tab G p.12-14, Ms Huyg, speaking  of  Wasim,
       described how Wasim had always  been  open  with  her  about  how  he
       suffers from depression. He told her he had been getting support  for
       this but it was not something she had addressed  with  him.  His  low
       mood, he told her, was  associated  with  the  on-going  appeal.  She
       described how he had struggled  academically  with  school  work  and
       found it hard to concentrate. Since leaving school he had attended  a
       carpentry course but did not progress in it. In  her  view,  removing
       Wasim from his  current  community  and  support  networks  could  be
       detrimental. He needed a clear and settled future. He needed to  have
       the rights and the security to move  on  from  the  restrictions  and
       uncertainty that have affected him so much.  She told Ms  Cronin  how
       difficult it was when Wasim became depressed, with feelings  that  he
       could not look forward. His lack of motivation could be compared with
       his brother Arfan who had moved forward whereas Wasim  had  not.  She
       described how she supposed that he had had such  limited  experiences
       for such a  long  time,  not  knowing  how  he  could  progress.  The
       comparison between his situation and those around him with  different
       prospects was hard.

  344. In relation to Bundle 2 Tab I p.43 and her report  on  Zahra  Bi,  Ms
       Huyg first came into contact with Zahra  when  she  started  work  at
       Oxford Spires Academy. She supported her with  her  coursework.   She
       spoke of Zahra requiring the engagement  of  the  Children's  Society
       therapy service  and  had  observed  that  Zahra  suffered  from  low
       motivation and low energy levels.

  345. In answer to questions asked by Mr  Toal,  she  described  how  Zahra
       lacked motivation. She was not able to say to what her lack of  sleep
       was attributable.   She described how she was affected by uncertainty
       and that she would see her future in the United Kingdom  studying  at
       college, where she currently is. She was unable to  imagine  her  not
       being in the United Kingdom. Her friends would be worse off were  she
       to be in Pakistan. Ms Huyg sees her  in  the  Cowley  Road  with  her
       friends. It is not within their comprehension  that  a  person  would
       have to go to a country they have not known for 10 years.

  346. In relation to her report of 28  May  2012  [Bundle  1  Tab  G  p.19]
       relating to Sulva and Salma, Ms Huyg said she had provided Sulva with
       intensive support when she joined the sixth-form, coming into  office
       on a daily basis and often staying  for  long  periods  chatting  and
       doing her coursework. She struggled with the more academic aspects of
       learning but Ms Huyg described Sulva as determined and working  hard.
       She suffered from the uncertainty of not knowing what would happen to
       her family. Some days she would be very low for long periods of  time
       and Ms Huyg  contrasted  this  with  those  occasions  when  she  was
       normally so bubbly. Sulva finds it upsetting when others  talk  about
       their future opportunities. She has a strong friendship  group  which
       means a lot to her. They support each  other  and  are  as  close  as
       sisters. Ms Huyg spoke warmly of seeing  them  growing  up  together.
       When Sulva was down, the whole group became upset. It is  clear  that
       Ms Huyg is very attached to Sulva.  In answer to  questions  from  Mr
       Jones, Ms Huyg spoke about Sulva being hard to support when her  mood
       is low:

            "You want to say it will get better.  But you do not know."

  347. When speaking of the effect of removal, Ms Huyg thought that it would
       "blow  her  life  apart".  She  described  how   she   has   learning
       difficulties but is very good at speaking to people who find learning
       hard. This is what she has always wanted to do.  However,  even  when
       volunteering, she was worried that she would not be allowed to do it.
       Then she was worried about how her mother would react. It was a  good
       moment when she received  approval.  To  remove  her  would  be  like
       starting again. She would not be where she  is  without  the  support
       services from teachers, therapists and the  Children's  Society.  She
       considered her to be a very vulnerable person. It was Ms Huyg's  wish
       that she goes into teaching which would, in doing so, remove her from
       some of the difficulties associated with her present environment.

  348. Ms Huyg has also worked with Salma  over  the  preceding  two  years.
       Salma works hard.

  349. Ms Huyg told us that Salma and Sulva were very close  to  each  other
       and "wonderful as sisters" although voicing some  concern  that  they
       should be so solely reliant upon each other.

  350. She also  spoke  of  the  role  played  by  Tousif  who  has  assumed
       responsibility for the family. She described how everyone relies upon
       him. He works. He has a car. His sisters are  reliant  upon  him  for
       their  independence.  She  described  how  she  and  her   colleagues
       explained things to him. As he drives a car, he is  able  to  provide
       transportation. She contemplated the prospect of  one  outcome  being
       the removal of the family leaving Tousif behind. Since members of the
       family have had to look after each other because of their  particular
       circumstances, any one person being separated from the  others  would
       be detrimental to them all.

  351. Tousif had been to see Chloe Purcell [Bundle1, Tab F p36] for help on
       practical issues.  She described how he holds an 'elevated  position'
       as a breadwinner and car-driver whom Ms Purcell often sees delivering
       and collecting the children to and from school.  He is much more of a
       carer and elder brother than Toukeer.

  352. Ms Huyg's view was that the rest of the family "needed to finally  be
       able to look forward to the future and have the certainty of  knowing
       what will happen next".  For those children this was a  country  they
       know and have settled in and Oxford Spires School had  provided  them
       with an opportunity for learning and a "home from home".

Chloe Purcell's evidence

  353. Chloe Purcell in confirming the contents of her statement [Bundle  6,
       Tab D, p.40] said she had worked with Sulva [Bundle 1, Tab  G  p.77],
       Tousif Ahmed [Bundle 1  Tab F pp.35-36]  and  Nusrut  Bi  [Bundle  7,
       p.19] although she has also had contact with a number  of  the  other
       children through her  role  as  a  project  worker  based  at  Oxford
       Community  School  and  in  activities  arranged  by  the  Children's
       Society.  The thrust of her evidence in relation to Sulva has already
       been summarised, through the evidence  of  the  other  professionals.
       Sulva shies away from talking about a return to Pakistan.  She is not
       able to progress her future plans and focuses instead on the positive
       elements of her life, her friends and the societies she  is  involved
       with and the voluntary work she does at  the  local  primary  school.
       Sulva has clearly benefitted from the services that  have  been  made
       available to her.

  354. In answer to questions from Mr Toal, Chloe Purcell  spoke  of  Nusrut
       who appears to her 'quite together': 'This is the way life  is.   Not
       much I can do about it.' She also spoke of her  frustration  and  how
       she seemed to put a lot of time  into  keeping  fit  as  a  means  of
       remaining positive in outlook. Undoubtedly, she said, Nusrut sees her
       future in the United Kingdom.

  355. Like the other professionals concerned, she sees see the prospect  of
       separation as devastating.

Sue Conlan's evidence

  356. Sue Conlan [Bundle 6, Tab  C,  p.  1,  Tab  D  p.100,  Bundle  7]  is
       presently the Chief Executive Officer of the  Irish  Refugee  Council
       (IRC) in Dublin, a position she has held since January 2010. At  that
       time she ceased to work for Tyndallwoods, Solicitors. She  first  met
       the children within a few days of their parents' arrest in  2004  and
       has had long  experience  as  their  legal  representative.  She  has
       continued to maintain contact with them as a friend and  has  visited
       all four families in their Oxford homes on two  or  three  occasions,
       the last being 7 August 2013 and 19  August  2013.  She  recalls,  in
       particular, the 'terrible  position'  in  which  the  children  found
       themselves after their parents had been arrested. She also speaks  of
       the sharp contrasts, epitomised in the situation of the  twins  Arfan
       and Wasim: the one, confident and capable; the other,  withdrawn  and
       unable to participate. In her recent visit, she  commented  upon  the
       deterioration in the condition of Jamila whom she had last seen  some
       two years before. She was agitated and verbally  abusive,  dominating
       the visit. It is obvious that this deeply affected the other  members
       of the family, particularly Kamran who 'bears much of  the  brunt  of
       her condition although all of them suffer to some extent'.

  357. She concludes:

           Despite  the  length  of  time  that  I  have   specialised   in
           immigration and asylum work (over 26 years), I cannot  recall  a
           case having such widespread impact on children.  In  my  opinion
           this extended uncertainty has been like an  extended  punishment
           for the families including the children. The  removal  of  these
           families now would be simply terrible for each and  all  of  the
           family members. I know this from my long and  close  association
           and now friendship with them.

  358. Atteqa had been granted indefinite leave to remain as  the  child  of
       Zafir who became British citizens in 2004.  However, as  she  is  the
       child of Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan, the grant of  indefinite  leave
       to remain was invalidated by the service of removal directions on  29
       April 2009.  She considers the impact of this would be 'exceptionally
       harsh' upon Atteqa.  In contrast, Adeel returned to the family at  an
       earlier stage.  She was granted exceptional leave  to  remain  to  30
       January 2005 but she, like Atteqa, is now subject to a removal notice
       of 29 April 2009.

  359. Ms Conlan, in relation to the family of Rungzaib Mohamed  and  Jamila
       Kauser, spoke  of  Hina  Bi  being  visibly  upset  by  her  mother's
       behaviour, 'It is dominating the whole family.'  However,  given  the
       length of time that Alam has been  detained  (since  2009)  they  are
       worried  about  the  effect  on  the  family  were   Jamila   to   be
       hospitalised.

  360. She spoke of the differences between those  with  immigration  status
       and those without it.  Those without it are glad for those  who  have
       obtained it.  Those with it are happy  for  themselves  but  sad  for
       those without it.  She considered it remarkable  that  there  was  no
       rancour.

Kate Helsby's evidence

  361. Kate Helsby has been a social worker in mental health for 25 years or
       more.   She  currently  works  as  part  of  the  forensic  team   at
       Littlemore.  Speaking in relation to the family of  Rungzaib  Mohamed
       and Jamila Kauser, she stated  that  she  first  saw  Alam  in  2009.
       Although she described the length of time that he has  been  detained
       under the Mental Health Act, she also spoke of his positive  decision
       not to appeal his continued hospitalisation because it indicated  his
       willingness to engage with  treatment.   Although  he  required  less
       supervision than before, at the time she wrote her report  the  level
       of supervision remained high.  There was an  agreed  plan  in  place:
       weekly visits to the mosque; family visits;  trips  to  the  gym  and
       swimming pool with the aim of re-integrating him into the  community.
       There  were  regular  psychotherapy  and  substance-abuse   sessions,
       alongside daily oral medication.

  362. The next stage was for him to move to the pre-discharge  unit  within
       the hospital grounds where patients are free to come and go at  will.
       A referral was to be made at the end of  2013  with  a  view  to  his
       moving in the Spring of 2014.  Thereafter, there would be a period of
       6 to 12 months spent in the unit at which point  those  treating  him
       would start looking for  accommodation  in  the  community.   If  the
       clinical team consider that he should be discharged, this  advice  is
       given to the Ministry of Justice which makes the decision outside the
       Tribunal system.  There remain some issues about  his  behaviour:  he
       can be impulsive.  Discharge into the community would  be  under  the
       terms of a 'conditional discharge' and subject to Ministry of Justice
       restrictions, such  as  conditions  affecting  residence,  treatment,
       attending regular sessions with his supervisor  and  restricting  the
       use of drugs and alcohol.  Kate  Helsby's  team  would  also  provide
       close supervision, alongside the clinician, each  reporting  back  to
       the Ministry of Justice.

  363. There were features of Alam's case which were  negative  including  a
       period without medication which resulted in a  severe  and  immediate
       relapse.  On the positive side, however, is  the  fact  that  he  has
       responded  to  treatment.   He  requires  stable  accommodation   and
       support,  structured  activities,  on-going  psychological  help  and
       engagement with the on-going work relating to substance abuse.

  364. She spoke of the difficulties he  would  face  if  removed  from  the
       United Kingdom at a number of levels.  Major changes in  family  life
       significantly affect those suffering from  schizophrenia.     It  was
       important to have stability.  On-going support was most  important  -
       constantly reinforcing the requirement to  take  the  medication  and
       monitor its use and avoid substance abuse.  Having got  to  know  the
       family dynamics, Ms Helsby said that he relates to Jehan  and  Ishrut
       best (the two siblings  who  have  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom) as they  are  most  active  in  'keeping  things  together'.
       Kamran,  who  is  the  eldest  but  unable  to   work,   had   'great
       responsibilities' and 'it would be a lot for him to manage'.

  365. When speaking of Jamila, Ms Helsby said that  Jamila  was  unable  to
       accept Alam is unwell and there was no  useful  conversation  in  her
       presence.  A similar meeting had been  arranged  in  2010  which  the
       interpreter had ended, obviously for  much  the  same  reasons.   The
       family are keen to deal with her at home.  Ms Helsby told us that the
       team would not support Alam living at home.  He  needed  independence
       from the home:

           "I suspect he finds it very difficult to cope with his  mother's
           position."

  366. Having said that, he remains very attached  to  his  mother.   He  is
       concerned and worried.  He feels he has let the family down.

  367. She described how motivated he was to engage in activities  but  also
       how there is a strong possibility of relapse.  The team can  identify
       the  warning  signs  but  a  relapse  happens  very  quickly.   Close
       supervision is able to pick up the warnings at an early stage.

Paragraph 276ADE

  368. Paragraph 276ADE provides:

           276ADE. The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to
           remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
           date of application, the applicant:

             i) does not fall for  refusal  under  any  of  the  grounds  in
                Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1.  in  Appendix
                FM; and

            ii) has made a valid application for  leave  to  remain  on  the
                grounds of private life in the UK; and

           iii) has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  20  years
                (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

            iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived  continuously  in
                the UK for at least  7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
                imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
                applicant to leave the UK; or

             v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and  has  spent
                at least half of his life  living  continuously  in  the  UK
                (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

            vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the  UK
                for  less  than  20  years  (discounting   any   period   of
                imprisonment) but has no ties (including social, cultural or
                family) with the country to which he would  have  to  go  if
                required to leave the UK.

  369. The grounds to which paragraph 276ADE (i) refers are:

           S-LTR.1.1. The applicant will be refused limited leave to remain
           on grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.1.2 to  1.7
           apply.

           S-LTR.1.2. The applicant is  at  the  date  of  application  the
           subject of a deportation order.

           S-LTR.1.3. The presence of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
           conducive to the public good because they have been convicted of
           an offence for which they have been  sentenced  to  imprisonment
           for at least 4 years.

           S-LTR.1.4. The presence of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
           conducive to the public good because they have been convicted of
           an offence for which they have been  sentenced  to  imprisonment
           for less than 4 years but at least 12 months.

           S-LTR.1.5. The presence of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
           conducive to the  public  good  because,  in  the  view  of  the
           Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious  harm  or
           they are a persistent offender who shows a particular  disregard
           for the law.

           S-LTR.1.6. The presence of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
           conducive to the public good because  their  conduct  (including
           convictions which do not fall within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3.  to
           1.5.),  character,  associations,  or  other  reasons,  make  it
           undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK...

  370. These provisions were introduced into the Immigration Rules on 9 July
       2012.

  371. The appellants contend that there are four children who qualify  with
       reference to paragraph 276ADE (iv), i.e. being under  18  and  having
       lived in the UK continuously for at least 7 years:


           Qadir Ahmed family:
                Salma Bi (10 December 1998, aged 15)


           Rungzaib Mohamed family:
                Hina Bi, (aged 17)


           Mehmood Ahmed family:
                 i) Atteqa Safdar, (aged 18)
                ii) Adeel Ahmed, (aged 17)

  372. In addition,  the  appellants  contend  there  are  a  further  seven
       children who have now become adults and who qualify with reference to
       paragraph 276ADE (v) i.e. being over 18, under 25 and having spent at
       least half of their lives living continuously in the UK:


           Qadir Ahmed family:
                Sulva Bi (aged 7 on entry, now 20)


           Rungzaib Mohamed family,
                 i) Idris Mohammed, (aged 7 on entry, now 21)
                ii) Mohammed Alam, (aged 8 on entry, now 22)


           Ghulam Rabani family:
                 i) Mohammed Rustam Rabani, (aged 8 on entry, now 22)
                ii) Zahra Bi, (aged 7 on entry, now 20)


           Mehmood Ahmed family:
                 i) Wasim Mohamed, (aged 8 on entry, now 21    )
                ii) Arfan Mohamed, Wasim's twin, (aged 8 on entry, now 21)

  373. Our consideration of paragraph 276ADE falls into two distinct parts:

             i) Does paragraph 276ADE have any application  in  relation  to
                decisions made before its introduction?

            ii) If it does apply, what is its effect?

  374. Both of these questions must be considered in light of  the  decision
       in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 given on 8 October  2013,
       after the hearing of these appeals was concluded.

  375. The first issue that requires consideration as  a  preliminary  point
       arises from the decision of the Upper Tribunal in MF (Article 8 - new
       rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393(IAC) in  which  the  Tribunal  dealt
       with the application of the new rules in relation to  decisions  made
       before they were introduced:

           Retrospectivity

           58. Mr Ahluwalia urged us to find that the provisions of the new
           rules  relating  to  deportation,  A362   in   particular,   are
           inapplicable  to  the  appellant's  appeal   because   (i)   the
           deportation order was signed almost two years  ago,  before  any
           plans were made for the introduction of the new  rules;  (ii)  a
           fortiori the reasons for refusal letter makes  no  reference  to
           the new criteria; (iii)  there  has  been  no  new  reasons  for
           refusal letter by the respondent; (iv)  "it  seems  particularly
           unfair that A is subjected to  the  new  rules  given  that  his
           appeal was heard 18 months ago on 24.1.2011" and that,  had  the
           FtT not erred in law, then his appeal would have been dealt with
           under the old rules.

           59. We do not find the arguments on this issue all one way.   In
           Odelola (FC) (Appellant) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department (Respondent) [2009] UKHL 25 it was held that,  unless
           specified to the contrary,  changes  in  the  immigration  rules
           "take effect whenever they say they take  effect."  (Lord  Brown
           paragraph 39, see also Lord Hope, paragraph 7); see also  R  (on
           the application of Munir and Anor) v the Secretary of State  for
           the Home Department [2012] UKSC 32.  Even though their Lordships
           in Odelola  were  not  agreed  as  to  whether  the  common  law
           presumption against retrospectivity applied to  the  immigration
           rules, all agreed that the central issue  was  the  fairness  of
           retroactive changes, and that to decide fairness it is necessary
           to have regard to a range of factors, including  the  extent  to
           which the value of the rights which the appellant had under  the
           old law or rules is now diminished to  any  significant  extent.
           If one applied these dicta in the abstract to the context of the
           new rules on deportation in relation to  the  appellant,  it  is
           difficult to see any significant diminution of  the  appellant's
           rights.  At the time of the decision he was already  subject  to
           s.32(5)  of  the  2007  Act  so  that  there  was  a   statutory
           presumption that his continued presence was not conducive to the
           public good.  Further, for reasons  given  already,  we  do  not
           consider that the new rules can be exhaustive of  the  issue  of
           whether the deportation order was contrary to a person's Article
           8 rights.  Judges have  to  decide  that  question  by  applying
           existing Strasbourg jurisprudence as interpreted by  the  higher
           courts.  Under both the pre-9 July 2012 rules (which would  have
           applied if no error of law being found) and the  new  rules,  he
           was entitled to the protection afforded to him  by  s.6  of  the
           Human Rights Act which we as judges must always accord.

           60. However, whilst for reasons  which  will  become  clear  the
           issue is not material to the outcome of this case, we think that
           the arguments against  treating  A362  as  having  retrospective
           effect carry  more  weight.  In  Odelola  their  Lordships  were
           concerned with decisions of the Secretary of  State  made  under
           the rules in force on or after  that  date.  The  case  did  not
           establish that new rules are capable of governing appeals  heard
           after that date in respect of decisions taken before  it.  Since
           the new rules concern how the Secretary of State decides claims,
           it would need very clear words to show that A362 was intended to
           bind courts and tribunals hearing appeals against decisions that
           were made and appealed before A362 came into force. The  wording
           of the  new  rule  (which  refers  to  "...when  the  notice  of
           intention to deport or deportation order, as  appropriate,   was
           served") is not  couched in language one  would  expect  if  its
           retrospective effect was as contended for by Mr Deller; it  does
           not say, for example,  "regardless  of  when  the  decision  was
           made". We remind ourselves that when s. 85A of the 2002 Act  was
           brought into force,  the  drafters  decided  that  an  elaborate
           transitional provision was needed, as regards the effect of that
           section on current appeals: see Alam [2012] EWCA Civ 960. If one
           of the purposes of A362 is to regulate appeals against decisions
           taken long before 9 July 2012, it is difficult to see that  this
           is within the scope of the enabling power to  make  rules  under
           s.3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971. Further, If Mr  Deller  were
           right then,  if the FtT when hearing this appeal  had  not  been
           found to have erred in law, its determination  would  have  been
           (and could only have been) made under the old rules, yet  solely
           because an error of law has been found,  it  would  transmogrify
           into a case under the new rules. For these reasons  we  are  not
           persuaded that the new rules apply to the decision under  appeal
           in this case. However, in case we are wrong in  that  conclusion
           we shall proceed to address the situation of the appellant under
           the new rules.

  376. When the Upper Tribunal's decision was considered  by  the  Court  of
       Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192,  the  Court  went
       through the Upper Tribunal's determination in sequence  dealing  with
       paragraph 56 in paragraph 24 of the Court of  Appeal's  judgment  and
       paragraph 64 of the Upper Tribunal's determination in  paragraph  26.
       The passage which we have set out above, paragraphs 58 to 60 entitled
       'Retrospectivity', was mentioned in passing in paragraph  25  of  the
       judgment of the Court of Appeal:

           "Leaving aside a retrospectivity argument with which we are  not
           concerned, it was conceded on behalf of the appellant before the
           UT that he could only succeed under the new rules if..."

  377. It is difficult to know how to construe this  passage.   On  the  one
       hand, if  the  Court  of  Appeal  was  no  longer  concerned  with  a
       retrospectivity argument, this  would  suggest  that  the  appellants
       failed to establish the Upper Tribunal was in error.  It  would  have
       required specific findings to have reached such a conclusion.  On the
       other hand, the mere fact that the Court of Appeal then  went  on  to
       deal with the new rules suggests that they were in play  which  would
       not have been  the  case  had  the  Upper  Tribunal's  conclusion  on
       retrospectivity been accepted.

  378. In her skeleton argument, the Secretary of State contends:

           185. The Appellants' solicitor wrote to the Secretary of State on
                7 December 2012 asking that certain  of  the  Appellants  be
                granted ILR on the basis of paragraph 276ADE of  the  Rules.
                In light of the forthcoming appeals, the Secretary of  State
                refused to consider those arguments.

           186. The Appellants have revived them in their Skeleton Argument.
                They have not explained on what basis they are  entitled  to
                rely on these arguments in the present appeals: see, in this
                respect, the finding of the Tribunal in MF (Article 8 -  new
                rules) Nigeria) [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC),  at  paragraph  60,
                where it considered that the new Rules did not  apply  to  a
                case decided under the older Rules, where an appeal  to  the
                FTT had taken place under the old Rules but a further appeal
                to the Upper Tribunal involving a rehearing of an Article  8
                claim took place after the new Rules came into  force  on  9
                July 2012. That is the situation in the present case.  Thus,
                the Appellants' attempted  reliance  on  the  new  Rules  is
                flawed.

  379. The appellants make no substantive response to that argument  in  the
       reply.  Thus, it seems to us that the retrospectivity finding made by
       the Upper Tribunal  has  not  been  successfully  challenged  by  the
       appellants in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD in the Court of Appeal and has  not
       been challenged by anything advanced before us. In such circumstances
       we adopt the conclusions of the tribunal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  on  this
       issue - a conclusion which in our view is unaffected  by  the  recent
       decisions of the Court of Appeal in Edgehill & Others v  SSHD  [2014]
       EWCA Civ 402 and Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558. Furthermore,
       given the appellants' request of 7 December 2012 that some  of  their
       number be granted ILR on  the  basis  of  paragraph  276ADE  and  the
       Secretary of State's refusal to consider those arguments, we  do  not
       see how paragraph 276ADE is before us.

  380. However, in a situation redolent of irony, we feel bound to deal with
       paragraph 276ADE in any event, just as the Upper Tribunal did  in  MF
       (Article 8 - new rules) and just as the Court of  Appeal  did  in  MF
       (Nigeria) v SSHD.  We may be forgiven for wondering what is the point
       of our conclusion that paragraph 276ADE does not apply.

  381. We thus proceed to deal with the application of paragraph 276ADE.

  382. There is no doubt  that  the  11  children,  both  minor  and  adult,
       mentioned above meet the requirements of either  sub-paragraphs  (iv)
       or (v) of paragraph 276 ADE either as being under 18 years and having
       lived continuously in the UK for at least 7 years or as being  18  or
       over but under 25 years and having spent at least half of their lives
       in the UK.  The minor children having also to establish that it would
       not be reasonable to expect them to leave  (a  requirement  which  is
       omitted from sub-paragraph (v) but which,  in  the  circumstances  of
       these appellants, does not  materially  strengthen  or  weaken  their
       respective claims).

  383. The issue is whether the overall circumstances fall for refusal under
       any of the grounds in Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and  S-LTR.3.1.
       in Appendix FM.  The respondent contends that  the  presence  of  the
       applicant in the United Kingdom is not conducive to the  public  good
       because their conduct (including convictions which do not fall within
       paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.),  character,  associations,  or  other
       reasons, make it undesirable to allow them to remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom.

  384. The juxtaposition of 'the  applicant'  in  the  singular  and  'their
       conduct' and 'them' in the plural does not mean  that  the  character
       conduct or associations refers to anyone other  than  the  applicant.
       It appears to be an example of  drafting  that  is  gender-sensitive.
       All  of  the  children  are  innocent  of  wrong-doing;  hence  their
       applications  do  not  fall  to  be  refused  for  their  conduct  or
       characters or associations.  The Secretary of State relies  upon  the
       fact that, when the circumstances are assessed in the  round,  (which
       includes all of the factors weighing in favour of the  children),  it
       nevertheless remains the fact that their removal is conducive to  the
       public good.  Hence, it is said, paragraph 276ADE does not assist the
       appellants.

  385. Whilst the ultimate decision on  whether  the  removal  of  these  11
       appellants would be conducive to the public good  remains a matter of
       balance to which we will return later, we do not agree that paragraph
       276ADE does not materially assist the  appellants.   Were  paragraphs
       (iv) and (v) omitted from the Rules, the  presence  of  children  and
       young persons in the United Kingdom for substantial periods of  their
       lives would not compel specific consideration to the fact by the Home
       Office or by judges.  The express provisions within  the  Rules,  not
       only acknowledging the time spent in the United Kingdom  by  children
       and young children as  a  material  factor  but,  in  addition,  that
       specific periods of  time  (7  years  or  half  a  lifetime)  have  a
       qualifying significance increases the weight to be attached  to  this
       factor.  Looked at from a different perspective,  if  these  children
       had spent less than 7 years in the United Kingdom or less  than  half
       their lives, the Respondent would rightly rely on this as taking them
       outside the scope of paragraph 276ADE.  Since, it  is  accepted  that
       the affected children do stand to be considered as  qualifying  under
       sub-paragraphs 276ADE (iv) and (v), it cannot be said this  does  not
       assist them.  It may  not  be  determinative.   There  may  be  other
       reasons, notwithstanding the  fact  that  they  meet  the  qualifying
       conditions,  that   render   it   proportionate   to   remove   them.
       Nevertheless, the fact that they qualify according to  the  Secretary
       of State's own precepts, is a weighty factor in  their  favour  which
       cannot properly be marginalised.

Article 8 and the new rules

  386. The significance of these new Immigration Rules must now be  assessed
       by reference to the decision in the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v
       SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

  387. In MF (Nigeria) v SSHD, the Court of Appeal (the Master of the Rolls,
       Davis  and  Gloster  LLJ)  considered  in  what   circumstances   the
       deportation of a foreign national criminal was contrary to Article  8
       in the context of paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of the new Immigration
       Rules introduced in 2012.

  388. Under paragraph 398 entitled 'Deportation  and  Article  8'  where  a
       person claims his deportation would violate his Article 8 rights  and
       the Secretary of State considers his removal from the UK is conducive
       to the public good because of the seriousness  of  the  offending  or
       because the offending has caused serious harm or the individual is  a
       persistent offender who has shown a particular disregard for the law,
       the Secretary of State will first consider whether paragraph  399  or
       399A apply and, if they do not,  it  will  only  be  in  'exceptional
       circumstances' that  the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  be
       outweighed by other factors.  See Kabia (MF: para 398 -  "exceptional
       circumstances") [2013] UKUT 569 at paragraph 17:

           In this context, ""exceptional"  means  circumstances  in  which
           deportation would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for
           the individual or their family such that a deportation would not
           be proportionate".

  389. Whilst the Court of Appeal was dealing with a  deportation  case  and
       not a s.10 removal appeal, it considered the decision in R (Nagre)  v
       SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), in which Sales J dealt with a case  not
       involving the deportation of a foreign criminal.  The Court of Appeal
       thought the difference between the two types of case was  immaterial.



  390. On 13  June  2012,  the  Home  Office  issued  a  statement  entitled
       "Immigration  Rules  on  Family  and   Private   Life:   Grounds   of
       Compatibility with Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
       Rights".  Paragraph 20 of the statement read:

           "The intention is that the Rules  will  state  how  the  balance
           should be struck between  the  public  interest  and  individual
           right, taking  into  account  relevant  case  law,  and  thereby
           provide for  a  consistent  and  fair  decision-making  process.
           Therefore, if the Rules are proportionate, a decision  taken  in
           accordance with the Rules will, other than in exceptional cases,
           be compatible with A8."

  391. The Upper Tribunal in MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012]  UKUT
       00393(IAC) had decided that what was required was a two stage process
       of first applying the Immigration Rules and, if the  claimant  failed
       under the Rules, then applying a  proportionality  test  outside  the
       Rules.  This was the approach adopted in the arguments before us.

  392. The Court of Appeal adopted a somewhat different  approach:  the  new
       rules provide that where the Rules do not assist  an  applicant,  "it
       will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in
       deportation [or removal] will be outweighed by other  factors".   The
       central question was whether  the  use  of  the  phrase  "exceptional
       circumstances" meant that the weighing exercise contemplated  by  the
       new Rules was to be carried out compatibly with the Convention inside
       the Rules or, as the Upper Tribunal suggested, outside the Rules.  At
       paragraph 40 of R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin),  Sales  J
       said that in 'precarious cases', it was 'likely to  be  only  in  the
       most exceptional circumstances that the removal of  the  non-national
       family member will constitute a violation of  Article  8'.  This  had
       been repeated and adopted by the ECtHR in  near  identical  terms  in
       many cases. We have alluded to this by reference to Konstatinov v the
       Netherlands  (16351/03) [2007] ECHR 336 in which the Court  said,  in
       paragraph 48

           Nevertheless, in a case which concerns family life  as  well  as
           immigration, the extent of a State's obligations to admit to its
           territory  relatives  of  persons  residing  there   will   vary
           according  to  the  particular  circumstances  of  the   persons
           involved and the general interest.... The Court  has  previously
           held that where this is the case it is likely only to be in  the
           most exceptional circumstances that  the  removal  of  the  non-
           national family member will constitute a violation of Article  8
           (see Rodrigues da Silva and Hoogkamer v. the  Netherlands,  no.
           50435/99, � 39, ECHR 2006 ...)

  393. The Court of Appeal said that this was not the application of a  test
       of exceptionality but merely that, in  approaching  the  question  of
       whether removal is a proportionate interference with an  individual's
       Article 8 rights, the  scales  are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of
       deportation or removal and something very compelling (which  will  be
       "exceptional")  is  required  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
       removal. In other words,  it  was  no  coincidence  that  the  phrase
       "exceptional circumstances" was used in the new  Rules.   Whilst  the
       word "exceptional" was often  used  to  denote  a  departure  from  a
       general rule, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom paras 399 and
       399A did not apply, very compelling  reasons  would  be  required  to
       outweigh the public interest in deportation. Those compelling reasons
       were, by their very nature, "exceptional circumstances".   The  Court
       of Appeal concluded in paragraph 44:

           We would, therefore, hold that the new rules are a complete code
           and that the exceptional circumstances to be considered  in  the
           balancing exercise involve the application of a  proportionality
           test as required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence. We accordingly
           respectfully do not agree with the UT that the decision-maker is
           not "mandated or directed" to take all the  relevant  Article  8
           criteria into account....

  394. Even were the Court of  Appeal  to  be  wrong,  it  would  have  been
       necessary to apply a proportionality test outside the  new  Rules  as
       was done by the Upper Tribunal and the result should (and would) have
       been the same.

  395. No doubt there are some  difficulties  in  imposing  an  'exceptional
       circumstances' exemption in removal cases.  The  reason  is  obvious,
       such an exemption is expressly to be found in  deportation  cases  in
       the words of paragraph 398, '...the Secretary of State  in  assessing
       that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
       if it does not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the
       public interest in deportation will be outweighed by other  factors.'
       No such exemption is found in paragraph 276ADE.

  396. However, the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  imposing  such  a
       test/exemption is clearly correct since the proper application of the
       Immigration Rules is not legally capable of producing  results  which
       violate an individual's  human  rights,  at  least  so  long  as  the
       Convention remains domesticated into United Kingdom law  pursuant  to
       s.1(2) of the human rights Act 1998.  In any event,  decision  makers
       are to exercise their functions in accordance with those rights,  see
       s.6 of the Act  and  paragraph  2  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which
       provides:

           Immigration Officers, Entry Clearance Officers and all staff  of
           the Home Office Immigration  and  Nationality  Directorate  will
           carry out their duties ... in compliance with the provisions  of
           the Human Rights Act 1998.

  397. Hence, there is no room for the Rules to be construed, or for them to
       be applied, in such a way that violates the Convention rights  of  an
       individual.

  398. These principles have been developed further in the months that  have
       followed the Court of Appeal's judgment in MF (Nigeria).  Patel & Ors
       v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 (20 November 2013) speaks of  the  relationship
       between the Immigration Rules and Article  8  and  of  the  continued
       relevance of Lord Bingham's words in Huang [2007] UKHL  11  that  the
       focus must always be on the preservation of  protected  rights.    In
       particular, Article 8 is  not  a  general  dispensing  power  but  an
       applicant's failure to qualify under the Rules is the point at  which
       to begin, not end, consideration of the claim under  Article  8.  The
       terms of the Rules are relevant to that consideration, but  they  are
       not determinative.

  399. The Tribunal in Nasim and others [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) reminded itself
       that Article 8 had limited impact upon a private and family life  far
       removed from an individual's moral and physical  integrity:  a  claim
       was not enhanced by the absence of offending  or  a  non-reliance  on
       public funds.  Such matters clearly went beyond the protection of  an
       individual's private life and appeared to  engage  no  more  than  an
       unwarranted  assessment  of  that  individual's  personal  qualities.
       Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  00640
       (Cranston  J  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor)   considered   the
       relationship as a  two-stage  process  whereby,  after  applying  the
       requirements of the Rules, it was only if there  were  arguably  good
       grounds for granting leave to remain outside them was  it  necessary,
       applying Nagre, to go on to consider Article  8.  This  approach  has
       been endorsed by Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085
       (IAC) (Upper Tribunal Judges Storey and Pitt) in which  the  Tribunal
       pointed out that paragraph 398 of the Rules requires the  application
       of  a  test  of  exceptional  circumstances  and  other  factors  and
       therefore amounted to  a  complete  code  for  the  consideration  of
       Article 8 as identified in MF (Nigeria).  It followed that any  other
       rule which has a similar provision would constitute such  a  complete
       code.  Where, however, the Rules provided no such express  mechanism,
       the approach in Nagre and Gulshan applied, namely, after applying the
       requirements of the Rules, it was only if there may be arguably  good
       grounds for granting leave to remain outside them  was  it  necessary
       for Article 8 purposes to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  were
       compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under  them  to
       merit the grant of leave.

  400. In the context of this  case,  however,  we  are  not  considering  a
       departure from the Rules at all but rather the  application  of  them
       and, in particular, whether there are adequate reasons applicable  in
       the separate appeals of these appellants that  render  their  removal
       proportionate notwithstanding the fact  that  the  affected  children
       meet the qualifying conditions of paragraph 276ADE.

The assessment of proportionality

  401. The appellants contend that the appeals  should  be  allowed  on  the
       grounds that the decisions in respect of the child appellants  breach
       their rights to  respect  for  private  life  having  regard  to  the
       following matters:

             i) the length of time that the 'child' appellants have been  in
                the UK;

            ii) the significant proportion of  their  lives  represented  by
                that time spent in the UK;

           iii) the formation of their identities by their time in  the  UK.
                (As the First-tier Tribunal found; 'it is  significant  that
                many of the child  appellants  now  consider  themselves  as
                British' (para. 64));

            iv) the innocence of the 'child' appellants in relation  to  the
                deceptions by which entry was obtained and leave  to  remain
                was sought or  obtained  and  their  status  as  victims  of
                trafficking;

             v) the prolongation of their time residing in  the  UK  by  the
                Secretary of  State's  protracted  failure  to  make  lawful
                decisions to remove them and  by  the  tribunal's  delay  in
                dealing with their appeals;

            vi) the differential treatment of the  'child'  appellants  that
                will result if they are not given leave  to  remain;  -  one
                cohort have already succeeded in their appeals -  those  who
                were given indefinite leave to remain and who were 18 at the
                time of the immigration decisions; another cohort, those who
                have turned 18, should also succeed;

           vii) the difficulties that the 'child' appellants will experience
                if removed to Pakistan, bearing in mind that  they  have  no
                real and effective ties there;

          viii) their best interests and the  protection  and  promotion  of
                their welfare and that removal of the minor and young  adult
                appellants could not  be  characterised  as  in  their  best
                interests and no justification of sufficient moment has been
                advanced capable of founding a contention that those primary
                considerations fall to be displaced in the public interest;

            ix) that removal to Pakistan will have particular  and  profound
                adverse consequences for the  private  life  rights  of  the
                young women and girl appellants. Save for  Qadir  Ahmed  and
                Fazal Jan, all other adult parties associated with this case
                have contracted arranged marriages to close  relatives.  The
                children (boys and girls) immersed in  English  culture  are
                likely to want the option to choose their  own  spouse.  The
                case  facts  reveal  the  serious  social  consequences  for
                disobeying family marriage decisions.  It  is  important  to
                recognise the protection available to all  the  children  in
                the UK concerning these decisions and the complete  lack  of
                protection for them in such matters in Pakistan;

             x) that removal of those suffering from severe  mental  illness
                has a disproportionate adverse effect and will  remove  them
                from the care of professionals and mentors on whom they have
                come to rely. This issue is  particularly  relevant  to  the
                removal decisions concerning Wasim and Alam.

  402. The appellants appear to seek to argue that, as here, where there are
       children who have been in the UK for a significant  period  of  time,
       there is a legal test that circumstances have to be very exceptional,
       an expression used by Mr John Howell QC, sitting  as  a  Deputy  High
       Court Judge in A v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2008]
       EWHC 2488 (Admin) when speaking of the now withdrawn  policy,  DP5/96
       policy.  For the reasons we have given, we do not import such a legal
       test.

  403. Further reliance is made of the OEM chapter 53 in which it  is  'made
       clear' that criminal convictions do not necessarily justify removal.

  404. As a result, the appellants contend:

           "It is submitted, therefore, that reliance on a  false  identity
           and partially false account for the purpose of making an  asylum
           claim does not make a case 'very exceptional' and by implication
           there is no legal justification for the removal of the  children
           and by extension their parents".

  405. Support, it is argued, is derived from case law and in particular  ZH
       (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 which will be considered later.   Her
       'immigration history has rightly been described as "appalling".   She
       made a claim for asylum on arrival in her own name which was  refused
       in 1997 and her appeal was dismissed in 1998, shortly after the birth
       of her daughter.  She then  made  two  further  asylum  applications,
       pretending to be a Somali, both of which were refused...' (para.  5).
       Notwithstanding this history and notwithstanding that the family life
       on which the appellant relied was  established  during  her  unlawful
       presence in the United Kingdom, the  Secretary  of  State  eventually
       conceded that it would breach Article 8 to remove her (para. 13).  In
       respect of that, Lady Hale said 'the Secretary of State  was  clearly
       right to concede that there could only be one answer' (para. 33).

  406. We do not regard ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD as establishing a principle  of
       law that those who have an appalling  immigration  history  and  have
       children in  the  United  Kingdom  are  therefore  protected  against
       removal.  These cases are fact sensitive and the Secretary of State's
       concession in that case was clearly made on  the  facts  as  she  saw
       them, including the fact that  the  children  involved  therein  were
       British Citizens.

  407. The Secretary of State does not shrink from the consequences  of  the
       decision in Ahmad and others and the effect that this  will  have  on
       the three families concerned (the family of Mehmood Ahmed  and  Fazal
       Jan is not affected by this decision because their children were  all
       minors at the time of the  relevant  decisions).   The  Secretary  of
       State  highlights  a  number  of  factors  which  she  deems  to   be
       uncontroversial and which, she argues,  condition the approach to the
       Article 8 balancing exercise in respect of both  family  and  private
       life rights, having regard to the following matters:

             i) The appellants lied in order to obtain  entry  clearance  to
                the United Kingdom;

            ii) They thus obtained entry clearance to which  they  were  not
                entitled;

           iii) They should, accordingly, never  have  been  in  the  United
                Kingdom;

            iv) Once here, they advanced claims  for  refugee  status  which
                they accept were false in a number of material respects (the
                Secretary of State's case is that they were entirely false);

             v) They are, even on their own case, entitled to citizenship of
                Pakistan and have no basis to advance  a  claim  to  refugee
                status as nationals of India;

            vi) Those who obtained leave to remain thus did so as  a  result
                of deception and were not entitled to it;

           vii) No protection claim is advanced in relation to Pakistan;

          viii) They have obtained and continue to obtain substantial public
                benefits at taxpayers'  expense  -  the  children  have  all
                received a full state education,  all  appellants  have  had
                full access to the NHS, their housing has been paid  for  by
                the state, they have received substantial  welfare  support,
                their legal representation in their immigration  proceedings
                has been publicly funded throughout  and,  as  the  Zambrano
                decision-letters for the Mehood  Ahmed  family  demonstrate,
                they have  received  very  substantial  payments  of  social
                security benefits (the total benefit  paid  to  the  Mehmood
                Ahmed family is �29,608.04 per annum)

            ix) On the strength  of  these  factors,  the  presence  of  the
                appellants in the United Kingdom has at all times  been  the
                result of deception and fraud. They should never  have  been
                here. Any private life rights which have developed have done
                so throughout under the shadow of deception and fraud  which
                infects  every  aspect  of  their  presence  in  the  United
                Kingdom. The same characteristic applies to the family  life
                rights that would be interfered  with  by  removal.  In  all
                respects, therefore, the appellants' presence in the  United
                Kingdom has at all times been precarious.

Family life

  408. In Advic v. United Kingdom (1995) 20  EHRR  CD  125,  the  Commission
       reaffirmed its decision in S v United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR  196.  The
       applicant was relying on links with an adult  brother  and  with  his
       adult children who lived in Scotland. The Commission held:

           "However, the Commission notes that both  children  are  adults.
           Although it is claimed that until their arrival  in  the  United
           Kingdom the children had lived with the applicant, there  is  no
           indication that the applicant depends on  them  financially.  It
           must be noted in this connection that both children are students
           who depend  themselves  on  the  support  of  a  Scottish  local
           authority."

  409. The Strasbourg Court applied the same reasoning in Konstatinov v. The
       Netherlands [2007] 2 FCR 194, holding that:

           "[A]ccording to its well-established case-law under  Article  8,
           relationships between adult relatives do not necessarily attract
           the  protection  of  Article  8  without  further  elements   of
           dependency involving more than the normal emotional."

  410. On the strength of these passages the Secretary  of  State  contended
       that there was no family life for the purposes of Article  8  between
       the Appellants with leave to remain and those who  will  be  removed.
       The Article 8 family  life  claim  accordingly  fails  at  the  first
       hurdle.

  411. In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012]  UKUT  00160
       (IAC) (Lang J and Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan)  considered  at  what
       stage the child/parent bond of family life comes to an end; in  other
       words, when does an adult child cease to enjoy family life  with  his
       parents, for the purposes of Article 8?

  412. It started with the Commission's observation in S v United Kingdom:

           "Generally  the  protection  of  family  life  under  Article  8
           involves  cohabiting  dependents,  such  as  parents  and  their
           dependent,  minor  children.  Whether  it   extends   to   other
           relationships depends on the  circumstances  of  the  particular
           case. Relationships between adults, a mother and her 33 year old
           son in the present  case,  would  not  necessarily  acquire  the
           protection of Article 8 of the Convention  without  evidence  of
           further elements of dependency, involving more than  the  normal
           emotional ties."

  413. The Tribunal noted that the facts of Kugathas v  Secretary  of  State
       for  the  Home  Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  were   'strikingly
       different' from the facts in Ghising.  Mr Kugathas was a national  of
       Sri Lanka, aged about 38, who had moved to Germany  with  his  mother
       and siblings, as refugees, about 17 years earlier.  Mr  Kugathas  had
       been living on his own in the UK for about  3  years,  and  the  only
       contact he had had with his family was one visit of 3 weeks  duration
       from his sister,  her  husband  and  child,  and  periodic  telephone
       calls.  Unsurprisingly, perhaps the Court of Appeal decided  that  he
       did not enjoy Article 8 family  life  with  his  family  in  Germany.
       Sedley LJ accepted the submission that 'dependency' was  not  limited
       to economic dependency.  He added at paragraph 17:

           "But if dependency is read down  as  meaning  "support"  in  the
           personal  sense,  and  if  one  adds,  echoing  the   Strasbourg
           jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or "effective" to the  word
           "support", then it represents in my view the irreducible minimum
           of what family life implies."

       Arden LJ said at paragraphs 24 and 25:

           "There is no presumption that a person has a family  life,  even
           with the members of a person's immediate family. The  court  has
           to  scrutinise  the  relevant  factors.  Such  factors   include
           identifying who are the near relatives  of  the  appellant,  the
           nature of the links between them and the appellant, the  age  of
           the appellant, where and with whom he has resided in  the  past,
           and the forms of  contact  he  has  maintained  with  the  other
           members of the family with whom he claims to have a family life.

           Because there is no presumption of family life, in my judgment a
           family life is not established between an adult  child  and  his
           surviving parent or other siblings unless something more  exists
           than normal emotional  ties...  Such  tie  might  exist  if  the
           appellant were dependent on his family or vice versa."

  414. The Tribunal in Ghising went on to find that that  the  judgments  in
       Kugathas had been interpreted too restrictively in the past and ought
       to be read in the light of subsequent decisions of the  domestic  and
       Strasbourg courts.  Family life may continue between parent and child
       even after the child has attained his majority: see  Etti-Adegbola  v
       SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1319.  "Undoubtedly he had family life while  he
       was growing up and I would not regard it as suddenly cut off when  he
       reached his majority" per Sir Scott  Baker  in  SSHD  v  HK  (Turkey)
        [2010] EWCA Civ 583.  It would be 'unreal' to dispute that  the  23
       year old appellant enjoyed family life with her parents with whom she
       'had lived pretty well continuously with her parents and siblings all
       her life, per Sedley LJ in RP (Zimbabwe) & Anor v  SSHD  [2008]  EWCA
       Civ 825.

  415. The Tribunal cited various examples from the ECtHR  in  which  family
       life had been found to exist between a parent and an adult, at  least
       when they had been and wished to  continue  to  live  together  as  a
       family unit.  See, for example, Bouchelkia v France  (1998)  25  EHRR
       686 in which the ECtHR held that a deportation order interfered  with
       the family life of a 20 year old man  living  with  his  parents  and
       siblings. More recently the ECtHR has reviewed the case law in  AA  v
       United Kingdom (Application no 8000/08). The Court cited those  cases
       where family life had been held to exist but continued:

           "However, in two recent cases against  the  United  Kingdom  the
           Court has declined to find "family life" between an adult  child
           and his parents. Thus in Onur v United Kingdom, no. 27319/07,  �
           43-45, 17 February 2009,the Court noted that the applicant, aged
           around 29 years old at the time  of  his  deportation,  had  not
           demonstrated  the  additional  amount  of  dependence   normally
           required to establish "family life" between  adult  parents  and
           adult children. In A.W. Khan v United Kingdom, no.  47486/06,  �
           32,  12  January  2010.  the  Court  reiterated  the  need   for
           additional elements of dependence in order to  establish  family
           life between parents and adult children and found  that  the  34
           year old applicant in that case did not have "family life"  with
           his mother and siblings, notwithstanding the fact  that  he  was
           living with them and that they suffered a variety  of  different
           health  problems.   It  is  noteworthy,   however,   that   both
           applicants had a  child  or  children  of  their  own  following
           relationships of some duration."

  416. The Tribunal went on to conclude that differing outcome  were  merely
       the effect of  the  issue  under  Article  8(1)  being  highly  fact-
       sensitive:

           "In our judgment, rather  than  applying  a  blanket  rule  with
           regard to adult children, each case should be  analysed  on  its
           own facts, to decide whether or not family life  exists,  within
           the meaning of Article 8(1)."

  417. The Secretary of State however makes the much stronger point that the
       circumstances in  which  the  appellants  find  themselves  impose  a
       dependency which arises of necessity. United  Kingdom  law  does  not
       permit many of the family members to work, unsurprisingly since  they
       have no leave to remain.  Accordingly, those whose immigration status
       permits them to work inevitably assist those unable to  do  so.   The
       financial dependency therefore becomes a self-fulfilling  consequence
       of their different immigration situations.  In the  same  way  as  an
       overstayer who is  unable  to  work  cannot  rely  upon  the  support
       provided to  him  by  a  relative  who  has  a  right  to  remain  as
       establishing a dependency, neither can these appellants rely upon the
       mutual support that each offers the  other  as  establishing  further
       elements of dependency.  The Secretary  of  State  argues  since  the
       parents' inability to support themselves stems back  from  their  own
       fraud the fact that  there  is  a  dependency  adds  nothing  to  the
       strength of their claims to remain.

  418. The Secretary of State therefore contends:

           "It would be wrong in principle for the Appellants to be able to
           rely on any alleged  closeness  with  their  parents  and  other
           siblings resulting from them "pulling together" in light of what
           they characterise as the "difficult" position  they  have  found
           themselves in since their fraud came to light. That would be  to
           allow them to profit from their own wrong in order to  establish
           family life rights. There are  strong  public  policy  arguments
           against such a state of affairs."

  419. The Secretary of State is  plainly  correct  in  looking  behind  the
       dependency in order to determine in what way it has arisen.   We  are
       satisfied that such contributions as the adult Ahmad children make to
       the family finances is the  inevitable  corollary  of  the  different
       outcomes that have arisen in the treatment of  the  appellants.   For
       the reasons we have stated this is not  the  result  of  inconsistent
       application of the same policies by the Secretary of  State  but  the
       fact that some of the parents managed to persuade  the  Secretary  of
       State that their claims were true, though without justification,  and
       others did not.  But the dynamics  of  the  family  relationships  in
       these appeals goes beyond merely differing  financial  contributions.
       It is inevitable that the situation in which these four families have
       found themselves is one of significant adversity and this  will  have
       resulted  in  the  families  individually  and  collectively  pulling
       together.

  420. We approach the appeals on  the  basis  that  there  is  family  life
       between all members of the four families and (to a much lesser extent
       that has not been explored before us) family life  between  the  four
       families themselves related by blood and marriage but,  in  assessing
       proportionality, we pay regard to  the  circumstances  in  which  the
       families find themselves and the reasons for it.

The legal principles

  421. It is common ground that the best interests of  the  children  are  a
       primary consideration.  There is no need to refer to  the  well-known
       case law on the subject.  Indeed, in the context of this case,  their
       interests are the most significant factor of all. Were their  parents
       to have come alone into the United Kingdom  using  deception  and  to
       have remained here ever since, never establishing a substantive right
       to remain, their claim to remain would hardly be arguable.  It is the
       presence of the children that  has  fuelled  their  claim  that  they
       should be allowed to remain.  It is the effect upon the children that
       is at the heart of the proportionality balance.  The situation of the
       parents adds little of real substance given that we have  found  that
       they are the authors of the position in which they  find  themselves.
       It is also common ground that the best interests of the children  are
       not determinative.  As innocent  participants  -  although  'victims'
       might be as apt an expression - of their parents' conduct, the effect
       upon them of removal informs  every  aspect  of  the  proportionality
       balance.

  422. A starting-point may be found in Maslov v  Austria  [2008]  ECHR  546
       where dealing with the removal  of  children  or  young  adults  with
       reference to crimes they themselves committed as  minors,  the  Court
       provided broad guidance as to the  approach  to  be  adopted.   These
       remarks, found in paragraphs  73 to 75, have all the more force  when
       the  removal  of   children,   innocent   of   wrong-doing,   is   in
       contemplation:
           "73. In turn, when assessing the length of the applicant's  stay
           in the country from which he or she is to be  expelled  and  the
           solidity of the social, cultural and family ties with  the  host
           country, it evidently makes  a  difference  whether  the  person
           concerned had already come to the  country  during  his  or  her
           childhood or youth, or was even born there, or whether he or she
           only came as an  adult.  This  tendency  is  also  reflected  in
           various  Council  of  Europe  instruments,  in   particular   in
           Committee of Ministers  Recommendations  Rec  (2001)15  and  Rec
           (2002)4 (see paragraphs 34-35 above).
           74. Although Article 8 provides no absolute  protection  against
           expulsion for any category of aliens (see �ner, cited  above,  �
           55), including those who were born in the host country or  moved
           there in their early childhood, the Court has already found that
           regard is to be had to the special situation of aliens who  have
           spent most, if not all, their childhood  in  the  host  country,
           were brought up there and received their  education  there  (see
           �ner, � 58 in fine).
           75.In short, the Court considers that for a settled migrant  who
           has lawfully spent all or the major part of his or her childhood
           and youth in the host country very serious reasons are  required
           to justify expulsion. This is all the more so where  the  person
           concerned  committed  the  offences  underlying  the   expulsion
           measure as a juvenile."

  423. In Nunez v Norway (55597/09) [2011] ECHR  1047  (28  June  2011)  the
       ECtHR was concerned  with  whether  the  applicant's  expulsion  from
       Norway with a two-year re-entry  ban  would  entail  a  violation  of
       Article 8 of the Convention.  It decided that it would.  As the facts
       of the case reveal, the Court was  considering  the  removal  of  the
       mother in circumstances where it was found that the children had long
       lasting and close bonds to her,  there  was  a  decision  in  custody
       proceedings to move the children to  the  father,  the  children  had
       already experienced disruption and stress and there had been  a  long
       period that elapsed before the  immigration  authorities  took  their
       decision to order the applicant's expulsion with a re-entry ban.  The
       Court was not, therefore, considering the permanent severing  of  the
       relationship between  mother  and  children  but  a  case  where  the
       relationship would continue and the issue was the length of  the  ban
       upon its resumption.  The  fact  sensitive  nature  of  the  case  is
       revealed in the Court's conclusion that it was 'not convinced in  the
       concrete and exceptional circumstances of the  case  that  sufficient
       weight was attached to the best interests of  the  children  for  the
       purposes of Article 8 of the Convention.'

  424. In reaching that conclusion, the Court provided  the  principles  for
       assessment where a person had entered  the  country  irregularly  and
       sought to remain on the grounds of a family relationship:

           "68. The Court recalls that, while the essential object of  this
           provision is to protect the individual against arbitrary  action
           by the public authorities, there may  in  addition  be  positive
           obligations inherent in effective  "respect"  for  family  life.
           However,  the  boundaries  between  the  State's  positive   and
           negative obligations under this provision do not lend themselves
           to  precise   definition.   The   applicable   principles   are,
           nonetheless, similar. In both contexts regard must be had to the
           fair balance  that  has  to  be  struck  between  the  competing
           interests of the individual and of the community as a whole; and
           in  both  contexts  the  State  enjoys  a  certain   margin   of
           appreciation....

           69.    Since the applicable principles are  similar,  the  Court
           does not find it necessary to determine whether in  the  present
           case the impugned  decision,  namely  the  order  to  expel  the
           applicant with a two-year prohibition on  re-entry,  constitutes
           an interference with her exercise of the right  to  respect  for
           her family life or is to be seen as one involving an  allegation
           of failure on the part of the respondent State to comply with  a
           positive obligation.

           70.    The Court further reiterates  that  Article 8  does  not
           entail a general obligation for a State to  respect  immigrants'
           choice of the country of their residence and to authorise family
           reunion in its territory. Nevertheless, in a case which concerns
           family life as well as immigration,  the  extent  of  a  State's
           obligations to admit  to  its  territory  relatives  of  persons
           residing  there  will   vary   according   to   the   particular
           circumstances  of  the  persons   involved   and   the   general
           interest.... Factors to be taken into account  in  this  context
           are the extent to which family life is effectively ruptured, the
           extent of the ties in the Contracting State, whether  there  are
           insurmountable obstacles in the way of the family living in  the
           country of origin of one or more of them and whether  there  are
           factors of  immigration  control  (for  example,  a  history  of
           breaches of immigration law) or considerations of  public  order
           weighing  in  favour   of   exclusion...).   Another   important
           consideration is whether family life was created at a time  when
           the persons involved were aware that the immigration  status  of
           one of them was such that the persistence of  that  family  life
           within   the   host   State   would   from   the    outset    be
           precarious...Where this is the case  the  removal  of  the  non-
           national family member would be incompatible with Article 8 only
           in exceptional circumstances...."

  425. The Court was also concerned with  the  process  of  decision-making.
       The applicant's stay in Norway was unlawful and was  brought  to  the
       authorities' attention in 2001 and she admitted it to the  police  in
       December 2001.  It was not until 26 April 2005 that  the  Directorate
       of Immigration decided to order her expulsion with a  prohibition  on
       re-entering for two years. Although this state of  affairs  could  to
       some extent be explained by the immigration  authorities'  choice  to
       process the revocation of her work and settlement permits separately,
       and not in parallel, the Court  did  not  consider  the  government's
       actions  adequately  fulfilled  the  interests   of   swiftness   and
       efficiency of immigration control that was the  intended  purpose  of
       the administrative measures as found by the national court.

  426. In Antwi and others v Norway (26940/10) [2012] ECHR  259,  the  Court
       was concerned with an applicant who in 1998  had  obtained  a  forged
       passport and birth certificate stating a false  identity,  indicating
       that he was a Portuguese national. He submitted that passport when he
       applied to the Norwegian authorities for a work and residence  permit
       in Norway as an EEA citizen, which was granted to him for five  years
       from 13 April 2000 to 13  April  2005  on  the  basis  of  the  false
       identity. The applicant  successfully  applied  for  renewal  of  the
       permit on two occasions and for Norwegian citizenship on the strength
       of his false identity. He had not been entitled to any of the permits
       obtained and at no time had his residence in Norway been lawful.  The
       Court relied on paragraphs 68 to 70 in the Nunez judgment as properly
       setting out the relevant principles.

  427. In Butt v Norway (47017/09), the Court once again relying upon  Nunez
       stated:

           "In the case  under  consideration,  the  Norwegian  immigration
           authorities  had  granted  the  applicants'   mother   and,   by
           extension, the applicants, a residence permit on the  ground  of
           strong humanitarian considerations on 28 February 1992 and  then
           a settlement permit on 2 August 1995. They granted  the  latter
           permit whilst ignorant of the  fact  that  the  mother  and  the
           applicants had left for Pakistan in the summer of  1992  and  on
           the basis of the false information provided by the  mother  that
           she and the applicants continued to reside in Norway. By  virtue
           of their sojourn in Pakistan, their entitlement to residence  in
           Norway ceased and, following their  return  to  the  country  in
           early 1996, their stay there was in reality unlawful even though
           it was in August 1999 that their settlement permit  was  finally
           revoked (see paragraph 6 to 8 above). The Court therefore agrees
           with the Government that the applicants could not be  viewed  as
           "settled migrants" as this notion has been used in the  case-law
           (see �ner, � 59; and Maslov, � 75).  Accordingly,  on  the  same
           approach as that adopted in the afore-mentioned Nunez judgment,
           the Court will have regard to the  following  principles  stated
           therein...:" [quoting paragraphs 68 to 70 of Nunez]

       The Court continued in paragraph 79 in these terms:

           "...strong immigration policy considerations would in  principle
           militate in favour of identifying children with the  conduct  of
           their parents, failing which there would be a  great  risk  that
           parents exploited the situation of their children  in  order  to
           secure  a  residence  permit  for  themselves  and   for   their
           children."

       On this basis, the Court concluded, at paragraph 79, that

           "...the removal of the applicants  would  be  incompatible  with
           Article 8 only in exceptional circumstances."

  428. In her written argument, the Secretary of State places much  emphasis
       on this passage describing it as an extremely important statement  of
       legal principle by the Strasbourg Court with clear  implications  for
       the consideration of the appellants' Article 8 case:

           "The twin factors of "strong" immigration policy  considerations
           which support the identification of children with their parents'
           wrong-doing and the "great" risk of parents otherwise seeking to
           "exploit" the situation of their children applies  precisely  in
           the present case. The conduct identified in Butt  was  deception
           in  obtaining  a  residence  permit  through  the   failure   to
           acknowledge a temporary return to the country of origin. In  the
           present case, it is the "web of  lies"  identified  by  the  FTT
           which  has  continued  from  the  making  of   entry   clearance
           applications in Pakistan until the present date. It  is  notable
           that the Strasbourg Court identified the risk as  extending  not
           only to the parents obtaining  residence  cards,  but  also  the
           children."

  429. In asserting that the decision in Butt v  Norway  was  a  recognition
       that there was a strong immigration policy imperative  in  favour  of
       identifying children with the wrong-doing of their parents  in  order
       to prevent abuse of the immigration system, the  Secretary  of  State
       submitted this justified the First-tier Tribunal's approach that  the
       children's response to their parents' requests for them  to  lie  was
       not a mitigating factor and,  by  analogy,  neither  was  the  wives'
       obedience to their husbands' requests to lie.

  430. Central to a consideration of United Kingdom case law is the decision
       in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.  The  mother  arrived  in  the
       United Kingdom in December 1995 at the age  of  20.  She  made  three
       unsuccessful claims for asylum, one in her own identity  and  two  in
       false identities. In 1997 she met and formed a  relationship  with  a
       British citizen by whom she had two children, then 12  and  9.   Both
       were British citizens and had lived in the United Kingdom with  their
       mother all their lives.  Their parents separated in  2005  but  their
       father continued to see them regularly.  He was diagnosed  with  HIV,
       was living on disability living allowance and apparently  drinking  a
       great deal.  The Tribunal did not  consider  there  were  necessarily
       practical difficulties in the children living with him, a view which,
       unsurprisingly, found little favour in the Court of Appeal.  However,
       the Court of Appeal upheld the Tribunal's finding that  the  children
       could reasonably be expected to follow their mother to Tanzania.   It
       was conceded by the Secretary of State that any  decision  which  was
       taken without having regard to the need to safeguard and promote  the
       welfare of any children would not be "in accordance with the law" for
       the purpose of Article 8(2). That did not mean that  identifying  the
       children's best interests would lead  inexorably  to  a  decision  in
       conformity with those interests:

           "Provided  that  the  Tribunal   did   not   treat   any   other
           consideration as  inherently  more  significant  than  the  best
           interests of the children, it could conclude that  the  strength
           of the  other  considerations  outweighed  them.  The  important
           thing, therefore, is to consider those best interests first."

  431. Those interests could, of course, be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative
       effect of  other  considerations,  for  example,  the  countervailing
       consideration of the need  to  maintain  firm  and  fair  immigration
       control, coupled with what was described as the  mother's  'appalling
       immigration history and  the  precariousness  of  her  position  when
       family life was created' but, that said:

           "...as the Tribunal rightly pointed out, the children  were  not
           to be blamed for that. And the  inevitable  result  of  removing
           their primary carer would be that they had to leave with her. On
           the facts, it is as least as strong a case as Edore v  Secretary
           of State for the Home Department [2003] 1 WLR 2979, where  Simon
           Brown LJ held that "there really is  only  room  for  one  view"
           (para 26). In those circumstances, the Secretary  of  State  was
           clearly right to concede that there could be only one answer."

  432. In paragraph 42 of the decision, the Supreme Court spoke of a  second
       error which lay at the heart of the appeal:

           "The tribunal found that the mother  knew  full  well  that  her
           immigration status was precarious before the youngest child  was
           born. On looking at all the evidence in the round,  it  was  not
           satisfied that her decisions to have her children  were  not  in
           some measure motivated by a belief that having children  in  the
           United  Kingdom  of  a  British  citizen  would  make  her  more
           difficult to remove. It accepted that the children were innocent
           of the mother's shortcomings. But it went on  to  say  that  the
           eventual need to take a decision as to where the  children  were
           to live must have been apparent  both  to  the  father  and  the
           mother ever since they began their relationship and  decided  to
           have  children  together.  It  was  upon   the   importance   of
           maintaining a proper and efficient system of immigration in this
           respect that in the  final  analysis  the  tribunal  placed  the
           greatest weight. The best interests of the children melted  away
           into the background."

  433. The Supreme Court identified the tension between the need to maintain
       a  proper  and  efficient  system  of  immigration  control  and  the
       principle that, where children were involved, the best  interests  of
       the children had to be a primary consideration. Whilst the fact  that
       the  mother's  immigration  status  was  precarious  when  they  were
       conceived might lead to a suspicion that the parents saw  this  as  a
       way of strengthening her case, considerations of that kind could  not
       be held against the children:

           "It would be wrong in principle to devalue  what  was  in  their
           best interests by something for which they could in  no  way  be
           held to be responsible."

  434. The Supreme Court has recently had an opportunity  to  draw  together
       the judicial learning on the best  interests  of  the  child,  in  an
       immigration context, in Zoumbas v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2013] UKSC 74, where Lord Hodge, delivering the  judgment
       of the Court, identified seven legal principles, which  "are  not  in
       doubt":

           "(1)   The best interests of a child are an integral part of the
                proportionality assessment  under Article 8 ECHR;

           (2)    In making that assessment, the best interests of a  child
                must be a primary consideration,  although  not  always  the
                only primary consideration; and the child's  best  interests
                do not of  themselves  have  the  status  of  the  paramount
                consideration;

           (3)    Although the best interests of a child can be  outweighed
                by the cumulative effect of other considerations,  no  other
                consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

           (4)    While different judges might approach the question of the
                best interests of a child in different ways, it is important
                to ask oneself the right questions in an orderly  manner  in
                order to avoid the risk that the best interests of  a  child
                might be undervalued  when  other  important  considerations
                were in play;

           (5)    It is important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
                circumstances and of what is in a   child's  best  interests
                before  one  asks  oneself  whether  those   interests   are
                outweighed by the force of other considerations;

           (6)    To  that  end  there  is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
                examination of all relevant factors   when the interests  of
                a child are involved in an Article 8 assessment; and

           (7)    A child must not be blamed for matters for  which  he  or
                she is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

 His  Lordship  then  added  the  following  "comments"  to   these   seven
       principles:

     "[13]...First,  the  decision-maker  is   required   to   assess   the
           proportionality of the interference with private and family life
           in the particular circumstances in which the decision  is  made.
           The evaluative exercise in assessing the  proportionality  of  a
           measure under Article 8 ECHR excludes any "hard-edged or bright-
           line rule to be applied to the generality of cases": EB (Kosovo)
           v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] AC 1159, per
           Lord Bingham at para 12. Secondly, as Lord Mance pointed out  in
           H(H) (at para 98) the decision-maker must evaluate  the  child's
           best interests and in some cases they may point only  marginally
           in one, rather than another, direction. Thirdly, as the case  of
           H(H)  shows  in  the  context  of  extradition,  there  may   be
           circumstances  in  which   the   weight   of   another   primary
           consideration can tip the  balance  and  make  the  interference
           proportionate even where it has  very  severe  consequences  for
           children...The third principle in para 10 above  is  subject  to
           the first and second qualifications and may,  depending  on  the
           circumstances, be subject to the third. But in our view,  it  is
           not likely that a  court  would  reach  in  the  context  of  an
           immigration decision what Lord Wilson described in H(H) (at para
           172) as the "firm if  bleak"  conclusion  in  that  case,  which
           separated young children from their parents."

  435. In JO (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2010]
       EWCA  Civ  10  the  Court  of  Appeal  drew  a  distinction   between
       deportation cases and removal  cases  in  that,  generally,  the  two
       involve the pursuit of different  legitimate  aims.   In  deportation
       cases it is the prevention of disorder or crime.  In removal cases it
       is the maintenance of effective immigration control.  The  difference
       in aim was potentially important because the  factors  in  favour  of
       expulsion were capable of carrying greater weight  in  a  deportation
       case than in a removal case. The maintenance of effective immigration
       control was important but the protection of society  against  serious
       crime was more so with the  consequence  that  it  attracted  greater
       weight in the balancing exercise but with the inevitable result  that
       the public interest might be less in a removal  case.   In  principle
       family and private life considerations may be sufficiently weighty to
       render expulsion disproportionate in a removal case, yet insufficient
       to render expulsion  disproportionate  in  a  deportation  case.  The
       actual weight to be placed on the criminal offending must  of  course
       depend on the seriousness of the offences and the other circumstances
       of the case:

           "But  if  reliance  is  placed  only  on  effective  immigration
           control, it is  difficult  to  see  how  the  person's  criminal
           offending would relate to that aim or,  therefore,  count  as  a
           factor positively favouring removal. On the other hand, it might
           still have a significant effect on the  proportionality  balance
           by reducing the weight to be placed on the  person's  family  or
           private life: to take an obvious example,  where  a  person  has
           spent long periods in detention, his family ties and social ties
           are likely to be fewer or weaker than if  he  has  been  in  the
           community throughout. Criminal offending  can  therefore  remain
           relevant  even  if  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
           control is the only aim of the  removal  decision;  but  careful
           account must be taken of how it bears on that decision."

  436. The Court of Appeal accepted the Tribunal had taken into account  the
       fact that the child had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  early
       childhood but said there was nothing to show that it did  so  with  a
       proper understanding of the importance  of  this  for  the  issue  of
       private life. (Nor to  the  fact  that  his  criminal  offences  were
       committed as a juvenile.)

Our assessment

General considerations

  437. Both sides in this  litigation  have  adopted  extreme  positions  in
       relationship to the factors  that  support  their  respective  cases.
       Perhaps that  is  the  inevitable  result  of  the  United  Kingdom's
       adversarial system.  In particular, great effort has  been  taken  by
       the  representatives  to  emphasise  highly  selective  passages   in
       European case law as if this represented  the  words  of  a  statute.
       Thus authorities covering many hundreds of pages  have  been  scoured
       for the  purple  prose  that  best  represents  a  single  answer  to
       proportionality.   Hence,  'very  serious  reasons  are  required  to
       justify expulsion', 'insurmountable obstacles' or 'the removal of the
       non-national family member would be incompatible with Article 8  only
       in exceptional circumstances'.  All  of  these  expressions  struggle
       with the line that has to be drawn between recognising the serious  -
       and distressing - impact on the lives of those who are to be  removed
       from a country with which they have established deep  links  and  the
       recognition that there is a public interest in maintaining  a  humane
       system of immigration control because  no  country  -  that  is,  the
       citizens who contribute to its welfare - can afford to house and feed
       the rest of humanity without imposing restrictions on those  who  may
       enter.

  438. It is, on any view, an unequal comparison.   The  innocent  child  is
       readily identifiable as an individual who will suffer and  inevitably
       becomes the focus of an Article 8 claim.  The public interest, by its
       very nature, is not susceptible to that type  of  suffering  but  the
       detriment to the community as a whole which a breach  of  immigration
       control may bring, whilst shared amongst many, is real enough.

General considerations - The oral evidence

  439. We were enormously impressed by all  of  the  professional  witnesses
       (including  the  appellants'  former  solicitor,  Ms  Conlan)   whose
       commitment to the families goes far beyond  simply  performing  their
       jobs.  It is to their great credit (and to the  community  at  large)
       that they have taken  such  infinite  care  in  trying  to  pull  the
       children through the experiences they have been  through.   In  these
       circumstances, (and we treat this as very much going in their favour,
       rather than the reverse) they  have  become  the  advocates  for  the
       children.   Indeed,  for  more  than  one  of  them,  that  is  their
       professional title.  Nor do we see this as  skewing  their  objective
       evaluation that the children would be better  off  remaining  in  the
       United Kingdom.  It would, we feel,  fail  to  do  justice  to  their
       professionalism that any the less weight should be attached to  their
       evidence because they have befriended the families and  the  children
       in particular and, to  that  extent,  identify  themselves  with  the
       children in a strong, almost emotional, commitment.  We are  indebted
       to them for their clear insights into the damage that has  been  done
       to these children by the actions of the adults around them and  their
       assessment of the effects upon them of removal.  Nor do we  apprehend
       that the Secretary of State took a different view of their  evidence.
       Mr Blundell's muted cross-examination made it perfectly plain that it
       is not the Secretary of State's contention  that  the  evidence  from
       these witnesses should not be given its full weight.

  440. It is not, of course, the function of the professional  witnesses  to
       take  to  themselves  the  Tribunal's   task   of   balancing   these
       considerations against the public interest.  Nor did they attempt  to
       do so.  Their function was entirely focussed on the  individuals  for
       whom they  have  a  professional  responsibility.   Inevitably,  this
       results in an imbalance but it is not of  their  making,  rather  the
       inevitable consequence of their function within the  appeal  process.
       Further, as children appellants  who  are  innocent  of  wrong-doing,
       there is no call for them to engage in any  objective  evaluation  of
       their conduct.  They were, properly, astute  to  avoid  pointing  the
       finger of blame at the parents.  Such an approach could  only  damage
       the work they do, and have done, for the children.

General considerations - The public interest

  441. There is a marked difference in the application of  Article  8  in  a
       case where the individual establishes a right to remain by fulfilling
       the substantive requirements of the Immigration Rules  for  leave  to
       enter or remain in the capacity sought.  In such a case, his  removal
       will deprive him of that right or the enjoyment of that right.  It is
       a deprivation and has a very different character  compared  with  the
       case of a person who has no substantive right to remain or  who  does
       not enjoy settled status.  His removal is  merely  the  corollary  of
       having no right to remain.   More  importantly,  to  acknowledge  his
       having a right to remain (that is, to defeat removal)  by  reason  of
       his presence is the United Kingdom is to create for him a right  that
       he does not possess.  This is not the creation of absolute principles
       but rather the acknowledgment of different situations.

  442. Whilst these considerations will apply to an overstayer,  they  apply
       with particular force to  a  person  whose  presence  in  the  United
       Kingdom has never had any underlying or substantive right to  support
       it.  They apply with greater  force  still  to  the  person  who  has
       acquired  entry  by  some  form  of  deception  because  the   active
       participation in concealment from the United Kingdom  authorities  of
       his true position is the means by which he  has  secured  his  entry.
       Where, on a proper assessment of the facts, a  person's  presence  in
       the  United  Kingdom  is  only  attributable  to  such  a  course  of
       concealment, the recognition of a right to remain sanctions the  very
       outcome that the appellant has engineered by his  initial  deception.
       That is a very weighty factor against permitting  these  families  to
       remain.

  443. In this appeal, the Secretary of State categorises  this  as  sending
       out the wrong message but that, to some  extent,  misses  the  point.
       Whilst it will, of  course,  encourage  others  to  commit  the  same
       deception if no effective sanction is provided against  it,  it  will
       also result in the specific unfairness that arises in  this  case  as
       far  as  the  parents  are  concerned  for  it  will  sanction  their
       benefitting from that which they had no right to benefit from in  the
       first place.  There is therefore a force behind the  public  interest
       which is based on a fundamental principle of fairness.

  444. There are no absolutes in this.   The  pressing  public  interest  in
       preventing the person who uses dishonesty  from  achieving  his  goal
       will, in appropriate circumstances, give way to a wider interest that
       there are other forces in play.  Hence, a sufficiently long period of
       residence (even unlawfully) might displace  the  public  interest  in
       removal or the existence of a policy which permits  derogation.   So,
       too, the weight to be attached to  the  interest  of  those  who  are
       innocent of wrong-doing, such as the children.  This does not operate
       to diminish the public interest; rather it  acknowledges  the  weight
       attached to countervailing factors.

Conclusions - The families

Qadir Ahmed and Nasreen Bi's family

  445. Whilst being careful to avoid taking responsibility themselves, Qadir
       Ahmed and his wife Nasreen Bi repeat the claim that  they  were  both
       new to the country, illiterate and uneducated and were merely  acting
       under the directions of Mohammed Faruq, we do not accept  that  self-
       description. We are, however,  prepared  to  accept  that  they  have
       sufficient awareness that they have placed  their  children  in  this
       difficult position. Doubtless they are speaking the truth  when  they
       said they thought they would provide their  children  with  a  better
       life in the United Kingdom but we have rejected their claim that they
       were unaware  that  what  they  were  doing  was  wrong.  Whilst  the
       differences that we have pointed out are the result of the actions of
       their parents, the children have  all  received  the  benefit  of  an
       education in the United Kingdom which  was  one  of  the  motives  in
       bringing them here. Removal will, of course, prevent  the  fulfilment
       of that aspiration but the children will still return having received
       a better education than they would have received in Pakistan  and  at
       no cost. The family have also been supported by benefits  during  the
       period they have remained in the United Kingdom which would not  have
       been the case had they remained in Pakistan. Whether or not they have
       had need to recourse  to  it,  the  family  has  benefited  from  the
       provision of health care.  Qadir Ahmed tells us that he suffers  from
       bad asthma.

  446. Qadir Ahmed speaks of his daughters having more freedom in the United
       Kingdom than they would do in Pakistan and the opportunity to receive
       both an education  and  a  worthwhile  career,  and  that  these  are
       benefits that they would not  have  received  had  they  remained  in
       Pakistan.

  447. Further, whilst we have pointed out the sharp distinctions that exist
       between those children who happened to  be  named  as  dependants  on
       their successful parent's claim and those who happened to be named as
       dependants to their unsuccessful  parent's  claim,  (between,  as  it
       were, the haves and the have-nots) this was at the very core  of  the
       scheme that had been devised.  Whilst we do not say that any  of  the
       parents had the sophistication to devise this refinement,  it  was  a
       classic example of hedging their bets.  Each  set  of  parents  might
       have made a single unmeritorious asylum claim with all their children
       as dependants.   Had  that  single  claim  failed,  none  would  have
       benefitted from  being  recognised  as  a  refugee.   Yet,  with  two
       separate  claims,  the  chance  of  success  was  doubled   and   the
       unsuccessful claimants might then hope to join  themselves  with  the
       fate of their successful spouse or siblings.  Despite the passage  of
       time, this remains, essentially,  the  same  argument.   All  of  the
       unsuccessful siblings rely on the fate  of  their  successful  family
       members as a  cardinal  feature  of  their  claims  to  benefit  from
       consistent  or  equal  treatment.   Unsurprisingly,   none   of   the
       successful siblings seek to rely on the fate  of  their  unsuccessful
       siblings.  The haves are used as a lever to advance the claims of the
       have-nots but not vice-versa.

  448. It is a mark of the damaging  position  in  which  the  parents  have
       placed their children that, in his statement, Tousif  speaks  of  the
       difficult time they faced when  the  family  arrived  in  the  United
       Kingdom. At that time, he was only 11 years old. He said:

           "I do remember that it was a shock. I did not really  understand
           why we were brought here. Then we were told  to  lie,  and  told
           that we would have to leave the country if we did not lie. I did
           not understand why all this was happening.  I  was  a  child.  I
           remember feeling stressed about it, and then feeling embarrassed
           and upset when people found out  about  the  lies.  This  was  a
           horrible time, but it is a long time since all of this happened.
           We have kept going and have worked hard to  make  lives  in  the
           UK."

  449. It is, of course, a feature of this appeal  that  the  children  have
       been required  to  continue  with  the  untruthful  account  of  what
       occurred to them in India.  For  example,  in  his  statement  of  25
       October 2009, Toukeer continued to speak of his upbringing  in  India
       and the fact that the Indian Army took his  father  away  on  two  or
       three occasions which prompted their departure from India.

  450. The sharp divisions that exist in the various families arise  because
       some of the applications for asylum were accepted by the Secretary of
       State as truthful and this resulted in the grant of settled status to
       those children who, by chance, were placed as dependants to the claim
       of  the  successful  parent.  There   is,   therefore,   an   obvious
       inconsistency of treatment. However, the appellants have  not  sought
       to rely upon this as an inconsistency which  supports  their  claims.
       Nor could they rightly do so. It cannot properly be argued  that  the
       decision-maker who accepted as credible the account of the applicant-
       parent was acting irrationally in doing  so.  Plainly  the  decision-
       maker who did not accept as credible the account  of  the  applicant-
       parent was not acting irrationally in doing so since the account  was
       untruthful. The division that exists within these families is, in our
       judgment, the inevitable consequence of the false claims being  made.
       Had those claims not been advanced,  none  would  have  been  granted
       leave to remain and the different consequences which have  arisen  as
       between some children on the one hand and their siblings on the other
       would not have arisen. The Secretary of State is not responsible  for
       this situation having arisen and  it  cannot  be  classified  as  the
       result of a dysfunctional decision-making process.

  451. Notwithstanding the length of time the  families  have  been  in  the
       United Kingdom, it is noticeable that Diane Jackson and Johanne  Huyg
       refer to using interpreters in the  interviews  they  have  conducted
       with the parents.  The clear inference is that  the  parents  do  not
       speak English.  This means that the children, when at home,  have  to
       converse in the  language  used  by  their  parents,  at  least  when
       speaking to them.  We treat with some scepticism the claims  made  by
       the parents that they live in polyglot households where communication
       is a problem, see for example Rungzaib Mohamed's statement [Bundle  3
       Tab A p.2 para 7] in which he describes children and adults not being
       able fully to understand each  other.  Thus,  whilst  we  accept  the
       extent to which the children have become integrated into English life
       (indeed, they were described as  'British  Asians')  inevitably  they
       retain many cultural, religious and linguistic ties with Pakistan.

  452. Given the fact that, ultimately, this family's presence in the United
       Kingdom was, has always been and remains, the  result  of  deception,
       there is  a  compelling  public  interest  in  removing  those  whose
       presence is not the result of having satisfied the  requirements  for
       entry clearance or leave to remain  but  has  been  achieved  through
       wrong-doing.

  453. This applies with its full force in the case of the  parents.   There
       is a legitimate public interest in seeing that an  individual  should
       not  be  permitted  to  benefit  from  his  wrong-doing   and,   once
       discovered, be permitted to retain what he has got by unlawful means.
        The proposition is so simple that it hardly needs be stated.

  454. The public interest however is both  realistic  and  humane  and  the
       substance of this appeal has been to seek ways by  which  the  public
       interest should properly be regarded as reduced by demonstrating that
       the parents had little personal responsibility for what  took  place,
       that they should be seen as victims rather than as offenders and that
       this principle in its most acute form is their categorisation as  the
       victims of trafficking.  The arguments have included claims that they
       have been unfairly treated by a system - including the appeal process
       - that has delayed  decisions  in  their  cases,  that  has  produced
       inconsistent decisions and - in general terms - has unfairly operated
       as between one person and another.  For the reasons we have given, we
       have largely discounted the weight that should be attached  to  these
       countervailing arguments directed at reducing the public interest  in
       removal.  The stark reality remains that if the  parents  succeed  in
       establishing a claim to remain, it will be to have achieved the  very
       thing that their wrong-doing was designed to achieve.   They will not
       have established a claim to have been recognised as  refugees  or  in
       need of humanitarian protection or at risk of harm; it  will  not  be
       because they meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules which are
       an expression of the  policy  -  social  and  political  -  aimed  at
       distinguishing between those who are permitted to enter or remain and
       those who are not.   Further, having made use of resources  in  terms
       of maintenance, accommodation, and education as well as the right  to
       access healthcare (whether provided or not) to  which  no  legitimate
       entitlement  existed,  the  parents  will,  if  entitled  to  remain,
       continue to benefit from these sources irrespective of whether or not
       they contribute.  It is a matter of substance and not form: it is not
       about sending out the "wrong message".

  455. If this is the nature of the public interest,  and  in  our  view  it
       remains a  compelling  one,  this  has  to  be  weighed  against  the
       situation as it presents itself now, after the passage of many  years
       during which time, both individually  and  collectively,  the  family
       members have pursued their lives in the United Kingdom.  There can be
       no escaping the fact that the parents could have resolved this  years
       before.  If they knew their arrival was on a false basis,  they  knew
       by 2004 that the authorities were aware of this  and  planning  their
       removal.  More than anybody else,  irrespective  of  what  they  told
       their advisers, they knew their claim had no foundation  to  it.   We
       have considered at length the weight that is to be attached to  delay
       on  the  part  of  the  United  Kingdom  authorities,  including  the
       Tribunal, but this should divert attention from  the  fact  that  the
       parents' continued presence in the United Kingdom  was  a  matter  of
       choice without there being a  sound  basis  that  they  were  somehow
       entitled to remain.   In many respects, the reticence on the parents'
       part to leave was understandable.  We daresay they hoped it would all
       work out in their favour in the end.  The longer they  remained,  the
       better the prospects.  However, there was never any legitimate  basis
       for those hopes and there was no-one in a better position  than  they
       were to know that underlying all their  claims  was  the  fundamental
       fragility of a claim to have a right to remain.  Were there to be  no
       children involved, none of these parents  would  have  a  significant
       claim that their hopes outweighed the public interest.

  456. It is easy to see, therefore, why the children must  be  our  primary
       consideration, as their best interests fuel the balance operating  in
       favour of them - and their  parents  -  being  permitted  to  remain,
       notwithstanding the grudging  acceptance  that  this  will  mean  the
       parents have, to put it colloquially, 'won the day'.  Much  time  and
       effort has been expended on the almost biblical significance of  what
       are said to be two competing legal principles: 'the wrongdoing of the
       fathers must not be visited upon the  children'  and  'strong  policy
       considerations favour identifying children with the conduct of  their
       parents'.  The reality, of course, is that neither amounts to a legal
       principle but broadly reflect  the  dichotomy  faced  by  immigration
       authorities in searching for a solution when children become enmeshed
       in the unlawful actions of their parents.

  457. There is no doubt that these children have already  suffered  by  the
       conduct of their parents and others.  They have been abused.  Nowhere
       is this clearer than in the accounts of being drilled  with  a  false
       account of the loss of a parent and being  forced  to  lie  and  then
       suffer the humiliation of discovery and their  parents'  convictions.
       We can hardly  imagine  the  sense  of  shame  those  old  enough  to
       comprehend their own situation must have felt and the  position  this
       must have placed them in in relation to their  friends  and  teachers
       and support workers.  Understandably, the witnesses called  on  their
       behalf did not dwell on  this  element.   We  greatly  respect  these
       children for the manner in which they have dealt with what they  were
       expected to do; indeed, forced to do.  In none  of  the  material  is
       there a suggestion of a sense of grievance or recrimination  for  the
       pain that this must have caused them.  However  misguided  this  was,
       the children must have felt that their parents' intentions  were  for
       their own good.

  458. It is hardly necessary to re-state that the children are innocent  of
       their parents' wrongdoing; indeed they have  suffered  by  it.   Yet,
       this fact alone cannot be determinative  or  otherwise  the  parents'
       removal might never be sanctioned as  proportionate  however  serious
       their wrongdoing.  The two elements remain  in  competition;  neither
       determinative either as a matter of law or  of  fact.    The  obvious
       tension that exists between them can only be resolved as part of  the
       balance that needs to be struck.

  459. Sulva Bi, now aged 19 does not benefit  from  the  Ahmad  and  others
       decision and was 7 at the date of entry.  Those speaking of her do so
       with the utmost respect and sympathy.  Indeed, her  vulnerability  is
       one of the characteristics that comes across most clearly.   She  has
       started helping at East Oxford Primary School doing unpaid  work  and
       has some  intellectual  difficulties.   She  lacks  confidence.   Her
       younger sister Salma appears to be doing well at school where she  is
       studying for her GCSEs and whatever consequences may  flow  from  her
       successfully  achieving  them.  Sulva  and  Salma  fall  within   the
       qualifying condition of paragraph 276 ADE (iv) or (v) either under 18
       and having spent 7 years in the United Kingdom or between 18  and  25
       and having spent more than half their life in the United Kingdom.  No
       useful distinction can be drawn because Sulva achieved refugee status
       and indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of  the  father's  claim
       whereas her sister did not.

  460. Both will return to a country with which they have not lost all  ties
       notwithstanding the fact that Salma was only 2 � at the time  of  her
       departure.  The home in which they live and  the  parents  with  whom
       they live have not abandoned their cultural,  linguistic  and  social
       links with Pakistan.  The experts speak of them as a  normal  British
       Asian family and there may well be very little to differentiate  them
       from other such families who have  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.
       However, there is  the  significant  difference  that  this  family's
       presence has never been legitimate.  The family as a  whole  and  the
       parents in particular have not become so immersed in  western  values
       as to have lost their cultural roots.  We accept  that  the  children
       have adapted more readily and to a much greater extent into a British
       society having spent so long within  the  British  education  system.
       However, this has been of immense value to them and  has  undoubtedly
       provided them with opportunities that they could not  have  hoped  to
       have had if they  had  remained  in  Pakistan.   Indeed,  these  very
       benefits  are  relied  upon  as  a   principal   reason   for   their
       continuation.

  461. We do not accept that the consequences for the young women  and  girl
       appellants will be so profoundly adverse as to prevent their removal.
        It is submitted on their behalf that they  will  face  a  series  of
       risks, including forced marriage and  the  associated  lack  of  free
       choice in decisions they will make about ther future.   It  seems  to
       us that if the parents are putting this forward as a reason why their
       children should not be removed, the solution is largely within  their
       own hands.  If, as a result of their presence in the United  Kingdom,
       the parents  have  become  less  sympathetic  to  cultural  norms  in
       Pakistan, we see this as operating both in the United Kingdom and  on
       return to Pakistan.  Whilst, doubtless, wider  social  pressures  may
       well be different in Pakistan, if the families as a whole have  taken
       upon themselves a different  approach  to  forced  marriages  or  the
       exercise  of  greater  freedom  of  choice,  no  mechanism  has  been
       identified by which these families will be prevented from  reflecting
       that difference in outlook on  return.   This  consideration  is  not
       confined to the children of this family; nor is it  confined  to  the
       female members of the family.

  462. The children include Toukeer and Tousif.  Toukeer is the  elder,  but
       overshadowed by his younger brother Tousif (an adult Ahmad and others
       beneficiary) who does not fall within the category of those liable to
       be removed by our decision.  For the reasons we have given, we do not
       regard the decision in Ahmad and others as requiring  Toukeer  to  be
       equated  with  his  brother  by  reason  of  the  operation  of   the
       Immigration Acts which  distinguish  between  the  removal  of  those
       previously granted indefinite leave to remain (and able to benefit by
       the Ahmad and others decision) and those like Toukeer who  never  had
       leave to remain and could not benefit from it.  There does not appear
       to us to be any principled reason why the application of  immigration
       law which has given his younger brother  a  benefit  should  be  read
       across to provide Toukeer with an equivalent status.   The  disparity
       of outcome is not the result of a dysfunctional or irrational  system
       of law but the effect of distinctions created by  statute  that  have
       had the effect of benefitting  Tousif  but  which  do  not  apply  to
       Toukeer.  The same disparity exists, according to our  view,  between
       the adult Ahmad children and other children, now adult,  like  Sulva,
       who do not benefit from it.  It inevitably causes a decision-maker to
       reflect deeply but does not cause us to  conclude  that  the  way  to
       resolve the difficulty is to equate Toukeer or  Sulva  (or  for  that
       matter Salma  who  remains  a  minor)  with  their  brother,  Tousif.
       Toukeer has  yet  to  develop  his  full  potential  because  of  the
       limitations imposed upon him by reason  of  his  immigration  status.
       Those limitations cannot be categorised, either now or in retrospect,
       as unreasonable or unfair.  He failed to be recognised as  a  refugee
       and to become entitled to indefinite leave to remain because he was a
       dependant on his mother's unsuccessful claim.  The decision to reject
       her claim was legally and factually  correct  and  remains  so.   His
       present position is the consequence of those events.  As an adult now
       aged 25, his entitlement to remain has no compelling  features  about
       it.  His claim has many unusual features about it  but  they  do  not
       establish that an exception needs to be made in the assessment of his
       claim.

  463. The effect of this consideration is  that  we  conclude  that  it  is
       proportionate to return Toukeer, Sulva and  Salma  to  Pakistan  with
       their parents as a family.  Tousif, now aged 23, is under no pressure
       to accompany them.  He is a fully independent young man, able to reap
       the advantages of his immigration status as he chooses. He  may  wish
       to remain here and offer some financial support to the other  members
       of his family or he may choose (either temporarily or permanently) to
       return to Pakistan where his prospects of success  are  significantly
       better (like all his siblings) as a result of the period spent in the
       United Kingdom.  That decision must be a matter for him  but,  if  he
       chooses to remain, it will not render our  decision  disproportionate
       as far as the other family members are concerned.  The family will be
       split but then such a split may have occurred in any event, if he had
       decided to leave  the  family  home  and  settle  elsewhere,  perhaps
       seeking entry clearance as a student. Many families disperse  as  the
       children become young adults.  It is the very nature of growing up.

Ghulam Rabani and Noreen Shakila's family

  464. Atif, Mobushra and Farah, aged 27, 25 and 23 respectively are able to
       rely on the decision in  Ahmad  and  others  for  an  entitlement  to
       remain.  Hence, three out of the six  children  are  not  subject  to
       removal.

  465. As to Nusrat, given the combined effect of her not being  responsible
       for her unlawful  entry  into  the  United  Kingdom,  and  thereafter
       remaining here, and the time she has spent  in  the  United  Kingdom,
       there is no public interest in  requiring  her  to  make  an  out-of-
       country application  for  entry  clearance  as  a  spouse  if  it  is
       established the outcome of her application is not in doubt.  This  is
       not a case where Nusrat should  be  held  responsible  for  breaching
       United Kingdom immigration law.  Where  such  responsibility  arises,
       there  may  be  a  significant  public  interest  in  requiring   the
       individual to legitimise his or her stay by returning to the  country
       of  origin  and  meeting  the  formalities  of  entry  clearance   in
       accordance with principles set out in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40
       and SSHD v Treebhowan and Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ 1054.

  466. We understand  that  Nusrat  Bi  went  through  an  Islamic  marriage
       ceremony on 20 October 2013 with Brendan Walker, a  British  citizen.
       This is not a marriage which is recognised  under  English  law  and,
       therefore, Nusrat is not legally married to Mr Walker.   However,  we
       have no reason to question either the validity of the Islamic form of
       marriage or  whether  the  couple  enjoy  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship.  We are not satisfied, however, that,  on  the  limited
       material before us, this tips the balance  in  favour  of  Nusrat  Bi
       being permitted to remain in the United Kingdom pursuant  to  Article
       8.

  467. This is an appeal where the particular circumstances of Nusrut's case
       have not been fully articulated as they would have been had she  made
       an application as a sole appellant.  For example we have insufficient
       evidence to ascertain whether she can meet the financial requirements
       of the Immigration Rules.

  468. We are not satisfied that the material before  us  is  sufficient  to
       establish a right to remain under the  Immigration  Rules,  but  that
       situation may very well be remediable by  the  provision  of  further
       information along the lines we have suggested without  the  necessity
       for her removal, there being no sensible reason for enforcing  it  if
       the only reasons she cannot meet the requirements of the Rules is her
       lack of entry clearance, and her unlawful status here.  The fact that
       the specific circumstances of her case have not been put before us in
       any detail  is  understandable  given  there  are  some  20  or  more
       appellants in this appeal and the failure cannot  properly  be  taken
       against her.

  469. Rustam and Zahra Bi are the remaining children.  They are now aged 21
       and 19 respectively.  They do not benefit from the decision in  Ahmad
       and others.  They were 8 and 7 respectively  when  they  arrived  and
       were 16 and 15 respectively when the relevant decisions were made  in
       their cases.

  470. Rustam has obtained some GCSEs but has been hampered by the fact that
       his further studies were halted because of his immigration status and
       the fact that he lacked permission to work.  Doubtless this has  been
       the cause of his resentment, his unsettled school life and  inability
       to concentrate.  In contrast, Zahra has progressed well.

  471. Whilst there is a marked disparity of outcome between  the  prospects
       faced by Rustam and Zahra when compared with the  outcome  for  Atif,
       Mobushra and Furah, (between the haves who  succeeded  in  Ahmad  and
       others and the have-nots who do not), we see no principled reason why
       the difficulty should be resolved by equating Rustam and  Zahra  with
       Atif, Mobushra and Furah.  Rustam and Zahra, both now adult, will  be
       returning with their parents and will have  significantly  benefitted
       from the time they have spent in the United Kingdom.   They  are  not
       able to establish a right to remain under the Immigration Rules  and,
       notwithstanding the period they have spent in the United Kingdom,  it
       is not disproportionate to require them to leave.

Rungzaib Mohamed and Jamila Kauser's family

  472. Ishrut and Jehan, as benefitting  from  the  decision  in  Ahmad  and
       others, are entitled to remain in the United Kingdom.  They are young
       independent adults and free to make their own decision to  remain  or
       leave.  If other members of the family are required  to  leave,  they
       may decide to do so but that will be a matter for them.  They  cannot
       assert, for example, that their parents must be permitted  to  remain
       in order to provide them with a fuller enjoyment of their  own  leave
       to remain.

  473. Alam, now adult, cannot currently be removed.  The  progress  of  his
       treatment which has been on-going for many years, is  at  a  critical
       stage because for the first time since September  2009  he  has  been
       assessed  as  capable  of  being  given  limited  autonomy  with  the
       envisaged move to Lambourn House, the open pre-discharge  unit  where
       patients become more independent in preparation for leaving hospital.
         This is a step-by-step approach and his removal at  this  stage  in
       his progress to good or better health cannot be  arrested.   We  feel
       certain that this lies behind the respondent's concession.

  474. We do not consider that this is dependent upon his parents  remaining
       in the United Kingdom.  Our reasons are as follows:

        i) Both Ishrut and Jehan are in the process of being granted  leave
           to  remain  with  the  probable  outcome  of  acquiring  British
           citizenship in due course.  As we have stated above [305] we  do
           not construe the contents of Ishrut's statement as evidencing  a
           firm resolve  to  return  to  Pakistan;  indeed,  how  could  it
           reasonably be so when she did not know  that  the  Secretary  of
           State accepted that Alam would remain in the United Kingdom?

       ii) Jehan is in a similar position to Ishrut.

      iii) Kate Helsby spoke of Alam having most contact  with  Ishrut  and
           Jehan.  Having got to know the family dynamics, Ms  Helsby  said
           that Alam related to Jehan and Ishrut best  as  they  were  most
           active in 'keeping things together'. She stated in express terms
           that, if separated from any of his  siblings,  particularly  the
           older ones, Ishrut and Jehan , Alam would struggle emotionally.

       iv) Whilst we accept that Alam remains very attached to his  mother,
           Jamila's visits to Alam have  not  been  positive  and  her  own
           mental state was precipitated by Alam's admission  to  hospital.
           According to Ms Helsby, Jamila  is  unable  to  accept  Alam  is
           unwell.

        v) Critically, Ms Helsby said  the  team  would  not  support  Alam
           living at home because she suspected Alam found it difficult  to
           cope with his mother's position.

       vi) We accept that a separation of Alam from his mother will have  a
           negative impact on him but so, too, does her presence.

  475. There are significant differences between the  family's  approach  to
       Jamila's mental illness and that of  Alam's.   Alam  is  in  hospital
       under powers requiring him to remain as an inpatient, Jamila is  not.
       The family have taken the positive stance of  not  seeking  help  for
       her.  The family are reluctant to involve mental health professionals
       in making any assessment under the Mental Health Act fearing that she
       might be involuntarily admitted to hospital. Although the family  had
       tried to encourage Jamila to see a doctor, she had refused  to  visit
       her general practitioner.  When  a  psychiatrist  and  social  worker
       visited with  a  view  to  her  formal  admission  to  a  psychiatric
       hospital, Jamila refused to communicate with  them.  She  refuses  to
       take medication.  It is apparent that the family do not have a  clear
       understanding of mental illness and live in hope - unfounded,  though
       that is  -  that  Alam  and  his  mother  will  recover  if  he  were
       discharged.

  476.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  family  finds  her  behaviour
       embarrassing and distressing, they have managed to achieve a sort  of
       equilibrium.  She is accepted in the family as the mother figure  and
       her behaviour is accepted without resulting in  destructive  friction
       within the family although,  no  doubt,  with  extreme  sadness.   As
       Kamran said, "We have to  live  with  it."   There  is  no  realistic
       prospect of her receiving voluntary treatment under the NHS and there
       is no credible material before us to establish she will  be  admitted
       involuntarily.  The situation has continued for a  sufficient  number
       of years to make this prospect a realistic assessment of the  future.
       We see this situation as prevailing in very  much  the  same  way  in
       Pakistan as in the United Kingdom.  The family will rally  round  her
       without seeking out medical treatment and avoiding  what  the  family
       believe is the alternative solution of following the path  that  Alam
       has, involuntarily, been required to follow.   This  is  not  how  we
       would view the ideal solution but we are satisfied that  the  obvious
       route  of  treatment  and  medication  will  not  happen.    Jamila's
       continued presence in the United Kingdom is not,  therefore,  reliant
       on the provision of healthcare here or the result of its  absence  in
       Pakistan.

  477. We would certainly  not  view  Jamila's  departure  from  the  United
       Kingdom as the end  of  the  relationship  between  herself  and  her
       children.  Once the children's immigration status is  settled,  there
       will be opportunities for them to visit their  parents  in  Pakistan.
       It is likely that those able to do so will provide financial  support
       to their family in Pakistan.

  478. As we have seen, Kamran aged 23 at the date of decision and  now  27,
       has fared very differently  from  his  younger  brothers,  Jehan  and
       Ishrut, two  of  the  successful  appellants  in  Ahmad  and  others.
       However, for the reasons we have given in  relation  to  the  similar
       distinction that arises for similar reasons in the cases  of  Toukeer
       and Tousif, we do not regard the disparity as meriting  Kamran  being
       equated with the position of his younger siblings, Jehan and  Ishrut.



  479. Idris, now 20, studied at Oxford Aspires Academy until  2010  sitting
       GCSEs in six  subjects  and  a  BTEC  in  Business  Level  II.  Since
       finishing school, he has had a variety of temporary jobs for Domino's
       pizzas and Chicken Hut. He had hoped to study  carpentry  at  college
       and then completed an apprenticeship but was  unable  to  afford  the
       fees.  We do not consider that, given the  underlying  circumstances,
       it would be disproportionate to remove him along with his parents and
       elder brother Kamran.  They will return as a family, albeit a  family
       reduced by the absence of Jehan, Ishrut and Alam.   We  consider  the
       family retain sufficient social, cultural and  linguistic  ties  with
       Pakistan to render this reasonable and proportionate.

  480. Similar considerations apply to Hina Bi, who  will  return  with  her
       parents and two of her brothers.

  481. Kamran, Idris and Hina have all benefitted from  the  education  they
       have received in the United Kingdom but they will not be returning to
       an alien culture, notwithstanding the fact that Hina has been in  the
       United Kingdom since she was 3 years old.

Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan's family

  482. The Secretary of State accepts that, as a matter of domestic law, she
       has no power to remove any of her own  nationals,  save  through  the
       process, inapplicable here, of  extradition.   This  places  H  in  a
       position which is  not  exactly  replicated  elsewhere.  As  we  have
       identified above, it is the case of Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan  that
       they derive rights to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  consequence
       of H's nationality and the fact that their removal would  lead  to  a
       genuine denial of H's right to remain living in the territory of  the
       European  Union.  They  also  maintain  that  such  rights  are   not
       defeasable, despite their deceptive and fraudulent acts.

  483. If they are right in this submission then, given the findings we have
       made above in relation to H, it would be unlawful for  the  Secretary
       of State to remove them, at the present time, to  Pakistan.  If  they
       are wrong in this submission, then we must  determine  whether  their
       removal would be proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued in  this
       case.

  484. Although the issue of whether H's parents rights are defeasable is  a
       matter of EU law and is not acte clare, we have declined  to  make  a
       reference to the CJEU because,  for  the  reasons  given  below,  the
       determination of this issue is not necessary to determine the outcome
       of the appeal.

  485. We are not herein considering an appeal against  a  decision  not  to
       provide EEA residence documentation. The appeal against such decision
       remains pending before the First-tier Tribunal. Our consideration  of
       whether the Zambrano rights acquired by H's parents are derogable  is
       performed within the confines of a proportionality  assessment  under
       Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention. Having  performed  such  an
       assessment we find, for the reasons set out below,  that  removal  of
       Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan to Pakistan would not be proportionate.

  486. The Secretary of  State  submits  that,  on  the  assumption  that  H
       accompanies his parents and that his enjoyment of his EU  citizenship
       rights would be suspended, this would only be a temporary suspension.
       If his citizenship were not revoked, he would be free  to  return  to
       the  United  Kingdom,  once  he  was  old  enough,  and   live   here
       permanently. On this basis, the suspension of H's citizenship, it  is
       argued, would be  proportionate  when  balancing  the  strong  public
       interest in  the  removal  of  his  parents.   In  other  words,  H's
       constructive removal from the United Kingdom accompanying his parents
       in their enforced  removal  would  balance  the  competing  force  of
       respect for the public interest in removal  while  acknowledging  his
       right to remain to the United Kingdom in due course.

    1. The Secretary  of  State  says  in  paragraph  320  of  her  skeleton
       argument:

           "...the fraud and deception practised by the family members goes
           to  the  heart  of  [H's]   British   citizenship.    In   these
           circumstances, the Secretary  of  State  would  be  entitled  to
           revoke that citizenship under the  conduciveness  provisions  of
           section 40(2) of th BNA 1981.  For the moment, she has not  done
           so.  However, that is an  option  which  she  is  keeping  under
           review, depending on the outcome of the present proceedings."

       Even if the Secretary of State is permitted to challenge the decision
       in Ahmad and others only at the conclusion of the appeals before  us,
       she cannot realistically entertain such an appeal when she has  acted
       upon the decision at least in the case of some of the adult  children
       by granting them British citizenship.

    2. There  is  another  weighty  factor  against  removal  of  H  in  the
       circumstances of this case.  A consideration of proportionality  must
       require the Tribunal to assess where the future of this  child  lies.
       The respondent's resolution of the tension between H's  rights  as  a
       British citizen and the removal of his parents whilst he is  still  a
       minor expressly acknowledges his right to resume the  full  enjoyment
       of his rights in due course if, when H has reached his  majority  (or
       perhaps earlier), he chooses to return to the United Kingdom.  Whilst
       such a  consideration  is  inevitably  speculative,  there  are  some
       indications in the present appeal that render it more likely than not
       that he will return.  He  has  relatives  in  this  country.   He  is
       conversant with  it.   It  is  accepted  that  his  circumstances  in
       Pakistan will offer limited opportunities to further his education or
       to find work save of a modest type.  The relative advantages of  life
       in the United Kingdom are obvious notwithstanding the separation that
       this would entail from his parents and siblings if they are  removed.
       Indeed, even ready access to state benefits would offer an incentive.



    3. We therefore find that H is likely to return to  the  United  Kingdom
       provided he retains the right to do so presently encapsulated in  his
       British  citizenship.   However,  he   will   do   so   substantially
       disadvantaged by reason of the curtailment for the foreseeable future
       of his right to education and training which will permit him to  make
       effective use of  his  British  citizenship.   Further,  whilst  this
       directly prejudices him, it  may  not  be  altogether  in  the  wider
       interest of society to have within  it  any  citizen  who  is  poorly
       educated and poorly trained.  Nor is it an answer to say that, in due
       course, H will have the opportunity of  resuming  his  education  and
       commencing training because  the  late  acquisition  of  such  skills
       places him at a comparative disadvantage to one who has acquired them
       in the course of his minority.

    4. In our judgment therefore these are weighty factors in favour of  H's
       remaining in the UK.  These considerations disappear, of course, were
       the respondent to have established that she had a  power  to  deprive
       him of his citizenship and had  taken  steps  to  do  so  before  the
       hearing of this appeal.  Even if, therefore, removal of H's  parents,
       and consequently constructively of  H,  is  permissible  when  it  is
       proportionate to do so, the factors weighing in the  balance  against
       removal demonstrate just what significant hurdles  the  Secretary  of
       State has to overcome before she can establish it is proportionate to
       do so.

    5. It is possible to contemplate a case where  the  public  interest  in
       removing a person who has been convicted of the most  heinous  crimes
       outweigh the interests of a British child of  whom  he  is  the  sole
       carer but H's case is not such a case.  Even were it to be  one,  the
       child's removal might then be avoided by  the  intervention  of  care
       proceedings designed to place the child in an alternative home in the
       United Kingdom.  Whilst  a  possible  outcome  might  have  been  the
       placement of H within the home of a relative (perhaps even  an  adult
       child), this is not a  solution  which  has  been  suggested  by  the
       Secretary of State in the circumstances of this appeal.  None of  his
       own adult siblings has established a right to remain and therefore to
       have carved out the identity as a potential carer.

    6. Since both parents bear a similar responsibility  for  the  situation
       that has arisen, the solution is not to be found in  the  removal  of
       one parent whilst permitting the other to remain.  This will often be
       the result where one parent is convicted of  serious  crime  and  the
       other, with a right to remain, is  innocent.   Ironically,  the  fact
       that both parents have been  convicted  of  a  conspiracy  affords  a
       greater barrier to their removal than if only one parent had been the
       wrong-doer.  Further, the respondent has never  suggested  that  this
       was a viable solution.

    7. The effect of these considerations is that the removal of H's parents
       is impermissible as this will effectively deprive their  son  of  his
       right to exercise the benefits of being a British citizen  in  a  way
       that amounts to a disproportionate interference.

    8. Inevitably, this impacts upon the fate  of  his  minor  siblings  who
       cannot be removed if their parents remain.   This  leaves  the  adult
       twins, Wasim and Arfan.

    9. As we have already pointed out, these appeals raise significant issue
       as to disparity of treatment.  Wasim and Arfan are themselves such an
       example.  However,  this  has  been  the  result  of  their  parents'
       behaviour, not the effect of failings in the  system  of  immigration
       control.  It has resulted in families being split into those  members
       who have been relatively more successful than  others.   As  we  have
       pointed out, Wasim has been most affected in this family, giving up a
       course he started suffering from the effects of depression, for which
       he  was  prescribed  medication  by   his   GP.    It   is   entirely
       understandable that those who have suffered most from the disparities
       that have emerged in these cases will have become  depressed  by  the
       situation created, fundamentally, by their parents.  However, Wasim's
       condition does not approach that of Alam in terms of the severity  of
       the mental heath difficulties he faces.

   10. We have reached the conclusion that, as adults who do  not  have  the
       responsibility of looking after H, it  is  proportionate  to  require
       them to leave the United Kingdom.  In reaching  this  conclusion,  we
       accept that this  has  created  a  disparity  between  them  (as  the
       innocent victims of their parents' wrongdoing) and their parents  who
       bear that burden of responsibility and yet  have  been  permitted  to
       remain.  We have this well in mind.  The parents, however,  have  not
       established a right  to  remain  in  recognition  of  their  actions;
       rather, H should be  permitted  to  have  them  remain  with  him  in
       recognition of his rights.   Nor do we  necessarily  say  that  their
       right to remain must be made permanent.  All  we  conclude  is  that,
       during the minority of H, it  would  be  disproportionate  to  remove
       them.  It will be for the respondent to determine what should  happen
       when H reaches adulthood.

  487. The result in this case is analogous to  the  Ahmad  children.   They
       were distinguished  by  the  way  that  the  law  operated  in  their
       respective cases, brought about by age and differences  arising  from
       those with settled status and those without.  Distinctions were drawn
       by the operation of the legal system but this does not mean that  the
       system is dysfunctional or discriminatory; merely that lines have  to
       be drawn.  In the case of H, this has resulted in his  parents  being
       permitted to remain in circumstances where, were  it  for  their  own
       efforts or actions, this result would not have ensued.  For them, the
       result is not based on merit but upon due recognition of  the  rights
       that are attracted to the rights of another.

DECISION

       The panel made an error on  a  point  of  law  and  we  substitute  a
       determination in the following terms:


Family 1 Qadir Ahmed's family
      1. The appeals of (i) Qadir Ahmed and (ii) Nasreen Bi are dismissed.
      2. The  appeals  of  their  children  Toukeer,  Sulva  and  Salma  are
         dismissed.
      3. Tousif Ahmed has succeeded by reason of the decision in  Ahmad  and
         others (removal of children over 18) [2012] UKUT 00267(IAC).


Family 2 Ghulam Rabani's family
      4. The appeals of (i)  Ghulam  Rabani  and  (ii)  Noreen  Shakila  are
         dismissed.
      5. The appeals of their children Nusrat Bi, Rustam and  Zahra  Bi  are
         dismissed.
      6. Mohammed Atif, Mobushra Begum and Farah  Begum  have  succeeded  by
         reason of the decision in Ahmad and others.


Family 3 Rungzaib Mohamed's family
      7. The appeals of (i) Rungzaib Mohamed  and  (ii)  Jamila  Kauser  are
         dismissed.
      8. The appeals  of  their  children  Kamran  Idris  and  Hina  Bi  are
         dismissed.
      9. The appeal of their son, Alam, is allowed.
     10. Jehan and Ishrut have succeeded by reason of the decision in  Ahmad
         and others (removal of children over 18) [2012] UKUT 00267(IAC).


Family 4 Mehmood Ahmed's family
     11. The appeals of (i) Mehmood Ahmed and (ii) Fazal Jan are allowed.
     12. The appeals of their minor children, Atteqa and Adeel, are allowed.
     13.  The  appeals  of  their  adult  children,  Wasim  and  Arfan,  are
         dismissed.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                10 July 2014
                                  ADDENDUM

 1. The hearing resumed on 14 October 2014 by which time  a  draft  of  our
    determination had been sent  to  the  parties  under  embargo  for  the
    purposes of checking errors and omissions  and  in  order  to  consider
    questions of anonymity.  The  determination  in  this  draft  form,  as
    corrected, appears above, otherwise without alteration.

 2. On 14 October 2014, there were two significant new matters.  First, the
    provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act,  2002  had
    been amended by the introduction of Part 5A and  sections  117-117D  by
    operation of s. 19 of the Immigration Act 2014.   Second,  a  few  days
    before the resumed hearing, the Court of Appeal had decided YM (Uganda)
    v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 (10 October 2014) which touched upon  these
    new provisions.  YM (Uganda) had been heard by the Court of  Appeal  on
    19 June 2014. On 28 July 2014 part 5A came  into  force  prior  to  the
    judgment in YM (Uganda). On 10 October 2014, the Court of Appeal handed
    down its judgment in YM (Uganda) which by then had taken  into  account
    the provisions of Part 5A.

 3. We gave directions for  consolidated  written  submissions  as  to  the
    relevance to our decision of (i) the new Part 5A of the  2002  Act  and
    (ii) the decision in YM (Uganda).  The Secretary of State's submissions
    were submitted by Mr Blundell on 4 November 2014 and those by  Mr  Toal
    on 28 November 2014 to which Mr Blundell replied on 12  December  2014.
    We were only able to resume the hearing on 12 February 2015 in order to
    permit Mr Blundell and Mr Toal to address us orally on these matters.

 4. In the meantime, Mr Blundell had been involved in the appeal  of  Singh
    and Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 (12 February 2015)  in  which  the
    Court of Appeal agreed to hand down its judgment at 9.30  that  morning
    to enable us to have sight of  it  for  the  purposes  of  our  resumed
    consideration later that morning.  The following is  our  determination
    on these additional matters.

Legal Background

Part 5A of the 2002 Act

   5. We begin by setting out the provisions of Part 5A,  emboldening  those
      parts which have particular significance:

        117A Application of this Part


        (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
        determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


           (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and family
           life under Article 8, and


           (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human
           Rights Act 1998.


        (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
        tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


           (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section  117B,
           and


           (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to
           the considerations listed in section 117C.


        (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
        question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
        respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
        8(2).


        117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
        cases


        (1)The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
        public interest.


        (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
        interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
        persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
        to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


        (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
        interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
        persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
        financially independent, because such persons-


           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


        (4) Little weight should be given to-


           (a) a private life, or


           (b) a relationship formed with a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
           established by a person at a time when  the  person  is  in  the
           United Kingdom unlawfully.


        (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
        a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
        precarious.


        (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
        public interest does not require the person's removal where-


           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and


           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           United Kingdom.


        117C Article 8 additional considerations in cases involving foreign
        criminals.


        (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.


        (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
        the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.


        (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
        sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
        public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
        Exception 2 applies.


        (4) Exception 1 applies where-


           (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most
           of C's life,


           (b) C is  socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
           Kingdom, and


           (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration
           into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.


        (5) Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
        parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
        C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


        (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  a
        period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
        requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
        circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
        2.


        (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are  to  be  taken
        into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
        deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
        the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
        been convicted.


        117D Interpretation of this Part


        (1)  In this Part-


        "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
        Rights;


        "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
        who-


           (a) is a British citizen, or


           (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of
           seven years or more;


        ...


        (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


           (a) who is not a British citizen,


           (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an  offence,
           and


           (c) who -


             (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least
             12 months,


             (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has  caused  serious
             harm, or


             (iii) is a persistent offender.


        (3)  ...


        (4)  In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to
        a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-


           (a)  do not include  a  person  who  has  received  a  suspended
           sentence (unless a court subsequently orders that  the  sentence
           or any part of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);


           (b)  do not include a person who has been sentenced to a  period
           of imprisonment of that length of time only by virtue  of  being
           sentenced to consecutive sentences  amounting  in  aggregate  to
           that length of time;


           (c)  include a person who is sentenced to detention, or  ordered
           or directed to be detained,  in  an  institution  other  than  a
           prison (including, in particular, a hospital or  an  institution
           for young offenders) for that length of time; and


           (d)  include a  person  who  is  sentenced  to  imprisonment  or
           detention, or  ordered  or  directed  to  be  detained,  for  an
           indeterminate period, provided that it may  last  for  at  least
           that length of time.


        (5) If any question arises for the purposes  of  this  Part  as  to
        whether a person is  a  British  citizen,  it  is  for  the  person
        asserting that fact to prove it."


YM (Uganda) v SSHD


   6. In YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 (10 October 2014),  YM  who
      was born  on  24  June  1984,  was  sentenced  to  3  years  5  months
      imprisonment for terrorist offences.  On 22 May 2008 (then aged 23) he
      was served with a deportation notice by the SSHD.


   7. As a result of a successful appeal, the re-making of the decision  was
      delayed until 2 May 2013 by which time significant changes  have  been
      introduced on 9 July 2012 to the approach to be adopted in  Article  8
      cases. By this time YM's case fell to be determined,  potentially,  by
      reference to three different legal regimes.

   8. Unsurprisingly, the issue of whether the First-tier  Tribunal  or  the
      Upper Tribunal had made an error of  law  had  to  be  ascertained  by
      reference to the law as it applied to the date on  which  the  earlier
      appeals had been determined. Both the new Part 5A to the 2002 Act  and
      the 2014 Rules were irrelevant to the Court's first task  in  deciding
      whether the making of the decision involved the making of an error  on
      a point of law. The issue, however, arose as to which  regime  applied
      at the various stages in the appeal  process.  YM  was  a  deportation
      case. Paragraph A362 of the Immigration Rules expressly provided  that
      the Rule changes of 9 July 2012 were to apply regardless of  when  the
      deportation order was made. Thus, the  Upper  Tribunal  was  bound  to
      consider the approach to Article 8 introduced in 2012.

Singh and Khalid v SSHD

   9. In Singh and Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 (12 February 2015),  the
      Court of Appeal confirmed in Foot Note 7 that as different  provisions
      apply to the deportation of  foreign  criminals  YM  (Uganda)  had  no
      bearing on the case before it.   This  supports  our  approach  to  YM
      (Uganda).


  10.  Singh  and  Khalid  each  received  decisions  which  post-dated  the
      introduction of the new Rules on 9 July 2012  although  in  each  case
      their respective applications had been made before their introduction.
       The general issue raised was whether the new Rules should  have  been
      applied notwithstanding the fact that in both the original application
      was made before 9 July 2012.  The issue was the subject of  apparently
      conflicting decisions in the Court of Appeal: Edgehill v Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402  and  Haleemudeen  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  558.   Mr
      Blundell had contended that there was in truth no conflict between the
      decisions in Edgehill and Haleemudeen but Underhill LJ did not  accept
      that  contention.  Underhill  LJ  had  no  doubt  that  Edgehill   and
      Haleemudeen were indeed inconsistent and, given  a  choice,  he  would
      follow Edgehill.  Given the terms of the implementation provisions  to
      the effect that if an application has been made before 9 July 2012 and
      not yet decided, 'it will be decided in accordance with the  rules  in
      force on 8 July 2012', this plainly constituted a contrary  indication
      of the kind envisaged in Odelola v  SSHD  [2009]  UKHL  25,  with  the
      result that the  new  Rules  should  be  ignored  in  considering  any
      application made prior to 9 July 2012: the Secretary of State was  not
      entitled to take into account the provisions of the new Rules  (either
      directly or by treating them as a statement  of  her  current  policy)
      when making decisions on private  or  family  life  applications  made
      prior to that date but not yet decided. That was because,  as  decided
      in Edgehill, the implementation provision displaced the usual  Odelola
      principle.  But that position was altered by HC 565 - specifically  by
      the introduction of the new paragraph  A277C  -  with  effect  from  6
      September 2012. As from that date the Secretary of State was  entitled
      to take into account the provisions  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraphs
      276ADE-276DH in deciding private or family life applications  even  if
      they were made prior to 9 July 2012. The result is that the law as  it
      was held to be in Edgehill only obtained as regards decisions taken in
      the two-month window between 9 July and  6  September  2012.   Neither
      decision fell within that window. Accordingly the Secretary  of  State
      was entitled to apply the new Rules in reaching the decisions as  both
      the decisions with which this Court was  concerned  in  Edgehill  were
      made after 5 September 2012, outside the window referred to  in  Singh
      and Khalid.


Decision and discussion

New Immigration Rules introduced on, or after, 9 July 2012

  11. We have already found that the 9 July 2012 changes to the  Immigration
      Rules, or those brought in by amendments in 2014, do not apply to  our
      considerations  in  this  case  because  it  is   a   case   involving
      administrative removal where both the applications and  the  Secretary
      of State's decisions were made prior to 9 July 2012. Paragraph A362 is
      not of application because deportation is not proposed. Our conclusion
      in this regard is re-enforced by the decision in Singh and Khalid.


  12. We  made  alternative  findings  which  included  a  consideration  of
      paragraph 276ADE (iv) of the Rules. It follows, however, from what  we
      have  stated  above  that  anything  we  said  in  relation  to  these
      alternative findings remains obiter.

  13. Our conclusion  was  that,  ultimately,  the  issue  remained  one  of
      proportionality.  By its very nature, this requires  consideration  of
      all material factors;  the  Secretary  of  State's  legitimate  public
      interest  factors  on  the  one  hand;  the   appellant's   legitimate
      assertions as to the impact upon  the  individuals  concerned  on  the
      other. As we have pointed out in paragraph 382 above, when contrasting
      paragraph 276ADE (iv) and (v) the fact  that  it  is  only  (iv)  that
      contains a consideration of whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
      individual to leave the United Kingdom does not materially  strengthen
      or weaken the respective claims of those who fall within this category
      since the distinction is  not  determinative  and  claimants  in  both
      categories are protected by the proportionality exercise that  has  to
      be conducted on their behalves.

  14. Our finding that the decision to remove an individual is proportionate
      in all the circumstances (including the parents' conduct) prevents the
      Tribunal  also  finding  that  it  is  unreasonable  to  remove   that
      individual in consideration of the same circumstances  (including  the
      parents' conduct).  Proportionality and reasonableness must,  for  all
      practical purposes, go hand-in-hand in any rational assessment of  the
      same  set  of  circumstances   when   considered   'in   the   round'.
      Furthermore, if there is a distinction,  it  is  proportionality  that
      trumps all else because of the over-arching place of Article 8 in  the
      hierarchy.


   Part 5A of the 2002 Act


  15. The relevance of Part 5 A of the 2002 Act  arises  before  us  in  the
      cases of three of the minor children:

        a. SB, daughter of the appellants Qadir Ahmed and Nasreen Bi.   She
           was born on 10 December 1998 and is 15 years old.  She has  been
           in the UK for more than 12 years;


        b. HB, daughter of  the  appellants  Rungzaib  Mohamed  and  Jamila
           Kauser.  She was born on 20 May 1997 and is 17 years  old.   She
           has been in the UK for more than 14  years  (her  family  having
           arrived on 5 August 2000);

        c. AA, son of Mehmood Ahmed and Fazal Jan.  He was born on 25  June
           1997 and is now 17 years old.  He has been in the  UK  for  more
           than 13 years.

  16. The parents of each child have  a  'genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship' with the child and they are not liable to deportation.

The nature and scope of a consideration of proportionality


  17. It as well to remind ourselves of what the Tribunal is required to  do
      when applying s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1968.  Where proportionality
      is  engaged,  a  lawful  decision  cannot  be  made  unless  there  is
      compliance with its requirements.  In Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11  (21
      March 2007), the opinion of the Judicial Committee  was  expressed  in
      these terms:


        "The authority will wish to consider and weigh all  that  tells  in
        favour of the refusal of leave which is challenged, with particular
        reference to justification  under  article  8(2).  There  will,  in
        almost any case, be certain general considerations to bear in mind:
        the general administrative desirability of applying known rules  if
        a system of immigration control is  to  be  workable,  predictable,
        consistent and fair as  between  one  applicant  and  another;  the
        damage to good administration and effective control if a system  is
        perceived  by  applicants  internationally  to  be  unduly  porous,
        unpredictable or perfunctory; the need to discourage  non-nationals
        admitted to the country temporarily from believing  that  they  can
        commit serious crimes and yet be allowed to  remain;  the  need  to
        discourage fraud, deception and deliberate breaches of the law; and
        so on. In some cases much more particular reasons will be relied on
        to justify refusal...The giving of weight to factors such as  these
        is not, in  our  opinion,  aptly  described  as  deference:  it  is
        performance of the  ordinary  judicial  task  of  weighing  up  the
        competing considerations on each  side  and  according  appropriate
        weight to the judgment of a person with responsibility for a  given
        subject matter and access  to  special  sources  of  knowledge  and
        advice. That is how any rational judicial decision-maker is  likely
        to proceed." [16]


   "...it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  United
   Kingdom"


  18. The central issue in this part of the appeal concerns the  meaning  to
      be attributed to the expression 'it would not be reasonable to  expect
      the child to leave the United Kingdom' as found in s.117B (6) of  Part
      5A.


  19. In ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 (1 February  2011),  Lady  Hale,
      with whom Lord Brown and Lord Mance agreed,  was  focussing  upon  the
      best interests of the child. Indeed, in paragraph 1 of  her  judgment,
      she identified the best interests of the children as being '[t]he over-
      arching issue  in  this  case'.   However,  she  recognised  competing
      considerations:

     "On the other hand, the reason for deporting may be very strong, or  it
           may be entirely reasonable to expect the other family members to
           leave with the person deported." [16]


  20. Having outlined the applicable principles derived from United  Kingdom
      and European case law, Lady Hale continued  in  the  section  entitled
      'Applying these principles' said:


     "Applying,  therefore,  the  approach  in  Wan  to  the  assessment  of
           proportionality under article 8(2), together  with  the  factors
           identified in Strasbourg,  what  is  encompassed  in  the  "best
           interests of the child"? As the UNHCR says, it broadly means the
           well-being of the child. Specifically, as Lord Bingham indicated
           in EB (Kosovo), it will involve asking whether it is  reasonable
           to expect the child to live in another country. Relevant to this
           will be the level of the child's integration in this country and
           the length of absence from the other  country;  where  and  with
           whom the child is to live and the arrangements for looking after
           the child in the other country; and the strength of the  child's
           relationships with parents or other family members which will be
           severed if the child has to move away." [29]

  21. However, this passage must be seen in the context of  what  Lady  Hale
      stated in a passage that follows the extract we have cited from [29]:

     "We now have a much greater understanding of the  importance  of  these
           issues in assessing the overall  well-being  of  the  child.  In
           making the proportionality assessment under article 8, the  best
           interests of the child must be  a  primary  consideration.  This
           means that they must be considered first. They can,  of  course,
           be outweighed by the cumulative effect of other  considerations.
           In this case, the countervailing considerations were the need to
           maintain firm and fair immigration  control,  coupled  with  the
           mother's appalling immigration history and the precariousness of
           her position when family life was created. But, as the  Tribunal
           rightly pointed out, the children were  not  to  be  blamed  for
           that. And the inevitable result of removing their primary  carer
           would be that they had to leave with her." [33]

  22. The assessment of whether it is 'reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
      live in another country' was articulated by Lady Hale in  the  context
      of a consideration of the best interests of the child, as paragraph 29
      makes clear.  This is not surprising given the over-arching  issue  in
      the case which concerned the weight to be given to the best  interests
      of children who are affected by the decision to remove or  deport  one
      or both of their parents from this country [1]. However, as  paragraph
      33 makes clear the best interests of the children and the  concomitant
      reasonableness of expecting the child to live in another  country  was
      not determinative and  had  to  be  assessed  amongst  all  the  other
      considerations, albeit the  best  interests  of  the  children  was  a
      primary consideration.

  23. The restricted meaning attached to the reasonableness of expecting the
      child to live in another country (restrictive in the sense that it was
      equated with the best interests of the children) does  not  mean  that
      this phrase must always  be  construed  as  short-hand  for  the  best
      interests of the children.  All will depend on the context.  Lady Hale
      was not  attempting  to  offer  a  statutory  interpretation.   As  Mr
      Blundell powerfully submits, Parliament could have used express  words
      to that effect; it could have referred expressly to the best interests
      of the child but did not do so. If Parliament had intended  a  child's
      best interests to be the sole consideration under  s.  117B(6)(b),  it
      needed only to have referred to the 2009 Act, as it did in  s.  71  of
      the Immigration Act 2014:

        "71.  Duty regarding the welfare of children
        For the avoidance of doubt,  this  Act  does  not  limit  any  duty
        imposed on the Secretary of State or any other person by s.  55  of
        the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  (duty  regarding
        the welfare of children)."

  24. In EV (Philippines) & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 (26  June  2014),
      Christopher Clarke LJ clearly used  the  expression  'whether  it  was
      reasonable to expect the children  to  live  in  another  country'  as
      encompassing  a  much  broader  meaning  that  one  restricted  to   a
      consideration of the best interests of the children:


          "43. In the present case the FTT judge treated the best  interests
           of the children as a primary consideration  and  concluded  that
           their best interests lay in remaining  with  their  parents  and
           continuing their education here. He then considered whether  the
           need   to   maintain   immigration   control   outweighed   that
           consideration.


           44. In carrying out this assessment he  took  into  account  the
           fact  (a)  that  the  parents  would  be   employable   in   the
           Philippines; (b) that the family would not be homeless; (c) that
           there was an extended family to which they  would  have  access;
           (d) that the family had only been in the UK for a limited time -
           3 years 9 months at the date of the FTT decision at  which  time
           the children were 11,10 and 8; (e) that the children  would  not
           be without education in the Philippines. The fact that it  would
           not be as good and that secondary education was not free was not
           determinative.  In  addition  there  was  no  question  of   any
           interference with the  appellants'  family  life.  Further,  the
           family could have had no assurance  of  a  guaranteed  permanent
           settlement. The judge took account of the fact that EV had  been
           underpaid by her employers and the chronology  provided  by  the
           Appellants [13] which reveals the  delays  attributable  to  the
           Respondent.

           45. His  overall  conclusion  was  that  the  need  to  maintain
           immigration control did  outweigh  the  best  interests  of  the
           children. In effect he found that it was  reasonable  to  expect
           the children to live in another country. The  Appellants  submit
           that the judge did not analyse the weight to be  given  in  this
           case to the need for immigration control. But, as  it  seems  to
           me, in setting out and examining the  factors  relating  to  the
           Appellants, he was performing that exercise."


  25. The enumeration of the factors set out in paragraph 44 of the judgment
      in EV (Philippines) clearly involved the holistic  approach  we  would
      expect to find in  a  classical  application  of  the  proportionality
      balance.  The factors identified undoubtedly went beyond a  restricted
      consideration of the best interests of the children.  It  resulted  in
      the Court of Appeal concluding that the Judge had  not  erred  in  his
      determination, [46].


  26. At the conclusion of a hearing in which Article 8 is engaged  and  due
      respect is given  to  an  individual's  private  and  family  life,  a
      decision must be proportionate. In such a case, there is no  room  for
      another test save one of proportionality. Anything that  requires  one
      factor to determine the decision must  inevitably  skew  the  balance,
      perhaps fatally. However, the public interest in  the  balance  to  be
      conducted on proportionality  requires  the  Tribunal  to  consider  a
      complex set of factors involving a wide  spectrum  of  considerations,
      economic, social  and  community  building  engaging  in  concepts  of
      justice, fairness, and integration whilst at the  same  time  avoiding
      discrimination. It is understandable that the concept  of  the  public
      interest may be more readily assessed by specific consideration  being
      given to identified factors. That is not, however, loading the balance
      in such a way that it cannot find  its  own  equilibrium.  The  public
      interest factors identified in  the  statute  can  never  artificially
      result in a different outcome to a proportionality assessment.

  27. Parliament is uniquely able to identify the public interest;  more  so
      than in a statement of policy by a Minister. Hence, it is  a  sensible
      measure for Parliament to identify a number of factors which  must  be
      taken into account; to which regard must be had. However the  list  is
      never exclusive and, as section 117B makes clear the specified factors
      are to be taken into account in particular, signifying that there  may
      well be other factors which fall to be  considered.  Furthermore,  the
      structure  avoids  being  over  prescriptive  thereby  permitting  the
      balance to swing freely without any artificial check that prevents the
      decision becoming disproportionate and violating Article 8.


  28.  There  is  a  danger  that  clearly  operates  in   the   appellants'
      interpretation of s. 117B(6) that,  provided  the  individual  is  not
      liable to deportation, in all cases where he  has  a  normal  parental
      relationship with a qualifying  minor  child,  his  removal  would  be
      unlawful by reason of that one factor alone, namely the reasonableness
      of expecting the child to leave the United Kingdom. Hence,  all  other
      factors are excluded from consideration. Whilst the reasonableness  of
      removing a child is a highly significant  factor,  indeed,  a  primary
      consideration, the  focus  restricted  to  this  issue  alone  to  the
      exclusion of all others unbalances the assessment of  proportionality.
      In the context of this appeal, the outcome, as Mr Blundell accepts  is
      stark.  An appeal which we have found fails by the application of  the
      conventional proportionality  exercise  succeeds  if  the  surrounding
      circumstances are disregarded.


  29. Mr Toal relied heavily upon what was said by Lady Hale at paragraph 29
      of ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  as
      defining what is meant in s 117B(6) by the expression 'it would not be
      reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom'  and  in
      particular the exact equation between the best interests of the  child
      and Lord Bingham's opinion in EB (Kosovo), that  the  answer  involved
      asking whether it was reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  live  in
      another country.


  30. Accordingly, Mr Toal submits that s.117B (6)  contains  what  we  will
      call dual eligibility requirements namely that the qualifying  child's
      parent must not be liable to deportation and there must be  a  genuine
      and subsisting  relationship.  If  the  eligibility  requirements  are
      satisfied,  the  only  consideration  is  whether  it  would  not   be
      reasonable to expect the child to leave the United  Kingdom.  This  is
      directed exclusively to a consideration of the child's interests.

  31. The consideration, Mr Toal argues, is driven exclusively  towards  the
      child's circumstances. Thus in paragraph 20 of his submission, Mr Toal
      asserts that the question whether it is reasonable to expect  a  child
      to live in another country is to be determined solely by reference  to
      the effect on the child of having to leave the United Kingdom and live
      in another country:

     "It does not invite a  global  consideration  of  all  of  the  factors
           weighing for and against the expulsion of the child and  his  or
           her parents and  an  assessment  in  that  context  of  what  is
           reasonable."

  32. In pursuing this argument, he relied upon the decision of the Tribunal
      in MK (best interests of child) India  [2011]  UKUT  00475  (IAC),  in
      relation to the timing of the consideration of the best  interests  of
      the child as a first or primary stage of  the  evaluation.  He  relied
      upon this passage:


          "There is a risk of the best interests of the child  consideration
      wrongly      taking  into  account  extraneous  factors  such  as  the
      parents' poor    immigration history." [19]

  33. In this way Mr Toal elided the reasonableness of expecting a child  to
      leave the country with the best interests of the child.  However,  the
      best  interests  of  the  child  will  inevitably  be  limited  to   a
      consideration of factors relating to the child. The reasonableness  of
      expecting the child to leave has no such connotation. It may  well  be
      that the best interests of the child  are  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom, to benefit from the welfare system including the provision of
      benefits as well as  the  provision  of  health  care  and  education,
      perhaps at a better  level  than  that  possible  in  the  country  of
      destination. Were the reasonableness of the child's removal to  relate
      solely to what is best for him, the consideration would  exclude,  for
      example, the fact that his parents have no  right  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom (or, indeed, that the child has no substantive right to
      remain here) or that one of them has committed offences whilst in  the
      United Kingdom. Similarly, Mr Toal relies upon  the  decision  in  the
      Court of Appeal in JW (China)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1526 in which, in paragraph 27, it is  said
      that the judge correctly reminded himself that "the public interest in
      the maintenance of effective immigration control must not form part of
      the best interests of the child consideration."


  34. Mr  Toal  seeks  to  justify  the  exclusion  of  factors  other  than
      considerations weighing in favour of the  private  right  because,  he
      argues, the public interest is expressly provided for by reference  to
      "the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation".  In  other
      words, the public interest has been expressly taken into  account  but
      is limited to the class of persons liable to deportation. There  would
      be, he argues, an intrinsic illogicality were the public  interest  to
      be given consideration in two separate places: the first, by reference
      to whether the  person  is  liable  to  deportation;  the  second,  by
      reference to a test of reasonableness which he describes as  a  'vague
      and  general  reference  to  reasonableness  as  a  global,  catch-all
      substituted for 'proportionate''. Accordingly, he submits, on the true
      construction of subparagraph (6), Parliament has expressly limited the
      public interest to a consideration of whether the person is liable  to
      deportation in cases of a  child  in  a  normal  relationship  with  a
      parent.


  35. These considerations require a careful examination of  Part  5A  which
      begins by noting ss. 117A to D apply to a  'court  or  tribunal'  when
      considering an individual's private and family life under  Article  8.
      It does not apply to the Secretary of State when making the  decision.
      Subsection (2) provides that when considering the public interest, the
      court or tribunal must have regard to the factors in s. 117B and where
      applicable, s117C. The overarching purpose of these provisions  is  to
      ensure that the interference with the person's right  to  respect  for
      family and private life is  appropriately  justified  as  required  by
      Article 8 (2).


  36. It is clear that it is an obligation  to  give  consideration  to  the
      statutory factors.


  37. The same broad meaning of "having regard to" a series  of  factors  is
      repeated, in somewhat different terms, in s. 117C as it relates to the
      additional  criteria  involving  foreign   criminals.   According   to
      subsection s.117C (7) considerations are to  be  "taken  into  account
      where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to deport  foreign
      criminal". The factors are 'considerations' which must mean  they  are
      all to be taken into account or that the court or tribunal  must  have
      regard  to  them.  That  is  a  far  cry  from  making  any  of  these
      considerations determinative of the issue of removal.


  38. The considerations set  out  in  s.117B  form  the  context  in  which
      subsection (6) is to be  considered.  Subsection  (1)  refers  to  the
      maintenance of effective  immigration  control  being  in  the  public
      interest.  Such  a  broad  consideration  does  not  easily  admit   a
      definitive or determinative answer. Similarly, in subsection (2),  the
      economic well-being of the country is directly linked to  the  ability
      of the person seeking  to  enter  or  remain  to  speak  English.  The
      consideration is expressly reasoned by reference to an English speaker
      being less of a burden on taxpayers and better able to integrate  into
      society. In subsection (3) the economic well-being of the  country  is
      directly linked to the ability of  the  person  seeking  to  enter  or
      remain in the United Kingdom being financially independent.


  39. Subsections (4) and (5)  perform  a  related  but  distinct  function.
      Whilst, by implication, subsections (1)  to  (3)  are  concerned  with
      assessing  positive  considerations,  subsections  (4)  and  (5)   are
      concerned with ensuring little weight is attached  to  a  private  and
      family life developed  when  the  person  is  in  the  United  Kingdom
      unlawfully or during a period when that person's immigration status is
      precarious.


  40. All of the considerations  so  far  identified  in  section  117B  are
      directed at identifying a relative amount of weight to be attached  to
      relevant (one might say, obvious) factors whilst never asserting  that
      the  factors  are  determinative.  It  is  in  the  context  of   this
      consideration that we are bound to approach subsection (6). In such  a
      case the existence of a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
      with a qualifying child provides that the  public  interest  does  not
      require that person's removal. However, it is conditional upon it  and
      not being reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.


  41. If Mr Toal is correct in  his  submissions,  the  function  served  by
      subsection  (6)  is  distinctively  different   from   the   functions
      identified in subsections (1) to (5). It is true, of course,  that  it
      does not provide carte blanche to every parent because such  a  parent
      has to establish a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
      his qualifying child and to fall  into  that  class  of  persons  "not
      liable to deportation". These considerations refer to the  eligibility
      of those seeking to rely upon subsection  (6).  Once  the  eligibility
      criteria  are  satisfied,  according  to  Mr  Toal's  submission,  the
      individual cannot then be removed, because the public interest,  as  a
      matter of statute, does not require it.  In  these  circumstances  the
      public interest question ceases to be a matter to which regard  should
      be had or taken into account but becomes a  determinative  factor.  It
      may  not  be  relevant  that  the  effect   of   this   provision   is
      extraordinarily  wide  and  will  be  satisfied,  in  most  cases,  by
      establishing a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
      qualifying child. It does not matter if the  category  is  broad;  nor
      does it matter that it runs counter to any earlier  identification  of
      the public interest; nor does it matter if  it  introduces  a  radical
      departure provided this is what Parliament has expressly intended.  Mr
      Toal submits that the words are clear and that Parliament's  intention
      is rendered plain by their use in subsection (6). It follows that  the
      best interests of the qualifying  children  preclude  the  removal  of
      their parents.


  42. The language of sections 117A to  117D  does  not  readily  admit  the
      startling result for which Mr Toal contends. Nor, in our judgment,  is
      such  an  interpretation  necessary,  where  there   is   an   obvious
      alternative meaning to the phrase  "it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
      expect the child to  leave  the  United  Kingdom".  If  the  court  or
      tribunal  when  reaching  its  decision  is  able  to   consider   the
      reasonableness of removal in its broadest terms and in the context  of
      proportionality as  a  whole,  the  ultimate  decision  will  be  both
      reasonable and proportionate. Alternatively, if the court or  tribunal
      is restricted to  its  consideration  of  reasonableness  so  that  it
      relates solely to the child's best interests, the overall decision  is
      capable of being neither reasonable  nor  proportionate.   Indeed,  by
      artificially, as it were, loading the balance by excluding the  public
      interest in removal to a single consideration (whether the  person  is
      liable  to  deportation),  there  can  be  no  genuine   exercise   of
      proportionality, the essence of which is to permit the balance to find
      its own equilibrium.


  43. Mr Toal's approach sits uneasily with what the courts have said  about
      the holistic nature of proportionality. Thus, in VW  (Uganda),  Sedley
      LJ said:


     "...while it is of course possible that the facts of any one  case  may
           disclose an insurmountable obstacle to removal, the enquiry into
           proportionality is not a search for such an  obstacle  and  does
           not end with its elimination. It is a balanced judgment of  what
           can reasonably be expected in the  light  of  all  the  material
           facts."


  44. Mr Toal argues that this passage must  be  read  in  context  and,  in
      particular, the context created by what Sedley Lord Justice  described
      as the last word in EB (Kosovo) - which Lord Bingham said [12]:


     "...it will rarely be proportionate to uphold an order for removal of a
           spouse was if there is a close and genuine bond with  the  other
           spouse and that spouse cannot reasonably be expected  to  follow
           the remove spouse to the country of removal, or if the order  is
           to sever a genuine and subsisting  relationship  between  parent
           and child. But  cases  will  not  ordinarily  raise  such  stark
           choices, and there is in general  no  alternative  to  making  a
           careful and informed evaluation of the facts of  the  particular
           case."


  45. Neither of these cases provided any support for Mr  Toal's  submission
      that in deciding whether a removal  is  proportionate,  the  court  or
      tribunal must exclude material that is relevant to that issue. Indeed,
      both decisions pay close attention  to  the  importance  of  making  a
      balanced judgment on all of the material facts and suggesting, if  not
      establishing,  that  an  exclusionary  approach  will  inevitably   be
      incompatible with an holistic evaluative exercise.


  46. Further, Mr Toal's justification for the exclusion  of  factors  other
      than considerations weighing in favour of the child does not fit  into
      the scheme of Part 5A that the s. 117B considerations will need to  be
      addressed in all cases, see the express terms of s. 117A (2)(a):  ('in
      all cases, to the considerations listed in  section  117B').   If  the
      conditions for the application of s. 117B (6) are  met,  there  is  no
      room for  the  consideration  of  any  others  factors;  the  task  is
      complete.  By implication, Mr Toal's submission inserts into  s.  117A
      (2)(a) the additional words 'save where s.117B(6)  applies',   the  s.
      117B considerations will need to be  addressed  in  all  cases.   That
      cannot be right.


   Absurdity


  47.  Mr  Blundell  submitted  that  the  interpretation  advanced  by  the
      appellants amounted to an absurdity  given  that  the  application  of
      s.117 was expressly confined to the court or tribunal.  The  Secretary
      of State is not bound by its terms.  He, therefore,  argues  that  the
      Secretary of State is entitled to reach a decision which  is  contrary
      to the provisions of s.117B(6).  Such  a  decision  would  be  lawful.
      Furthermore, it would fall within the Secretary of State's broad  area
      of unfettered discretion. However,  provided  the  appellant  appealed
      against the Secretary of  State's  decision,  the  Tribunal  would  be
      bound,  as  a  matter  of  law,  to  allow  the   appellants   appeal,
      notwithstanding the lawfulness of the respondent's decision.


  48. We feel this disregards the essential purpose of Part 5A which is that
      it is specifically directed towards the Courts and Tribunals in  order
      to express Parliament's expression of the public interest.   The  need
      to do so arises only in the context of an appeal.   The  Secretary  of
      State may reasonably expect that her own  decision  makers  will  have
      regard to the public interest without the need for the imposition of a
      mandatory code. Officials  within  the  Home  Office  do  not  require
      statutory compulsion since this may be provided by other means. On the
      other hand, the developing case law has demonstrated the  significance
      of making express provision for  applying  criteria  as  part  of  the
      Article 8 assessment. A distinction exists between criteria identified
      in the Immigration Rules, the emanation of the  Secretary  of  State's
      policy on immigration matters albeit approved by  Parliament  and  the
      greater significance of criteria in statutory form expressing the will
      of Parliament itself. There is nothing  absurd  in  drafting  criteria
      which, theoretically, the decision maker in the Home Office  may  have
      no mandatory duty to apply but, for all practical purposes, is  likely
      to do so. Whilst the 'absurdity' identified by Mr Blundell is  at  its
      most extreme form in the case of s. 117B (6), the 'absurdity'  applies
      equally to the other mandatory criteria which impose a duty  upon  the
      Court or Tribunal to pay regard to  matters  which  the  Secretary  of
      State is not so bound. In the result,  the  respondent's  argument  on
      this point does not assist us in considering the meaning of subsection
      (6), notwithstanding the obvious  anomaly  arising  from  a  mandatory
      requirement that binds the appellate jurisdiction but not the original
      decision maker.


   The contextual scene


  49. The appellants rely upon documents that were before Parliament  during
      the passage of the bill  leading  to  the  2014  Act.  These  are  the
      Immigration Bill: European Convention on Human Rights:  Memorandum  by
      the Home Office (October 2013) ("the ECHR Memorandum") and a letter of
      12 November 2013 to the Chair of the Joint Committee on Human  Rights,
      sent by Mark Harper MP, Minister for Immigration.


  50. There is no dispute the documents are admissible, even where there  is
      no ambiguity, albeit limited to showing the contextual scene in  which
      the 2014 Act is set as demonstrating the aims  of  the  government  in
      promoting the 2014 Act.  In this regard  the  respondent  relies  upon
      Bennion on Statutory Interpretation (6th ed.), section 219, pp. 591  -
      593.  However, the respondent  contends  both  documents  support  the
      Secretary of State's submissions as to  how  the  relevant  provisions
      should be construed.  Mark Harper MP stated:

     "It takes into account the children duty and includes  subsection  (6),
           which sets out that the public interest  does  not  require  the
           removal of a person who has a qualifying child  where  it  would
           not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  UK.   This
           provision is a  proper  reflection  of  the  best  interests  of
           children in the UK - both British and foreign -  which  the  law
           requires to be a primary consideration in immigration decisions.
            The law  is  also  clear  that  those  best  interests  can  be
           outweighed by countervailing factors, including  in  controlling
           immigration and protecting the public.  Clause  14  strikes  the
           right overall balance on these issues."

  51. This expressly refers to the best interests of the child as a  primary
      consideration but not determinative and capable of being outweighed by
      countervailing factors.  They  reflect  the  status  quo  and  do  not
      suggest the introduction of a novel category of  individuals  entitled
      to remain solely on the basis of a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship with a qualifying child.  We  are  satisfied  this  would
      amount to a departure from the law as it stood prior to 28  July  2014
      and is not justified by the inclusion of subsection (6) into s.117B.


  52. For  all  of  the  above  reasons,  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the
      introduction  of  Part  5A  has  the  effect  contended  for  by   the
      appellants.  Our consideration of proportionality is, in  the  result,
      not determined by the changes introduced by Part 5A.

  53. Ultimately, for the reasons we have already given and now having taken
      into account ss.  117A-D  of  the  2002  Act,  we  consider  that  the
      children's  removal  is  proportionate,  notwithstanding  the  changes
      introduced.   It  goes  without  saying  that  we  consider  this   is
      reasonable.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                               12 March 2015


                                                     -----------------------
    [1] See also O & B -v- Minister voor Immigratie,  Integratie  en  Asiel
    [2014] CJEU C-456/12



