
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number:  AA/01397/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 9 October 2014            On 10 October 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                                     H Z
                          (Anonymity direction made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Elder Rahimi Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                         DETERMINATION: ERROR OF LAW


   1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  R
      J N B Morris promulgated on 29 April 2014, dismissing the  Appellant's
      appeal against the decision dated 14 February 2014 to remove her  from
      the UK following the refusal of his application for asylum.

Background

   2. The Appellant is  a  national  of  Iran  born  on  6  July  1986.  His
      immigration  history  is  summarised  in  the  cover  sheet   to   the
      Respondent's bundle: it is unnecessary to repeat the entirety of  that
      history here. The Appellant first claimed asylum in  April  2011;  his
      application was refused (with no right of appeal) for reasons set  out
      in a reasons for refusal letter ('RFRL') and a supplementary RFRL both
      dated 12 May 2011. The Appellant made further submissions  in  respect
      of his asylum claim on 27 March 2012, and  in  due  course  was  again
      refused asylum for reasons set out in a RFRL dated 14 February 2014. A
      Notice of Immigration Decision also dated 14 February 2014 was  served
      on the Appellant in consequence on 19 February 2014.

   3. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

   4. The Appellant's appeal was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      reasons set out in the determination promulgated on 29 April 2014.

   5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      which was  initially  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
      Hutchison on 20 May 2014 but subsequently granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Allen on 10 July 2014.

Error of Law

   6. The key elements to the Appellant's claim for asylum - though not  its
      totality - may be summarised for present  purposes  as  these.  Whilst
      present in the UK as a student the  Appellant  attended  a  number  of
      demonstrations outside the  Iranian  embassy  in  London  against  the
      results of the June 2009 presidential election; during a visit to Iran
      commencing on 31 July 2009 the Appellant was questioned at the airport
      concerning his attendance at such demonstrations and was  subsequently
      contacted and  asked  to  cooperate  by  becoming  an  informant;  the
      Appellant felt he had no choice but to agree, and  was  told  that  he
      would be contacted by someone following his  return  to  the  UK;  the
      Appellant was indeed contacted but did not  attend  the  meeting  then
      arranged;  subsequently,  the  Appellant's  father   was   taken   for
      questioning by the intelligence services in  Iran;  still  later,  the
      Appellant came to learn that a verdict had been  announced  convicting
      him in absentia to 2 years imprisonment  for  activities  against  the
      regime.

   7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not believe the Appellant's account.
      She gave extensive reasons for her conclusion. In my  judgement,  some
      of those reasons are sustainable. However, some of them are not  -  as
      detailed below. Although there is much substance  to  aspects  of  the
      Judge's reasoning, bearing in mind the 'in the round'  nature  of  the
      evaluation of risk in an asylum claim, the standard of proof, and  the
      'anxious scrutiny' required, I am just persuaded that it would not  be
      'safe' to uphold the Judge's overall findings as being  unaffected  by
      those aspects where she has fallen into error.

   8. I am satisfied that the following matters taken cumulatively amount to
      a deficiency of reasoning, such as to constitute an error of law.

(i) At paragraph 16(i) the Judge purports to identify inconsistency  in  the
      Appellant's reasons for being at risk of persecution. I find there  to
      be a lack of clarity of reasoning in this  regard.  At  his  screening
      interview the Appellant refers both to a religious aspect to his claim
      (question 4.1 -  and  also  see  the  clarification  provided  at  the
      substantive  interview  in  respect  of   the   screening   interview,
      Respondent's bundle C 14) - and to a political dimension by way of his
      reference to attendance at demonstrations in  London  (question  4.2).
      The Appellant in his substantive interview also  refers  both  to  his
      attendance at demonstrations (together with the adverse interest  this
      attracted when he returned to Iran in  2009),  and  being  potentially
      branded as anti-Islam or an enemy of God. The answer given to question
      82 - which the Judge considers significant - is no more than a summary
      of the preceding matters. The  Appellant  again  refers  both  to  the
      political  dimension  and  the  religious  dimension  in  his  witness
      statement. I can identify no particular  discrepancy  on  this  basis.
      Moreover, it seems to me that the Judge sets up a false  dichotomy  by
      distinguishing between participation in anti-regime demonstrations and
      political opinion.

(ii) Further in this context in respect of paragraph  16(ii)  I  accept  the
      criticism made on the  Appellant's  behalf  of  the  Judge's  apparent
      failure to recognise that the theocratic nature of the regime in  Iran
      meant that anti-regime activity could be perceived as the activity  of
      an 'enemy of God'. In this latter regard the  Judge  appears  to  have
      disregarded the country information to which he was referred  on  this
      very point - US State Department Report 2013  "prosecutors  frequently
      used moharebeh ['enmity towards God'] as  a  criminal  charge  against
      political dissidents and journalists, referring to struggling  against
      the precepts of  Islam  and  against  the  state  that  upholds  those
      precepts" (Appellant's bundle A3).

(iii) I pause to note that  Ms  Pal  conceded  that  these  aspects  of  the
      Judge's reasoning at paragraph 16(i) and  (ii)  of  the  determination
      were deficient.

(iv) In  my  judgement  there  is  considerable  substance  to  the  matters
      identified by the Judge at paragraph 16(v)(a)  as  to  the  supporting
      documentary evidence in relation to the Iranian  authorities  supposed
      adverse interest in the Appellant  and  his  conviction  in  absentia.
      There is a lack of narrative clarity in the Appellant's  own  account,
      and apparent variation in respect of the other sources of evidence, as
      identified by the Judge. However, this is to  a  very  limited  extent
      undermined by the use by the Judge of the wrong date in respect of the
      verdict. This is undermined in a  more  serious  way  by  the  Judge's
      apparent inversion of the standard of proof in the following line:  "I
      find that there is a real  possibility  that  this  lawyer  was  never
      appointed". Yet  further,  and  perhaps  most  concerning,  the  Judge
      seemingly converts the references in the background materials to court
      verdicts not "normally" being handed down (see RFRL 14 February  2014,
      paragraph 26 quoting from paragraph 11.64 of  the  Country  of  Origin
      Information Service Report dated 26 September 2013) to "Court Verdicts
      are not handed out". Taken together, whilst  it  might  be  said  that
      there was a sound basis from which it would be possible  to  reach  an
      adverse assessment of the Appellant's claim to have been sought by the
      authorities and convicted in absentia and  to  reject  the  supporting
      documents in  this  regard,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  Judge's
      evaluation of such matters has reached the requisite level of  anxious
      scrutiny because of  the  identified  deficiencies  in  the  reasoning
      process.

(v) Similarly  the  Judge,  also  without  any  apparent  evidential  basis,
      converts what is at best an improbable  event  into  an  inconceivable
      event at paragraph 20(iv).

   9. Although  criticisms  were  made  of  other  aspects  of  the  Judge's
      reasoning I find, taken  in  isolation,  that  there  was  nothing  of
      substance in the attempt to impugn the reasoning at paragraph  16(iii)
      and  (vi).  Further,  as  regards  the  supposed  discrepancy  in  the
      presentation of the Appellants claim, it seems to me  the  potentially
      more significant point is that the matter that is at the very core  of
      the claim - not the attendance of demonstrations simpliciter  but  the
      attempt to recruit the Appellant as an informant  and  his  subsequent
      non-cooperation  -  is  not  referred  to  at  all  in  the  screening
      interview.

  10. Further, over and above those matters identified  at  16(v)(b),  there
      appears to be a  yet  more  significant  discrepancy  as  between  the
      document said by the  Appellant  to  be  the  court  verdict  and  the
      attorney's letter concerning the court verdict in that the case number
      differs (1290 or 1390). Further, the Articles of the Penal Code,  said
      to constitute the offences  that  are  referenced  in  the  attorney's
      letter are not cited in the verdict. The extent to which this  may  be
      attributable in the former case to mistranslation or mistranscription,
      and in the latter case  to  the  lawyer  simply  providing  additional
      information, is unclear - but may properly be the subject  of  further
      consideration at the rehearing of this appeal

  11. Be that as it may, in all of the  circumstances,  whilst  the  Judge's
      overall conclusion is not a surprising conclusion given the nature  of
      the evidence and the sustainably reasoned difficulties identified with
      it - this is not  a  case  where  it  may  be  said  that  an  adverse
      assessment of the core elements of the Appellant's claim is inevitable
      in any event. Accordingly, I conclude that the  determination  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal must be set aside and remade.

  12. In circumstances where the challenge to the decision of  Judge  Morris
      was essentially in respect  of  credibility  findings  it  was  common
      ground between the representatives that the appeal should  be  reheard
      before the First-tier Tribunal with all issues  at  large.  I  endorse
      such an approach

  13. It is not necessary to make any specific Directions  for  the  further
      conduct of the appeal. Both parties are at liberty to file any further
      evidence upon which they seek to rely up to 7 days prior  to  the  re-
      listed hearing.

Decision

  14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside.

  15. The decision in the appeal is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  R  J  N  B
      Morris.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     9 October 2014
