
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01551/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 8th January 2019                    |On: 11th January 2019              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     PHA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms G. Loughran, Counsel instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  Iran  born  in  1991.  He   seeks
    international protection on the grounds that he has a well-founded fear
    of persecution in Iran for reasons of his  imputed  political  opinion,
    religious belief and ethnic origin.






 2. By its decision of the 15th May 2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Youngerwood) dismissed the Appellant's protection claim. The  Appellant
    applied for, and was successively refused, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal. The Appellant sought permission  to  judicially  review
    the Upper Tribunal's decision and was again refused. The Appellant  was
    however finally granted relief by  the  Court  of  Appeal.  Gloster  LJ
    granted permission on the 4th July 2017 and by an Order sealed  on  the
    13th November 2017 a full bench of the Court  (The  Chancellor  of  the
    High Court, Lord Justice Leggatt and Lord Justice Haddon-Cave)  quashed
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal to refuse the  Appellant  permission
    to appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. Before me Mr Wilding
    accepted that the Court of Appeal having found error in the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision the most appropriate disposal, some  three  and  half
    years after the Appellant's appeal was heard, would be  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to now set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  aside  and
    order that the matter be remitted for hearing de novo  before  a  Judge
    other than Judge Youngerwood. I do so with no objection by Ms Loughran.


 3. The decision of Judge Youngerwood is set aside by consent.  The  matter
    is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with the following directions:

              i) The appeal should be listed at Taylor House, London
             ii) Before any Judge other than Judge Youngerwood
            iii) The time estimate is 6 hours
             iv) A Kurdish Sorani interpreter is to be provided


 4. I make a direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, in the following terms:


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings".










                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             8th January
                                    2019
