
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01775/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 January 2015                       |On 3 February 2015                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                                   Mr A I
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. R. Spurling, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant, born on 22  June  1989,  is  a  citizen  of  Iran.   His
    application for international protection was refused by the  respondent
    on 30 September 2005.  However, as he had arrived in the United Kingdom
    as an unaccompanied minor, he was granted discretionary leave to remain
    until 21 June 2007, the day before the appellant  became  18  years  of
    age.  He appealed against the respondent's decision and that appeal was
    dismissed by an Immigration Judge in a determination promulgated on  20
    December 2005.  The appellant's appeal against that  dismissal  of  his
    appeal by the first Immigration Judge  was  allowed  and  the  Tribunal
    ordered the appeal to be reconsidered.  Following  reconsideration  the
    appellant's appeal was  once  more  dismissed  by  another  Immigration
    Judge.

 3. The appellant made further submissions on  11  February  2010  but  the
    respondent refused them on  14  May  2013.   Further  submissions  were
    likewise refused and  the  respondent  again  refused  the  appellant's
    asylum claim for reasons set out in a letter dated  4  March  2014.   A
    decision to remove the appellant under Section 10  of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999 was also made.

 4. The appellant appealed and following a hearing at Taylor House Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Aujla, in a  determination  promulgated  on  29
    July 2014, dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 5. In so doing the judge relied on  the  authority  of  Devaseelan  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702 in considering and coming to  conclusions  in  relation  to
    findings of credibility and fact.

 6. The grounds seeking permission to appeal can be distilled to  an  error
    made by the judge in proceeding to hear this appeal and finding himself
    "Devaseelan  bound"  without  having  before  him   the   earlier   two
    determinations.  The judge relied on quotes therefrom contained  within
    the respondent's Reasons for Refusal Letter.

 7. Initially permission to appeal was refused in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but was subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Peter  Lane  on  5
    December 2014 in the following terms:-

         "1.  It is arguable that there was procedural fairness in that  the
             judge  and  the  appellant   did   not   have   the   complete
             determinations, upon which the judge applied Devaseelan.   The
             respondent is hereby directed to supply  full  copies  to  the
             appellant and the Upper Tribunal forthwith.

         2.   It is also arguable that the judge failed to  have  regard  to
             relevant evidence in concluding that the appellant  would  not
             be at real risk  on  return,  assessed  at  the  date  of  the
             hearing."

 8. Thus the appeal came before me.

 9. I sought submissions from  both  representatives  in  relation  to  the
    Devaseelan point.  Mr Spurling relied on the grounds seeking permission
    to appeal.  Mr Bramble, although concerned about the procedural history
    and an argument as to whether or not adjournment applications had  been
    made, argued that there was no unfairness to the appellant in  the  way
    that the judge had dealt with his appeal and particularly so as many of
    the extracts from the earlier determinations and contained  within  the
    refusal letter were in fact in favour of the appellant.

Notice of Decision

10. I find that in proceeding to deal with this appeal in  the  absence  of
    the earlier determinations  and  relying  solely  on  the  respondent's
    refusal letter amounts to a procedural irregularity such  as  to  be  a
    material error of law.  The error is such that it infects the  totality
    of the judge's determination and  causes  me  to  set  it  aside.   The
    appellant has been  deprived  of  a  fair  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Therefore  I  remit  this  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  (de  novo),  pursuant  to  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
    Practice Statement 7.2(b) before  any  other  judge  aside  from  Judge
    Aujla.






Signed                              Date 2 February 2015.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard





