
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/01266/2014
     AA/01267/2014
     & AA/01268/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Promulgated                       |
|On 24 October 2014                |On 10 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                SY, VY AND PY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, instructed by SJS, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant, SY born on 19  September  1976  and
    her two dependant children VY born on 5  December  2006  and  PY  on  2
    August 2009, against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (FtTJ  Eban)
    dated 22 April 2014 dismissing their appeals against  the  respondent's
    decision made on 10 February 2014 to remove them  as  illegal  entrants
    following the refusal of their applications for asylum.
Background

 2. The appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka who arrived in the  UK  on  29
    April 2013. They left Sri Lanka on 22 April 2013 and then travelled  to
    Singapore leaving on 28  April  2013  by  a  direct  flight  to  London
    Heathrow. The appellant gained entry using a passport to which she  was
    not entitled and she claimed asylum on 14 May 2013. Her application was
    refused for the reasons set out in the respondent's Reasons for Refusal
    Letter dated 10 February 2014. She appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    and the appeal was heard on 17 April 2014.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The judge summarised the basis of the appellant's claim in [9]  of  her
    determination. She is a Tamil who married on 28 June 2006. Although her
    husband was not a member of the LTTE and never had any home visits from
    LTTE  members,   the   appellant   gathered   from   over-heard   phone
    conversations that he had assisted that organisation between  2002  and
    2008 by supplying batteries and other materials used in explosives. Her
    husband had not been arrested but the police had visited their home and
    had asked him to attend the police station 5 or 6 times  between  April
    2007 and September 2009. As a result of an  associate  of  her  husband
    being arrested when it was disclosed that he had supplied materials  to
    the LLTE they went into hiding and in about August 2012  the  appellant
    travelled to India to meet an agent. They kept a low  profile  for  six
    months and then left Sri Lanka for Latvia in September 2012.  They  did
    not claim asylum there as they had valid visas. The appellant  returned
    to Sri Lanka on 5 April 2013 with her two sons having been told by  her
    husband that she could return safely as the  problems  there  had  been
    because of his actions and not hers.

 4. On return the appellant says that she was arrested at Columbo  Airport,
    detained and ill treated. She  was  separated  from  her  children  and
    repeatedly asked questions about what items her husband had supplied to
    the LTTE. She was shown a document signed  by  her  husband  confessing
    that he had supplied goods to the LTTE and in the light  of  this,  she
    also signed a confession that they were both involved. She was detained
    from 5 or 6 April to 17 April 2013 but then released  because  she  had
    managed to get a letter sent from one of her family friends. It was her
    fear that, if returned to Sri Lanka, she and her children would  be  at
    risk from the authorities there.

 5. However, for the reasons set out in [23, (1)-(20)] the judge found that
    there was no reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the  appellant's
    account of what had occurred in Sri Lanka was  true  or  that  reliance
    could be placed on the police notes or the arrest  warrants  which  had
    been produced in evidence. The judge made  the  following  findings  in
    [24]:

          "... 1. The appellant is from Columbo.
          2. The appellant is an ethnic Tamil.
          3. The appellant has never  worked  for  the  LTTE  or  undertaken
          military training.
          4. The appellant has never been detained, fingerprinted or made to
          sign a confession.
          5. The appellant's husband has never  been  arrested,  charged  or
          detained for more than a few hours."

 6. The judge went onto consider the risk  factors  identified  in  GJ  and
    Other (post civil war: returnees) [2013] UKUT 00319 Sri  Lanka  CG  and
    found at [27] that on return the appellant would not be regarded  as  a
    Tamil or someone involved in the  LTTE  but  instead  as  a  woman  who
    travelled to the UK last year with her children to see  and  stay  with
    her family. She found that the appellant was not  someone  who  was  at
    real risk of being stopped or questioned at the airport  or  thereafter
    in the community. The judge went on  to  consider  the  position  under
    article 8 and for the reasons set out in  [32]-[38]  found  that  there
    would not be a breach of that article in returning  the  appellant  and
    her children to Sri Lanka.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 7.  Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal on the basis that the grounds disclosed a
    arguable error of law in the judge's failure to  answer  the  questions
    she asked herself at [23 (4)-(9)] and in  disregarding  the  supporting
    Sri Lankan documents. The judge when granting permission commented that
    the argument in the  grounds  that  there  was  demonstrable  error  of
    material fact in the light of further documentary evidence would depend
    on whether the principles in E and R [2004] EWCA Civ 49 were met.

 8. In his submissions Mr Hawkin dealt with grounds 2 to 6 and then  ground
    1. He argued (ground 2) that  at  [23  (4)-(9)]  the  judge  had  asked
    herself a number of questions which she appeared to regard as  material
    to the assessment of the asylum claim but did not actually answer them.
    He submitted that the judge could not take  a  rhetorical  approach  by
    asking questions and then not answering them.  She  had  not  indicated
    what her findings were and this must lead to a real  doubt  as  to  the
    fact- finding process. He then  argued  (ground  3)  that  the  judge's
    concerns as to the appellant's supporting witnesses set out at [23 (10)-
    (12)] were peripheral and the core  of  their  evidence  had  not  been
    addressed. It was not enough, so he argued, simply to address omissions
    and to refer to matters that cast doubt on  the  evidence  rather  than
    addressing the core of the  evidence  against  the  lower  standard  of
    proof. Issues which caused doubt should have been raised so  that  they
    could be resolved at the hearing. He submitted (ground 4) that  at  [23
    (13)-(20)] the judge appeared  entirely  to  disregard  the  supporting
    evidence from Sri Lanka simply  on  the  basis  that  there  were  some
    spelling or grammatical errors in them. He  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to engage with the fact that even if there were doubts about the
    evidence, nonetheless, it could still be evidence to which weight could
    properly be given.

 9. He then submitted (ground 5) that further documentary evidence from Sri
    Lanka confirmed that  the  lawyer's  evidence  and  the  warrants  were
    genuine and that taking into account the principles in E & R that there
    was a demonstrable error of material fact amounting to an error of law.
    Finally, he argued (ground 1) that the judge  failed  to  consider  the
    appeal in the light of the Asylum Gender Guidelines and  in  particular
    paras 5.40-5.44 and 3.20-3.24. She should have specifically  considered
    the additional problems that women asylum seekers have and  had  failed
    properly to take the guidelines into account.

10. Mr Duffy submitted that these guidelines did not  support  an  argument
    that the judge had erred in law. There was no reason to believe in  any
    event that she would not have been aware of them. It  was  for  her  to
    decide what weight to attach to the evidence she had heard. The further
    evidence now relied on related to factual issues which  the  judge  had
    had to resolve on the evidence before her. It was not arguable  in  the
    circumstances of this appeal that the further evidence  produced  could
    have any bearing on whether the judge had erred in law on the  evidence
    before her. In so far as it was argued that the judge had not raised at
    the hearing matters which concerned her about the evidence, he referred
    to and relied on MM (unfairness: E &  R)  Sudan  [2014]  UKUT  105.  He
    submitted that the judge had  made  clear  findings  of  fact  and  had
    reached a decision properly open to her. Although  the  judge  had  not
    actually answered the questions set out in [23 (4)-(9)], it  was  clear
    what the answers were in the light of her subsequent findings of fact.

Assessment of whether there is an Error of Law

11. I must consider whether the judge erred in law such that  the  decision
    should be set aside. I will deal with the grounds in the order taken by
    Mr Hawkin.

Ground 2

12. This ground argues that the judge asked questions but  did  not  answer
    them. It is based on [23 (4)-(9)] where she asked herself a  number  of
    questions but did not expressly answer them. By way of example  in  (4)
    the judge noted that the appellant had travelled to India and  returned
    in August 2012 on her  own  passport  and  had  no  problems  with  the
    authorities in contrast with the way she claimed she was  treated  less
    than a year later when she said she was detained at  the  airport.  The
    judge said:
              "I have asked myself what could have happened in the meantime
              to make her of interest  to  the  authorities  when  she  had
              clearly not been of interest before."

13. Similarly, in the following paragraphs in relation to specific  aspects
    of the evidence the judge set out a question that  she  considered.  Mr
    Hawkin argued that it was not open to the judge to  take  a  rhetorical
    approach asking questions without answering them.

14. I am not satisfied that there is any substance in  this  argument.  The
    judge has set out her reasons for  not  finding  the  appellant  to  be
    credible in a full and comprehensive way. It was for her to decide what
    weight to give to the evidence she heard  and  what  proper  inferences
    could be drawn from it. The fact that the judge set out  the  questions
    which concerned her indicates that  the  evidence  was  analysed,  that
    relevant matters were taken into  account  and  cumulatively  that  the
    evidence was properly considered.

Ground 3

15. In this ground it  is  argued  that  the  judge's  concerns  about  the
    evidence of the  supporting  witnesses  were  peripheral  and  did  not
    address the core of their evidence against the low standard  of  proof.
    This argument is based on the judge's comments at [23 (10)-(12)]  where
    in (10) the judge noted what she described as a noticeable omission  in
    the evidence of witness SS who made no mention of  speaking  to  PV  or
    PV's  wife.  In  (11)  the  judge  commented  that  it  was  odd   that
    arrangements for payment of any outstanding moneys were not either made
    at that time or subsequently through the bank of PV's wife  so  casting
    doubt on whether SS had contacted PV as described by PV and in (12) she
    noted that there were no copies of emails said to be passed between  SS
    and PV's wife. I am not satisfied that these grounds disclose any error
    of law on the part of the judge in her assessment of this  evidence  as
    part of the evidence as a whole. It was for her to decide  what  weight
    should be attached to omissions and to the  other  factors  identified.
    The judge did address the relevant core issues.

Ground 4

16. This ground argues that the judge entirely disregarded  the  supporting
    Sri Lankan documents including an arrest warrant, letters from a lawyer
    and a police officer on the basis of spelling  or  grammatical  errors.
    These documents are dealt with at [23 (13)-(20)]. It is argued that the
    judge has simply disregarded the evidence because  of  the  doubts  she
    expressed rather than giving proper consideration to the weight  to  be
    given to them in the light of those doubts.

17. Again I am not satisfied there is any substance in this criticism.  The
    judge's findings must be read as a whole. By way of example  the  judge
    was entitled to point out that the fact that the appellant had produced
    an arrest warrant had to be considered in the light of the  information
    in the COI report of 7 March 2012 that it was difficult for an  accused
    to obtain a copy of an arrest warrant and to  point  out  that  in  the
    letter of 27 May 2013 it was stated that "courts sent notice of  arrest
    warrant on 10 May 2013" with no indication  to  whom  the  warrant  was
    sent. When assessing the letters produced in  evidence  the  judge  was
    fully entitled to take into account spelling errors and the fact that a
    letter was clearly in two different fonts. She  was  also  entitled  to
    comment on the fact that although the letter bore  an  original  stamp,
    there was no letter heading.

18. In summary when the judge's findings and reasons are read cumulatively,
    I am satisfied that she reached findings properly open to her  for  the
    reasons she gave. Grounds 2-4 do not satisfy me that she erred in law.

Ground 5

19. In this ground it is argued that in the light  of  further  documentary
    evidence supplied after  the  appeal  was  decided  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it is clear that there was a demonstrable error  of  material
    fact and therefore  an  error  of  law  as  the  lawyer's  evidence  is
    confirmed and there is evidence that the warrant is  genuine.  However,
    this is not a case where the  requirements  in  E  &  R  are  met.  The
    reliability of these documents was in issue before the Tribunal and the
    judge had to determine that issue on the basis of the  evidence  before
    her. In E & R, the Court of Appeal set out the requirements to  be  met
    before it could be said that a mistake of fact constituted an error  of
    law. There would have to be a mistake as to an existing fact  including
    a mistake as the availability of evidence on a  particular  matter;  it
    must be  possible  to  categorise  the  relevant  factual  evidence  as
    "established" in the sense that it was  uncontentious  and  objectively
    verifiable;  the  appellant  or  his  advisers  must  not   have   been
    responsible for the  mistake;  and  the  mistake  must  have  played  a
    material, although not necessarily  decisive  part  in  the  Tribunal's
    reasoning. There is no adequate explanation why it was not possible  to
    obtain the evidence now relied on so  that  it  was  available  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier  tribunal.  Further,  the  issue  of  the
    reliability of the documents produced in evidence cannot be regarded as
    "established"  in  the  sense  it  was  uncontentious  and  objectively
    verifiable. It is in reality further contentious evidence  in  relation
    to an issue clearly in dispute between the parties.

Ground 1

20. It was argued that  the  judge  did  not  consider  the  Asylum  Gender
    Guidelines. The paragraphs I have been referred to  deal  with  general
    principles and there is no reason at all  to  believe  that  the  judge
    would not have been fully aware of  them  in  her  assessment  of  this
    appeal. Paragraphs 5.40-5.44 deal  with  credibility,  the  absence  of
    documentary evidence, corroboration, delay and demeanour  whilst  paras
    3.20-24 deal more specifically with the circumstances  in  which  there
    may be political reasons for a woman's persecution even though she  may
    not have regarded herself as acting politically. However, again,  there
    are general principles to be applied to the facts  of  each  individual
    case. There is no reason to believe the judge would not have been aware
    of them and when the determination is read as whole, there  is  nothing
    of substance to indicate  that  the  judge  assessed  the  evidence  in
    contravention of the gender guidelines.

Ground 6

21. This ground summarises the  other  grounds  arguing  that  the  judge's
    credibility findings are flawed; that it is strongly arguable that  the
    appellant would be at risk of persecution on return and refers  to  the
    fact that GJ and Others was subject to an appeal to the Court of Appeal
    at the date when the grounds were drafted. However, the  Court  of  the
    Appeal have  now  given  judgment  upholding  in  substance  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision. This ground was not pursued at the hearing  before
    me. In the light of the judge's findings of fact the  appellant  cannot
    bring herself within the country guidance in GJ and Others.

Decision

22. Accordingly, for the reasons I have set out the First-tier Tribunal did
    not err in law and the decision stands. There has been  no  application
    to vary or  discharge  the  anonymity  order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that order also stands.





Signed        Date 24 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


