
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01076/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th June 2013                               |On 27th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                   O M F F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Mullins, Counsel instructed by Gillman-Smith
Lee Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Egypt born on 4th August  1962.   He
    arrived in the UK on 10th July 2012 when he was given leave to enter as
    a visitor.  On 7th January 2013 the Appellant applied for asylum.  That
    application was refused for  the  reasons  given  in  the  Respondent's
    letter of 25th January 2013.  The Appellant appealed,  and  his  appeal
    was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal D  J  Baker  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 4th April 2013.  She decided to dismiss  the
    appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds for
    the reasons  given  in  her  Determination  of  8th  April  2013.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 30th April  2013
    such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should  be  set  aside.   The  Appellant  had
    applied for asylum on the basis that he was a Coptic Christian who  for
    that reason had been suspended from his  employment  at  a  bank.   The
    Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  because  although  she  found  that  the
    Appellant had been accused of fraud at the bank and had been  suspended
    and later dismissed from his  employment;  and  also  that  his  family
    assets had been temporarily frozen and his home searched and his mother-
    in-law arrested and questioned, the Judge was not  satisfied  that  the
    remainder of the Appellant's account was credible.  The  Appellant  was
    therefore  only  at  risk  of   prosecution,   not   persecution,   and
    discrimination on return, and that he would not be denied a fair trial.
     In reaching that conclusion, the Judge considered two expert  reports,
    one from Shaheryar Gill, and the other from Mariz  Tadros.   The  Judge
    preferred the former.

 3. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  both  parties.   Mr  Mullins
    referred to his skeleton argument and  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    erred in law by giving insufficient reasons for her  rejection  of  the
    report of Dr Tadros.  The  Judge  had  rejected  that  report  for  the
    reasons given in paragraph 68 of the Determination.   There  the  Judge
    had commented that Dr Tadros had not previously given  evidence  as  an
    expert  to  a  Tribunal,  and  that  the  report  was  brief  and   not
    comprehensively sourced.  The expert had relied upon an assumption that
    the account of the Appellant and his mother-in-law was accurate.

 4. Mr Mullins argued that these reasons  were  insufficient.   Dr  Tadros'
    previous experience as an expert witness was  irrelevant.   The  report
    was not brief, consisting of  some  fifteen  pages,  and  was  properly
    sourced.

 5. In response, Mr Avery submitted that it was significant that the expert
    lacked experience of providing the Tribunal with an expert report.  The
    Judge  had  attached  to  the  report  the  weight  which  she  thought
    appropriate.

 6. I find that the Judge erred in law in her decision  to  attach  limited
    weight to Dr Tadros' assessment of the current situation in  Egypt  and
    the risk on return to the Appellant.  This is because her  reasons  for
    taking that decision are insufficient.  The experience of Dr Tadros  in
    acting as an  expert  witness  is  mostly  irrelevant.   What  is  more
    relevant is Dr Tadros' credentials as an expert.  These were  given  in
    the report and are manifestly sufficient.  I have read  the  report  in
    question and find that it cannot be described as short.  It deals  with
    the issues that the expert was asked  to  comment  upon.   It  is  also
    properly sourced.

 7. The report of Dr Tadros is relevant to the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
    credibility and of the risk on return to the  Appellant.   I  therefore
    set aside the decision of the Judge.  I did not proceed to remake  that
    decision because in those circumstances none of the  findings  of  fact
    made by the Judge can be preserved.  They will have to  be  made  again
    and for that purpose I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    accordance with paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statements.  The Resident
    Judge at the hearing centre where the  appeal  is  re-heard  will  make
    directions for that hearing.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to be re-heard in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.   I  continue  that
order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

