
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Aa/02907/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent     |Decision & Reasons               |
|On 24th May 2016                           |On 26th July 2016                |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [N R]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Gita Patel (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Andy McVeety (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge N Manuel, promulgated on 27th August 2015, following a hearing at
    Manchester  on  17th  July  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iran, who was born on [  ]  1980.
    He appeals against the decision of the Respondent  dated  3rd  February
    2014  refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and   for   humanitarian
    protection.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is  based  upon  imputed  political  opinion  and
    religion on account of the fact that  he  converted  to  the  Christian
    faith from Islam and that the Appellant would be considered as an enemy
    by the state of Iran on account of his activities in  the  Iranian  air
    force during the Iran-Iraq war.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge first considered the risks to the Appellant on account of his
    claim to imputed political opinion.  This was based upon the  claim  of
    the Appellant's sister, [GR], who was  a  computer  engineer,  and  who
    claimed to have helped design, maintain and manage a  website  relating
    to immigration for a man named [RS] for a payment of 300,000 toman each
    month (see paragraph 16).  The authorities in Iran considered  [RS]  to
    be an enemy of the state because of his activities in the  Iranian  air
    force during the Iran Iraq war (paragraph 17).  The  Appellant's  claim
    was that he came to the attention of the  authorities  because  of  his
    sister's alleged activities and association with [RS],  but  the  judge
    held that, "I find no merit in this submission because the  Appellant's
    claim is based on the same facts as that of his sister and therefore of
    relevance in the appeal" (paragraph 31).   The  claim  of  the  sister,
    [GR], however, had been dismissed by  Judge  Ghani  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the judge referred to this (at paragraph 34) and concluded
    that since the Appellant's claim was based upon  that  of  his  sister,
    with the sister's claim having fallen away by  the  decision  of  Judge
    Ghani, it must  follow  that  on  the  question  of  imputed  political
    opinion, the Appellant's claim must also fall away (see paragraph  35).



 5.  Second,  the  judge  dealt  with   the   Appellant's   conversion   to
    Christianity.   At  the  time  of  his  interview  by  the  immigration
    authorities the Appellant had not yet been baptised (see paragraph 56).
     When asked whether the authorities in Iran knew that he had  converted
    to Christianity the Appellant said that he did not know (paragraph 56).
     The Appellant now attended a church in Liverpool and Pastor  [MS]  had
    provided a letter of support (see paragraph 60).   However,  the  judge
    found there to be serious  discrepancies  and  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence of Pastor [MS] (see paragraphs 64 to 67).  The judge  went  on
    to hold that the pastor  had  in  fact  "compounded  his  contradictory
    evidence" (paragraph 68).  This was particularly serious given that the
    pastor had said that he had appeared as witness some five to six  times
    this year  before  the  Tribunals  and  the  judge  held  that  "it  is
    reasonable to expect that he would be familiar with the requirement  to
    give accurate and  reliable  evidence,  including  in  the  letters  he
    provides" (paragraph 68).  The judge  then  went  on  to  consider  the
    objective material and concluded that the Appellant's position was that
    of an "ordinary convert" such that under the country guidance  case  in
    relation to Iran, "the ordinary convert would not be at a real risk  of
    persecution"  (paragraph  70).   What   was   required   instead   were
    "additional risk factors" which could change the  situation  but  these
    were not evident in the present case (see paragraphs 70-71).   This  is
    because "the Appellant has not provided any evidence to  show  that  he
    participated in any  Christian  activities  in  Iran  and/or  that  the
    authorities were aware of his interest in Christianity" (paragraph 71).
     The judge found that the Appellant lacked credibility (paragraph  72).
    The judge also added that the pastor also was an  "unreliable  witness"
    (paragraph 73).  In particular,  the  judge  was  concerned  about  the
    "speed and  timing  of  the  baptism"  (paragraph  73)  that  had  been
    undertaken by the pastor of the Appellant in the circumstances of  this
    case.

 6. Finally, the judge  held  that  given  the  absence  of  any  political
    profile, together with  the  absence  of  evidence  to  show  that  the
    authorities are aware of the Appellant's conversion, "I fail to see why
    the  authorities  would  be  interested  in  his  face  book   account"
    (paragraph 78) given that the Appellant had publicised himself and  his
    activities whilst he was in this country.

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge had reached a  decision
    that was procedurally unfair because he did  not  have  before  him  an
    email from the representative of the Appellant's sister that might have
    made a difference to the outcome of the appeal, as it drew attention to
    the possibility of a fresh claim,  being  made  on  the  basis  of  new
    evidence.   This  email  was  not  before  Judge  Manuel  because   the
    Appellant's representative was off sick and the email was not  produced
    to the Tribunal prior to the hearing.  The grounds also state that  the
    judge may have erred in relying too heavily on the case of FS  (Iran  -
    Christian Converts) Iran CG [2004]  UKIAT,  and  not  taken  sufficient
    notice of the more  recent  background  evidence  as  to  the  risk  to
    Christian converts.  It was also possible  that  there  was  inadequate
    consideration of the issue of whether the Appellant will  be  perceived
    as  a  Christian  convert  by  the  Iranian  authorities  even  if  his
    conversion is not genuine.  The Appellant was also at possible risk  in
    having put up face book entries when he returned to Iran.

 9. On 17th September 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

10. On 1st October 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Secretary of
    State to the effect that the judge had properly considered the risks to
    the Appellant as an actual or perceived Christian convert.  Furthermore
    the judge had adequately dealt with the issue  in  relation  to  social
    media.  Furthermore the judge found that the Appellant was not  of  any
    interest to the authorities and did not accept the Appellant's  account
    of events that caused him to leave Iran.



Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 24th May 2016, Miss Gita  Patel,  appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant as his Counsel, relied upon the four Grounds
    of Appeal that had been put forward.  These were  that  the  judge  had
    engaged in a mistaken analysis of the facts that resulted in  an  error
    of law.  Second that the Appellant faced risk as an actual or perceived
    Christian convert.  Third, that there had been a  failure  to  consider
    the evidence relating to  social  media.   Fourth,  that  there  was  a
    failure  to  consider  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the   risk   to
    undocumented failed asylum seekers.  In relation to this  last  matter,
    Mr Andy McVeety conceded, on behalf  of  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State, that there had been a material change in the country conditions.
     The Respondent accepted that detention conditions in Iran could amount
    to persecution.  This being so it was not enough  simply  to  cite  the
    country guidance case which pre-dated this change in policy.

12. At this stage, Mr McVeety intervened to say that whereas this  was  the
    case, it was still important to have a finding that the  Appellant  was
    likely to be detained, and this would only happen if the Appellant  was
    of interest to the authorities, which the judge had found not to be the
    case here on the basis of either of his two  separate  claims  in  this
    case.

13. Miss Gita Patel submitted that the judge  had  given  consideration  to
    irrelevant circumstances in referring to  the  determination  by  Judge
    Ghani with respect to the Appellant's sister.  Mr McVeety replied  that
    this was  not  an  irrelevant  consideration  because  the  Appellant's
    imputed political opinion claim was based upon the claim of his sister,
    which in turn was based upon her association with a man by the name  of
    [RS].

14. Miss Patel also referred before me to the materials that were contained
    in the  email  to  the  Appellant's  solicitors,  which  had  not  been
    disclosed before the Tribunal, and upon the basis of  which  permission
    had now been granted by the Tribunal.  This was an  email  by  Margaret
    Finch and it was in relation to the Appellant's sister and what it  was
    saying was that a fresh asylum application was going to be made for the
    Appellant's solicitor on the basis of compelling  fresh  evidence  that
    was not available earlier.  That evidence had not yet been disclosed.

15.  Mr  McVeety  replied  that  this  was  simply  too  far-fetched.   The
    suggestion that Judge Manuel could have fallen in error on the basis of
    an email, which had not been disclosed to the Tribunal  on  account  of
    the solicitor's illness, and even more importantly, on the basis  of  a
    fresh claim application that had yet to be made,  and  furthermore,  on
    the basis of evidence that had not even been produced yet, could not be
    used as a basis for impugning Judge Manuel's decision.  He could not be
    said to have fallen in error of law simply because an email in relation
    to the Appellant's solicitor, with respect to her claim, did  not  find
    its way forward before the Tribunal of Judge Manuel.

16. Mr McVeety went on to add that the Appellant could simply  not  succeed
    and there was no error of law for  the  following  particular  reasons.
    First, the Appellant was simply an ordinary convert, as  found  by  the
    judge, if he was a genuine convert.  Second, the judge  has  not  found
    him to be a genuine convert because of the "apparent speed  and  timing
    of the baptism" (paragraph 73).  Third, the judge  had  not  found  the
    Appellant or Pastor [MS] to have been credible witnesses.   Third,  the
    judge's findings were  that  the  Appellant  had  embarked  upon  these
    activities named simply in order to  claim  asylum.   Accordingly,  any
    suggestion that  the  detention  conditions  had  a  bearing  upon  the
    Appellant's asylum claim, now  that  it  had  been  conceded  that  the
    established position on detention was no  longer  fully  applicable  as
    before, was untenable.  If the Appellant was  not  at  risk  either  on
    account of his imputed political opinion or on account of  his  alleged
    conversion, then he was not likely to be detained.

17. In reply, Miss Patel submitted that even if the Appellant's  conversion
    was not a genuine conversion, and even if his face  book  entries  were
    contrived, an opportunist asylum seeker, could still face ill-treatment
    and persecution upon return to his country  and  this  had  been  well-
    established in case law such as Danian [1999] EWCA Civ 300.   The  fact
    was that the Appellant had been baptised, and whether or not  criticism
    was made about the manner and speed of this baptism, the fact was  that
    his baptism would attract adverse attention upon return  to  Iran.   He
    would be questioned on return.  He would then be  detained.   He  would
    suffer persecution.

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA [2007]) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are
    as follows.

19. First, the existence of the email by Margaret Finch, in relation to the
    Appellant's sister's claim, which had  been  rejected,  and  which  was
    going to be resurrected again by her solicitors,  on  the  basis  of  a
    fresh claim application, drawing attention to fresh evidence, cannot be
    used as a basis for suggesting that Judge Manuel had fallen into error.
     A judge can only decide a case on the evidence that is before him.  If
    the evidence was not in existence, the fact that  it  may  or  may  not
    arise at some future point in time, cannot amount to an error of law on
    his part.

20. Second, the fact that the Appellant may have been engaged in sur  place
    activities, even if this is in bad faith for the purpose of creating an
    asylum claim, as Danian allows for the possibility of,  does  not  mean
    that the Appellant would succeed.  Danian made it quite  clear  in  the
    words of Sedley LJ that, "nothing in it should be seen  as  giving  any
    kind of green light to bogus asylum seekers."  But more importantly, if
    the Appellant were to be questioned upon return, there is no obligation
    upon him to be untruthful to the authorities there,  because  if  Judge
    Manuel has found his claim to be lacking in credibility on both scores,
    then what the Appellant would be stating to the authorities there would
    in itself be lacking in credibility.  He could quite simply  state  the
    truth which is that he does not fear  persecution  on  account  of  his
    political opinion as imputed and he has not been engaged in  a  genuine
    conversion from Islam to Christianity.  That was  the  finding  of  the
    judge.

21. Third, that finding of the judge is one that was reasonably open to him
    on the basis of the  evidence  that  the  judge  heard  both  from  the
    Appellant and from Pastor [MS] because the judge observed that, "I have
    concerns about the basis on which the assessments  were  made  and  the
    apparent speed and timing of the baptism" (paragraph 73).

22. Fourth, with respect to the face book activities the Grounds of  Appeal
    refer to the case of A and B (Iran) [2015] UKUT 257 where it is  stated
    (at paragraph 467) that,

         "The mere fact of being in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  prolonged
         period does not lead  to  persecution.   However  it  may  lead  to
         scrutiny and there is clear evidence that  some  people  are  asked
         about their internet activity and particularly for their face  book
         password."

23. However, the judge dealt with  this  with  the  conclusion  that,  "the
    Appellant has no  political  profile,  has  not  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the Iranian authorities and they would not therefore  have
    any interest in him on return" (paragraph 84).  For all these  reasons,
    the judge was entitled to come to the findings and conclusions that  he
    did.

Notice of Decision

24. There is no material error of law in  the  original  Judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd July 2016


