
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02581/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2015                   |On 9 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     MR
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sesay of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The respondent refused the appellant's application  for  asylum  or
         ancillary protection on 30 January 2015. His  appeal  against  that
         decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Twydell  ("the
         Judge") following a hearing on 19 June  2015.  This  is  an  appeal
         against that decision.

The grounds of the application

      2. It was argued that the Judge;

          1) did not did not refer to the  Appellant's  evidence  regarding
             sufficiency of protection for gay men in Bangladesh,

          2) did not give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  there  is
             sufficiency of protection, and

          3) applied the wrong standard of proof regarding  the  likelihood
             of harm.

The grant of permission

      3. Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted permission to appeal (18 August
         2015) on the ground that;

         "It is arguable that the  Judge  ...  does  not  give  reasons  for
         preferring the evidence adduced by the Secretary of State over that
         of the Appellant."

Respondent's position

      4. The Respondent asserted in her reply (2 September 2015) in  essence
         that the Judge took into account all evidence and was  entitled  to
         find that;

          1) homosexuality is part of the Bangladeshi culture,

          2) participation in that culture will not necessarily  result  in
             prosecution,

          3) any discrimination suffered would not amount  to  persecution,
             and

          4) internal relocation to an active gay community  where  he  can
             integrate is a viable option.

      5. Mr Bramble submitted additionally that the fact that there are some
         unsympathetic policemen does not mean  that  there  is  a  lack  of
         willingness by the state to provide protection. The Judge looked at
         all the evidence. The fact that the gay scene is not  as  available
         does not mean he cannot act openly within the more constricted life
         available in Bangladesh.

The Judges findings

      6. The Judge found as follows;

         [42] "...the appellant's sexuality is fundamental to his  identity.
         He is homosexual and belongs to that particular social group."

         [43] "When the appellant was living in Bangladesh he was  subjected
         to intolerance/discrimination in relation to his sexuality from the
         local community ... his parents no  longer  had  contact  with  the
         appellant because of his sexuality. Same sex activity is illegal in
         Bangladesh ... However ... prosecution does not often occur."

         [44] "I find the appellant would have  sufficient  protection  from
         the police or  relevant  authorities  living  as  a  homosexual  in
         Bangladesh."

         [45] "Homosexuality is part of the  Bangladeshi  culture  and  that
         participation in  that  culture  will  not  necessarily  result  in
         prosecution...the appellant will not be able to  do  in  Bangladesh
         everything he can openly do in the UK as that is not the  test.  It
         is possible the appellant might suffer some  discrimination  if  he
         returned to Bangladesh, but based on  the  evidence  it  would  not
         equate to persecution."

         [46] "... his father was no longer an active  police  officer,  and
         even if he was, it is unlikely he would be able to influence  whose
         sections of a community to which the appellant  has  relocated  ...
         the threats ... are unlikely to be so far reaching  they  could  be
         carried out if the  appellant  relocated.  The  appellant  is  fit,
         healthy  and  educated.  Bangladesh  is  a  large  country  with  a
         population of approximately 166 million. I find that the  appellant
         would be able to relocate, not only physically away from members of
         his family, but also to an area of Bangladesh  where  there  is  an
         active gay community to enable him to integrate."

         [48] "He suffered discrimination in the form of  teasing,  bullying
         and physical assaults when in Bangladesh."

         [51] "... he has lived  most  of  his  life  in  Bangladesh,  spoke
         Bengali and went to school in Bangladesh. He is  fit,  healthy  and
         educated and able to relocate ... and will have the  protection  of
         the police and relevant authorities upon his return."

Relevant case law

      7. Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341  (IAC)  guides
         me to the view that it is generally unnecessary and  unhelpful  for
         First-tier Tribunal judgments to rehearse  every  detail  or  issue
         raised in a case. It is, however, necessary for Judges to  identify
         and resolve key conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear  and
         brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can  understand  why
         they have won or lost.

      8. HL (Malaysia) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 834 states that even if  in  a
         particular country a gay person might not live freely and openly as
         such, an applicant would not be entitled to refugee  status  if  he
         would behave discreetly for reasons quite  other  than  a  fear  of
         persecution. In such a case there was no nexus between the possible
         persecution of overt gays and the claimant's conduct.

      9. HJ (Iran) v SSHD; HT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31  states  that
         attention must be focussed on what the applicant would actually  do
         if he was returned to his country of nationality. The fact that  he
         could take action to avoid persecution did not disentitle him  from
         asylum if in fact he would not act in such a way as to avoid it.

     10. R v SSHD (ex p Bagdanavicius) [2005] UKHL 38 states that there  has
         to be substantial grounds for believing that there will be  a  real
         risk of harm and a failure  by  the  state  to  provide  reasonable
         protection.

     11. AW (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC) guides
         me to the view that the test set out in Horvath [2001] 1 AC 489 was
         intended to deal with the ability of a state to  afford  protection
         to  the  generality  of  its  citizens.  Notwithstanding   systemic
         sufficiency of state protection, a claimant may still have  a  well
         founded fear of persecution if authorities know or ought to know of
         circumstances particular to his/her case giving rise to  the  fear,
         but  are  unlikely  to  provide  the  additional   protection   the
         particular circumstances  reasonably  require.  Particular  account
         must be taken of past persecution (if any)  so  as  to  ensure  the
         question posed is whether there are good reasons to  consider  that
         such persecution (and past lack of sufficient protection) will  not
         be repeated.

Discussion

     12. In my judgement the Judge  did  not  engage  with  the  Appellant's
         evidence regarding sufficiency of  protection  or  the  ability  to
         internally relocate. She does  not  explain  why  she  prefers  the
         evidence of the Respondent to that produced by the  Appellant.  She
         does not explain how being teased, bullied and physically assaulted
         amounts to discrimination and not persecution. She does not explain
         how, if he had to cease being open regarding his sexuality to avoid
         the ill-treatment she accepted had occurred and which was linked to
         his sexuality,  he  fell  foul  of  the  guidance  set  out  in  HL
         (Malaysia) and HJ (Iran).

     13. In addition, in stating that (my emphasis) "participation  in  that
         culture will not necessarily  result  in  prosecution",  the  Judge
         erred, as the correct test is whether  "it  is  reasonably  likely"
         rather  than  "not  necessarily".  The  former  is  a  much   lower
         threshold.

     14. There was therefore a material error of law in the manner in  which
         the Judge dealt with the Appellant's evidence as she failed to give
         reasons for preferring the evidence adduced by the Respondent  over
         that of the Appellant, and applied the wrong test.

     15. I therefore set the decision aside.

Rehearing

     16. Mr Sesay submitted that I should remit the matter to the First-tier
         Tribunal to enable the internal flight option to be considered.  Mr
         Bartle submitted that all  the  information  was  available  and  I
         should determine the matter myself. I agreed with  Mr  Bartle.  All
         the evidence was before me and  delaying  the  matter  when  I  was
         cognisant of all relevant facts did not accord with  the  principle
         of resolving disputes without undue delay.

     17. On rehearing the matter Mr Bramble referred me to the  Respondent's
         Country of Origin Information Report issued on 31 August  2013.  Mr
         Sesay submitted that there  was  a  deeply  homophobic  society  in
         Bangladesh. The authorities were complicit in the  persecution  and
         lack of adequate protection. There was a  systematic  brutality  of
         the community towards homosexuals.  Internal  relocation  would  be
         unduly harsh and unreasonable.

     18. The Respondent's Country of Origin Information Report notes;

         (21.01) - the jail and financial penalties for homosexuality within
         the penal code,

         (21.04 - December 2010)  -  the  systematic  persecution  by  state
         agents  for  "suspicious"  behaviour   of   sexually   marginalised
         populations,

         the gross infringements of the rights of sexual minorities,

         the harassment, physical and sexual abuse and extortion, as well as
         arbitrary  arrest  and  detention  of  those  not   conforming   to
         heterosexual norms,

         an emerging self-identified gay and lesbian culture, and that

         self-identified gay teenagers are often forced into psychiatric and
         medical regimes in order to be "cured",

         (21.07 - 2012)  -  the  law  against  consensual  same  sex  sexual
         activity was not enforced but there were reports  that  the  police
         used the law as a pretext to bully especially effeminate men, and

         there were several informal support networks for gay men, and

         (21.08 - September 2011) that due  to  legal  issues  and  societal
         norms and pressures, gay men rarely disclose their status.

     19. I note the launching of an  LGTB  magazine  in  Dhaka  (20  January
         2014), and the article from Globalgayz (1 January 2012) which noted
         the lack of a publicly identifiable Bangladesh gay community.

     20. It was accepted that the Appellant has  been  teased,  bullied  and
         physically assaulted and  ostracised  by  his  family  due  to  his
         sexuality.  The  background  evidence  makes  it  clear  that   the
         authorities do not actively prosecute homosexuals under  one  piece
         of legislation but do so under another and used it as a pretext  to
         bullying. Accordingly the homosexual community is marginalised  and
         underground.

     21. The Appellant would not be able to live openly as a  homosexual  in
         Bangladesh wherever he is. The only reason he cannot do that is  to
         avoid a repeat of the ill-treatment he has suffered  in  the  past.
         Being beaten goes beyond discrimination as it is a physical act  as
         opposed to a denial of rights.

     22. Given the background  evidence,  I  am  satisfied  that  there  are
         substantial grounds for believing that there will be a real risk of
         harm and a failure by the state to provide reasonable protection to
         the Appellant should he return  to  Bangladesh  and  seek  to  live
         openly as a homosexual. Internal relocation is  not  an  option  as
         there is no evidence any one part of Bangladesh is less  homophobic
         than any other, and as the background evidence indicates  that  the
         police are part of the problem not part of the solution.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I remake the decision and  allow  the  appeal  under  the  1951  Geneva
    Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, and  Article  3  of  the
    1950 Convention for the Protection  of  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental
    Freedoms.


Signed:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
4 November 2015
