
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02124/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 February 2018 & 3 May 2018     |On 4 May 2018                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                Mohammad [M]
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Dr E Mynott, instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the resumed hearing  of  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davies  promulgated  18.8.17,
    dismissing on all grounds  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State, dated 23.1.15, to refuse his protection claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parker  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    6.11.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 16.2.18 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, on which occasion Mr C Bates  represented  the  Secretary  of
    State.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, at the hearing  on  16.2.18  I  found
    such error of law in the making  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as to require the decision to be set aside.

 5. The case has a long history. The appellant claimed asylum on arrival in
    the UK in 2012, on the basis of imputed political opinion. He claims to
    have  attended  demonstrations  in  Tehran  but  was  not  detained  or
    identified. However, he had a contract to supply fruit to a  member  of
    Sepah. When he was not paid and threatened to report the matter, he was
    arrested by his contact in Sepah on grounds  of  participating  in  the
    demonstrations. He was mistreated in detention, but eventually released
    on bail to attend court. He did not attend court, but fled Iran, making
    his way to the UK.

 6. His claim was rejected in the decision of  the  Home  Office,  for  the
    reasons set out in the letter of 23.1.15 (RFR). His appeal against that
    decision was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Tobin,  in  the
    decision of the Tribunal promulgated 5.10.15. The appellant sought, and
    on 25.11.15 was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 7. In the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  promulgated  20.12.16,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chalkley found errors of law  in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. It was found that Judge Tobin failed  to  consider
    the  future  risk  on  return  and  the  questions  of  sufficiency  of
    protection and internal flight, as well as the risk he  might  face  on
    return having fled Iran whilst on bail. Judge Chalkley also found  that
    the judge also failed to make any findings in  respect  of  the  arrest
    warrant document produced by the appellant. Both  parties  agreed  that
    the decision could not stand. In the circumstances,  the  decision  was
    set aside and  remitted  for  rehearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    However, Judge Chalkley preserved both the finding in  the  appellant's
    favour at [26] of Judge Tobin's decision,  and  the  rejection  of  the
    claim to Christian conversion from [34] onwards,  against  which  there
    had been no appeal.

 8. The remitted appeal was reheard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davies.
    The appellant was not called to give evidence; the appellant relied  on
    the  documentary  evidence  and  the  hearing  proceeded  by   way   of
    submissions only.

 9. In his decision promulgated 18.8.17, Judge Davies expressed surprise at
    the error of law decision of Judge Chalkley, noting that, in his  view,
    the findings  did  not  accord  with  the  contents  of  Judge  Tobin's
    decision. However, at [7] he affirmed that those  observations  at  [5]
    and also those made at [6] of his decision, did not affect the  way  in
    which he made the findings and decided the appeal.

10. The grounds complain of procedural impropriety and  unfairness  on  the
    part of Judge Davies. Despite the assurance that his comments would not
    affect the way in which he made the findings, it was submitted that  it
    is clear from the findings [36] onwards that the judge allowed his view
    that that Judge Tobin had correctly dealt with the issues to  influence
    his own findings, infecting and influencing the outcome of  the  appeal
    to the appellant's prejudice.

11. Complaint is also made as to [39] of Judge Davies' decision, in respect
    of which it is submitted that he failed  to  give  weight  to  material
    evidence. The judge there stated that no evidence had been  put  before
    the Tribunal that the appellant could not contact  the  office  of  the
    Supreme Leader. Reference is made in the  grounds  to  [15]  where  the
    judge stated that he had considered all the evidence and  concluded  at
    [45] that  the  Iranian  authorities  would  offer  protection  to  the
    appellant against a corrupt Republican Guard. It is submitted that  the
    country evidence before the Tribunal did not support  this  conclusion.
    Reliance is placed on the country background information  at  [45]  and
    [47] that security forces routinely  torture  and  ill-treat  detainees
    with impunity; and at [59] that there was official corruption,  a  lack
    of  judicial  independence  and  government  transparency,   and   that
    officials have ignored or failed to investigate credible allegations of
    mistreatment.  It  is  submitted  that  Judge  Davies  could  not  have
    considered all the evidence and it cannot be said  that  there  was  no
    evidence  that  the  appellant  could  not  make  contact  with   state
    authorities. It is submitted that the conclusion  of  Judge  Davies  at
    [45] that the appellant had been mistreated by  a  non-state  actor,  a
    corrupt Republican Guard, and at [40] that the  guard  was  not  acting
    under the sanctions of the Iranian State, was  unreasoned,  irrational,
    wholly unsupported by evidence, and unsustainable.

12. With regard to the arrest warrant, addressed at [41] of  Judge  Davies'
    decision, it is submitted that he relied  solely  on  the  findings  of
    Judge Tobin and failed to undertake an independent assessment  of  this
    aspect of the appeal.

13. In granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge  Parker  noted  that  Judge
    Chalkley preserved only Judge Tobin's findings on lack  of  credibility
    of Christian conversion, and the  positive  findings  at  [26]  of  the
    decision, that the appellant had  extensive  injuries  consistent  with
    being a victim of torture. "Although the other  findings  of  IJ  Tobin
    were set aside, it is apparent from the decision of IJ Davies  that  he
    adopted some of them (eg at paragraphs 41 and 44). The findings of fact
    made by IJ Davies are not supported by adequate, or any,  reasons.  For
    these reasons alone, I find that there is an arguable error of  law  in
    the decision."

14. Whilst the findings at [37], [38] and [40] do  mirror  those  of  Judge
    Tobin, I find that they were findings independently open to  the  judge
    on the appellant's own evidence. Although somewhat brief, the reasoning
    is clear. On the evidence it was open to the judge to conclude that the
    actions of the sole Sepah member, a Republican Guard, were  of  a  non-
    state actor, acting corruptly by instigating the appellant's detention.
    It was open to the judge to reject the  proposition  that  that  person
    would have had access, some two and a half years after the  events,  to
    information  or  evidence  that  the   appellant   had   attended   the
    demonstrations. The judge concluded that the guard may simply have been
    acting in this way to avoid payment of the outstanding debt.

15. However, it is clear that at [41] Judge Davies relied on Judge  Tobin's
    assessment of the arrest warrant document, despite the finding of Judge
    Chalkley that Judge Tobin had made  no  clear  findings.  Judge  Davies
    recites that Judge Tobin attached little weight to the document, on the
    basis that there was no other supporting evidence in  relation  to  it,
    though the appellant would have been  well-able  to  obtain  additional
    evidence. Judge Davies purported to adopt that reasoning to also attach
    little or no weight to the document and  concluded  that  the  document
    does not indicate  that  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the  Iranian
    authorities have any adverse interest in the appellant.

16.  At  [42]  the  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    demonstrate to the lower standard of proof that he was ever  bailed  on
    the basis that his father put forward the security of his own property.
    However, it appears that the finding is not justified by any reasoning.



17. At [44] Judge Davies stated that it was his view that these credibility
    issues were clearly set out in the decision of Judge Tobin and went  on
    to find that the false claim to be a Christian convert further  damaged
    his credibility.

18. Notwithstanding the declaration that he made the decision in the appeal
    without  being  affected  by  (a)  his  view  as  to  Judge  Chalkley's
    assessment of Judge Tobin's decision, and (b) his own view  that  Judge
    Tobin had properly dealt with these issues,  the  way  in  which  Judge
    Davies drafted his decision, repeatedly referring back to Judge Tobin's
    findings and expressly taking some of  them  into  account,  undermines
    confidence that  there  has  been  an  independent  assessment  of  the
    appellant's case. Although I accept that some of the contested findings
    were open to Judge Davies and were adequately reasoned, other findings,
    such as that at [42], appear to be without any reasoned  justification.
    Read as a whole, the decision gives the impression, if  not  the  fact,
    that Judge Davies merely adopted the findings made by  Judge  Tobin  on
    the contested issues, despite the conclusion of the Upper Tribunal that
    those findings had not been adequately made, or not made clearly.

19. Despite the Rule 24 reply, dated 12.12.17, which submitted  that  Judge
    Davies made findings which were open to him and "had  regard  to  Judge
    Tobin's findings and was guided  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley's
    determination, "Mr  Bates  indicated  that  he  could  not  defend  the
    decision and did not resist the setting aside of the decision.

20. In all the circumstances, I was not  satisfied  that  the  decision  of
    Judge Davies met the Tribunal's  overriding  duty  to  act  fairly  and
    justly, and concluded that it must be set aside and remade.

21. I considered with the two representatives at  the  initial  hearing  of
    16.2.18 whether this is a case that should be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, or whether it could be dealt with in the Upper Tribunal.
    Unfortunately, the  appeal  has  already  been  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on two previous occasions.

22. Mr Bates submitted that there remain arguable issues for the  Secretary
    of State to pursue, including whether the Republican Guard  was  acting
    under the authority of the  state,  or  whether  his  actions  and  the
    consequences for the appellant were  those  arising  from  a  non-state
    actor. The arrest warrant/summons also remains a live  issue.  However,
    it was agreed that no further evidence needs to be taken and  that  the
    hearing could proceed by way of submissions only.

23. In the circumstances, having regard to the Senior President's  Practice
    Statement, I concluded that this was a case that can be resolved in the
    Upper Tribunal. However, the parties were not in  a  position  to  make
    those submissions immediately and it required adjournment for a resumed
    hearing.

24. I specifically directed that, by agreement, the resumed  hearing  would
    proceed by way of submission only without any oral evidence, and on the
    basis of the existing evidenced that was before the First-tier Tribunal
    and Judge Davies.

25. That resumed appeal hearing came back before me at Liverpool on 3.5.18,
    when the respondent was represented by Mr A McVeety.

26. The tribunal had  the  advantage  of  Dr  Mynott's  skeleton  argument,
    prepared in accordance with the directions I issued on 19.2.18.  Having
    considered the matter further, Mr McVeety took the  view  that  on  the
    positive findings of Judge  Tobin  preserved  by  Judge  Chalkley,  the
    Secretary of State could  not  justifiably  argue  that  the  treatment
    received by  the  appellant  on  detention  in  Iran,  whether  or  not
    instigated  by  a  rogue  officer,  did  not  amount  to  institutional
    mistreatment by other officers  of  the  Iranian  state,  so  that  the
    appellant would be at real risk  of  further  mistreatment  on  return,
    pursuant to SSH & HR (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG
    [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC). In  the  circumstances,  Mr  McVeety  did  not
    resist the appellant's appeal.

27.  To  summarise  the  position,  the  appellant's  claim  to   Christian
    conversion has been  dismissed  and  is  no  longer  pursued.  However,
    significant positive findings were preserved in the appellant's favour.
    These included that the  appellant  had  sustained  extensive  injuries
    consistent with being the victim of torture. The judge found the expert
    report provided a powerful and credible account of injuries  sustained,
    so that there could  be  little  doubt  that  the  appellant  had  been
    brutalised and subjected  to  a  disturbing  degree  of  violence.  His
    account of torture included being severely beaten,  struck  with  glass
    objects, given electric shocks, burnt with  cigarettes  and  acid,  and
    raped three times. Other medical evidence was to the  effect  that  his
    psychological state  could  be  directly  attributed  to  the  solitary
    confinement and torture he experienced in detention and at the hands of
    the Iranian authorities.

28. It follows that on the preserved findings, the tribunal has  to  accept
    that the appellant had already been subjected to a disturbing degree of
    violent mistreatment, consistent with being the victim of  torture  and
    thus of persecution and serious harm. I see no reason to disturb  those
    findings  of  fact  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  after  careful
    consideration of the evidence.

29. Whilst the appellant's arrest may have been instigated out of spite  by
    the rogue Sepah officer he had been dealing with, he  was  arrested  by
    two uniformed police officers and was placed in police  detention.  The
    subsequent treatment was at the hands of persons other than  the  Sepah
    officer and thus involved  other  state  actors,  including  police  or
    security officers acting in concert and inside a  state  facility.  The
    appellant's claim is that when released he  was  required  to  sign  an
    undertaking  not  to  engage  in  further  political  activity.  It  is
    reasonable  in  all  the  circumstances  to  conclude  that  the   past
    persecution or mistreatment was at the hands of state  agents  and  not
    merely one rogue officer.

30. The fact that he had already been subjected to persecution  or  serious
    harm, is recognised as an indication of a well-founded fear of  similar
    persecution on return  to  Iran,  unless  there  are  good  reasons  to
    consider that such treatment would not be repeated.

31. Mr McVeety conceded and I find  that  the  treatment  received  by  the
    appellant, as found by Judge Tobin and  preserved  by  Judge  Chalkley,
    reaches the minimum level of severity as to amount to persecution.  The
    ostensible reason for  treatment  was  in  relation  to  attendance  at
    demonstrations and thus comes  within  imputed  political  opinion.  Mr
    McVeety agreed that it amounted to persecution  within  the  Convention
    and thus humanitarian protection did not need to be considered.

32. The country evidence in relation to Iran  indicates  that  torture  and
    mistreatment of detainees is widely used and with impunity. Allegations
    of mistreatment have been ignored or  been  inadequately  investigated.
    Complainants are often threatened with further mistreatment.  The  CPIN
    indicates that those who fear rogue state agents  are  unlikely  to  be
    able to access effective state protection to the Horvath [2000] UKHL 37
    standard.

33. In SSH & HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    00308 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal issued country guidance in which it was
    held whilst ordinarily there was no risk on return after illegal  exit,
    if there are any particular concerns arising from a  person's  previous
    activities in Iran or the UK, then there would be  a  risk  of  further
    questioning, detention and potential ill-treatment.  On  the  preserved
    findings, the appellant must be at a heightened risk.

34. The argument of Dr Mynott was that in cases  where  the  abuse  is  not
    directly  authorised  by  the  state,  but  there  is   'non-conforming
    behaviour by official agents which is  not  subject  to  a  timely  and
    effective rectification by the state,' an asylum seeker will fall to be
    recognised as a refugee.  Mr  McVeety  accepted  and  I  so  find  that
    wherever this case falls on the spectrum  between  a  rogue  actor  and
    state-sanctioned persecution, there must, on the preserved findings, be
    a real risk that the Iranian authorities will not be  able  to  provide
    any sufficiency of protection to the appellant on return  to  Iran.  If
    anything, the state appears unwilling to prevent or give protection  to
    an individual against such mistreatment. Given  the  past  persecution,
    there must be a real risk on return that he will  fall  to  be  further
    questioned and mistreated, whether or not he is wanted under an  arrest
    warrant.

35. In the light of the concession and findings summarised  above,  it  was
    not necessary to resolve the issue of the arrest warrant.

36. In the circumstances, I find that  there  is  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on return so that the appellant is entitled  to  protection
    under the Convention.

Conclusion & Decision

37. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal
                    on asylum grounds.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
