
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02179/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17th March 2016                       |On 18th July 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                              mr. HOSSEIN IRAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Rasoul of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. J Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Trotter on 14th April 2015,  in  which  he
       dismissed an appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
       for the Home Department to refuse to grant the appellant asylum  and
       to remove the appellant from the UK by way of directions  under  s10
       of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


 Background


    2. The appellant is an Iranian national who claims to have left Iran on
       26th September 2014.  He claims to have travelled  in  four  lorries
       during the course of his journey to the UK, but is not aware of  the
       countries through which he travelled.  The appellant  was  found  in
       the back of a lorry on 9th October 2014 and was served  with  Notice
       of his liability to detention and removal.   The  appellant  claimed
       asylum.


    3. A screening interview was completed on 14th October  2014  and  that
       was followed by a full interview on  16th  January  2014.   On  23rd
       January 2015 a decision was made by  the  respondent  to  refuse  to
       grant the appellant asylum and it was that decision and the decision
       to remove the appellant from the UK, that gave rise  to  the  appeal
       before the First-tier Tribunal.


 The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    4. The appellant attended the hearing of his appeal  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.  He was not  represented.   The  Judge  sets  out  the
       background to the appeal before him and the  evidence  given  by  the
       appellant at paragraphs [1] to [11] of his  decision.   At  paragraph
       [1] the Judge states:


             "1.  ....the Appellant is a citizen of Iran who  was  born  in
             September 1996 and who  after  having  engaged  in  subversive
             activities against the  Iranian  state  left  Iran  on  the  9
             September 2014 arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  26
             September of the?same year..."


       I highlight that brief chronology at this point because the appellant
       in fact claims that he left Iran on  26th  September  2014.   He  was
       found, according to the respondent's decision refusing his claim  for
       asylum, in the back of a lorry by Suffolk & NE Essex Lit Arrest  team
       on 9th October 2014.


    5. The Judge records in his decision the account given by the  appellant
       of events in Iran, as set out in  the  screening  interview  and  the
       substantive interview. At paragraphs [2] to [4] of his decision,  the
       Judge refers to the appellant's claim to have been a student activist
       and to the incident in June 2009 when the appellant was detained  and
       released after 2 days,  having  been  involved  in  a  demonstration.
       Between paragraphs [3] and [9] of the  decision,  there  are  several
       reference to the appellant's activities in Iran following his release
       in June 2009.   At paragraph [5], the Judge refers to the appellant's
       brother having paid for the appellant to leave Iran.


    6. The Judge's findings are to be found at paragraphs [12]  to  [17]  of
       his decision.  The findings are encapsulated at paragraph [16] of the
       decision, and at paragraph [17] the Judge found  that  the  appellant
       will not suffer any risk of ill treatment on his return to Iran, save
       and except such risk as is borne by an individual who has  left  Iran
       without his passport.


The appeal before me


    7. The appellant advances three grounds of appeal.  The first and  third
       grounds can be taken together.  First, it is said that the  appellant
       requested an adjournment in order to find representation due  to  the
       complexities of his case, but that request  for  an  adjournment  was
       refused by the Judge.  It  is  said  that  the  appellant's  previous
       representatives ceased acting for him only  a  few  days  before  the
       hearing of the appeal, leaving the appellant with no time  to  secure
       alternative representation.  The lack of  representation  meant  that
       the appellant was unable to properly and adequately articulate all of
       his reasons for seeking protection.  Second,  the  appellant  submits
       that  the  decision  displays  a  factual  misunderstanding  of   the
       appellant's case.  The appellant submits that his claim and  fear  of
       persecution follows the raid on his family home in 2014 and the Judge
       failed to give any consideration to that aspect of  his  claim.   The
       appellant submits that it was following the raid on the  family  home
       in 2014 that the appellant's family were marked for  observation  and
       not after the appellant's arrest in 2009.  It is submitted  that  the
       Judge fails to address the raid upon the family home in 2014, in  his
       decision.


    8. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Wellesley-Cole on 24th June 2015.  The  matter  comes  before  me  to
       consider whether or not  the  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Trotter involved the making of a material error of law.


    9. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response  in  which  she  confirms
       that the appeal is opposed.  The Rule 24 response includes an extract
       from the notes of the Presenting Officer that appeared on  behalf  of
       the respondent at the hearing of the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  The extract states:


             "Before the IJ entered the appellant asked if it was  possible
             to have a solicitor. This was mentioned to the IJ who  checked
             with the appellant the circumstances of not being  represented
             and obtained confirmation he (sic) was happy to proceed.   The
             IJ allowed the appellant to add to his  interview  and  during
             cross examination asked about the summons and journey  to  the
             UK (route and funding)."


   10. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Rasoul adopts the matters set  out  in
       the Grounds of Appeal and submits that the appellant  had  previously
       been represented but his previous representatives only ceased to  act
       on his behalf, a few days before the hearing of his appeal before the
       First-tier Tribunal.   She was unable to confirm when it was that his
       previous  representatives,  had  ceased  to  act  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant.    She  maintains  that  the   Judge   appears   to   have
       misunderstood the  factual basis of the  appellant's  claim  and  the
       fact  that  the  appellant  was  not  represented  at  the   hearing,
       contributed to the confusion  and  the  Judge's  misunderstanding  of
       events.


   11. In reply, Mr Kingham adopts the  matters  set  out  in  the  Rule  24
       response.  He submits that there is no evidence  of  any  application
       for an adjournment having been made by the appellant, and  there  was
       no evidence that  the  appellant  would  have  been  able  to  secure
       representation even if the matter had been adjourned. He submits that
       a careful reading of paragraph [16] of the decision demonstrates that
       the Judge gave the appellant every opportunity to explain  his  case,
       and that it was open to the Judge to reach the findings that he  did.
       Mr Kingham concedes that the Judge does not appear to have considered
       the appellant's evidence about the raid on the family  home  in  2014
       that led to the appellant's departure from Iran.


Error of Law decision


   12. There is no reference in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge to any application for an adjournment having been made  by  the
       appellant.  The appellant was unrepresented.  It is  clear  from  the
       brief extract of the Presenting Officer's notes of the  hearing  that
       there was at least some discussion, it seems  prior  to  the  hearing
       being called on, between the appellant and the Presenting Officer  as
       to whether  it  might  be  possible  for  the  appellant  to  have  a
       solicitor.  Quite rightly, the Presenting  Officer  appears  to  have
       drawn the Judge's attention to that discussion and there then appears
       to have been some exchange between the appellant and the Judge.   The
       Presenting Officer recorded that "....the IJ ....  checked  with  the
       appellant the circumstances of not  being  represented  and  obtained
       confirmation he (sic) was happy to proceed....".  It is by  no  means
       clear whether the appellant did in fact make an  application  for  an
       adjournment.


   13. The issue of fairness in the context of adjournments  was  considered
       by the Upper Tribunal in the case of Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)
       [2014] UKUT 418.  The President gave the following reminder;


             "7. If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request,
             such decision could, in principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in
             several respects: these include a failure to take into account
             all    material    considerations;    permitting    immaterial
             considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a  fair
             hearing;  failing  to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
             irrationally. In practice, in most cases the question will  be
             whether the refusal deprived the affected party of  his  right
             to a fair hearing. Where an adjournment refusal is  challenged
             on fairness grounds, it is important  to  recognise  that  the
             question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  FtT  acted
             reasonably.  Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
             fairness: was there any deprivation of  the  affected  party's
             right to a fair hearing? Any temptation to review the  conduct
             and decision of the FtT through  the  lens  of  reasonableness
             must be firmly resisted, in order to avoid a  misdirection  in
             law. In a nutshell, fairness is the supreme criterion.


             8.  The  cardinal  rule  rehearsed  above  is   expressed   in
             uncompromising language in the decision of the Court of Appeal
             in  SH  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284, at [13]:


                       "First,  when  considering  whether  the  immigration
                  Judge ought to have granted an adjournment, the  test  was
                  not irrationality. The test was not whether  his  decision
                  was properly open to him or was Wednesbury unreasonable or
                  perverse. The test  and  sole  test  was  whether  it  was
                  unfair".


             Alertness to this test by Tribunals at both tiers  will  serve
             to prevent  judicial  error.  Regrettably,  in  the  real  and
             imperfect world of contemporary litigation,  the  question  of
             adjourning a case not  infrequently  arises  on  the  date  of
             hearing, at the doors of the court. I am conscious, of course,
             that in the typical case the Judge  will  have  invested  much
             time and effort in preparation, is understandably  anxious  to
             complete the day's list of cases for hearing and may well feel
             frustrated  by  the  (usually)   unexpected   advent   of   an
             adjournment request. Both the FtT and the Upper Tribunal  have
             demanding   workloads.   Parties   and    stakeholders    have
             expectations, typically elevated  and  sometimes  unrealistic,
             relating to the throughput and output of cases in the  system.
             In the present era, the spotlight on  the  judiciary  is  more
             acute than ever before. Moreover, Tribunals must  consistently
             give effect  to  the  overriding  objective.  Notwithstanding,
             sensations of frustration and  inconvenience,  no  matter  how
             legitimate, must always yield to the parties' right to a  fair
             hearing. In determining applications for adjournments,  Judges
             will also be guided by focusing on the  overarching  criterion
             enshrined in  the  overriding  objective,  which  is  that  of
             fairness."


   14. I have some sympathy with the submissions made by Mr. Kingham.   Even
       now, Ms.  Rasoul  was  unable  to  tell  me  when  it  was  that  the
       appellant's previous representatives had  told  him  they  would  not
       represent him at the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   If
       there was an application to adjourn, the application to  adjourn  was
       not made at the earliest opportunity, but left to the morning of  the
       hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The   application   was
       speculative,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  confirmation  from  the
       appellant's representatives, there was no reasonable basis to presume
       that the appellant would be able to secure representation at a future
       hearing.


   15. Had an application for an adjournment been made and the  reasons  for
       refusing the application been set out in the decision, one would know
       the reasons why the Judge refused the application.  There was plainly
       some discussion between the Judge and the appellant but there  is  no
       reference in the decision to what  it  was  that  the  appellant  was
       seeking.  Having raised the possibility of being  represented,  there
       is no clarification as to why it was  that  the  appellant  confirmed
       that he was happy to proceed without representation.  If there was no
       formal application made by the appellant, it would  appear  that  the
       Judge did not even consider the option of an adjournment, given  that
       there was at least some discussion  between  the  appellant  and  the
       Judge about the lack of representation at the hearing of the  appeal.
       There appeared to be representatives recorded as acting on behalf  of
       the appellant on the Tribunal record previously.


   16. I remind myself that the decision in Nwaigwe, makes it clear that the
       crucial question is not whether the decision of the First-tier  Judge
       was reasonable, but whether the refusal deprived the appellant of his
       right to a fair hearing.  There are at least two  references  in  the
       decision of the Judge of the difficulties that he  faced  in  dealing
       with this appeal because of the lack of representation.  At paragraph
       [1] the Judge states:


             "1.  ....The nature  of the appellants  case  as  set  out  in
             those documents (and it is in my view regrettable  that  there
             is no overarching statement made on behalf of the  appellant's
             representatives did not produce one)  is to  the  effect  that
             the appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born ....."


     At paragraph [16] the Judge states:


         "16.  I have to look at this matter as a whole bearing in mind  the
             lower standard of proof and handicapped (in my  view)  that  I
             have  been  by  the  fact   that   the   appellant   was   not
             represented..."


   17. From a careful reading of the decision, it is not entirely clear that
       the Judge properly understood the factual matrix for the  appellant's
       claim.  As Mr. Kingham concedes, the  Judge  makes  no  adequate  and
       clear reference  in  his  decision  to  the  event  that  caused  the
       appellant to flee Iran.  That is, the raid upon the  family  home  on
       25th September 2014, when the appellant was at school.   The  failure
       to deal with that event is in my view compounded by what  appears  to
       be a misunderstanding as to the chronology.  As I have  set  out,  at
       paragraph [1] of his decision, the Judge records that  the  appellant
       left Iran on 9th September  2014  and  arrived  in  the  UK  on  26th
       September 2014.


   18. In my view the judge erred in not granting an adjournment and because
       of that refusal to grant  an  adjournment,  the  appellant  was  left
       unable to properly articulate his claim.  In my judgement, it is  not
       entirely clear that the Judge properly understood the  factual  basis
       of the appellant's claim.  In the circumstances, I am  not  satisfied
       that the Judge took account of all  material  considerations  in  his
       decision, and I am satisfied that the appellant did lose his right to
       a fair hearing.


   19. I therefore conclude that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       must be set aside.


   20. I have taken into account  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement of 25th September 2012  and  decided  that  it  is
       appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  because
       of the extent of  judicial  fact-finding  which  is  necessary.   The
       parties will be advised in writing  of  the  date  and  time  of  the
       hearing. The appeal is to be  heard  de  novo  and  no  findings  are
       preserved.





Notice of Decision


   21. The appeal is allowed.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       promulgated on 24th April 2015 is set aside and I  remit  the  matter
       for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.


   22. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.


Signed                                  Date 18th July 2016



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




FEE AWARD


The First-tier Tribunal made no fee award, and whether or not  a  fee  award
is appropriate, is again  a  matter  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  due
course.

Signed                                  Date 18th July 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




