
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/02649/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29 February 2016                      |   On 29 April 2016               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                 Appellant
                                        -And-

                                    A A G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                 Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A. Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss N. Patel of counsel, instructed by Irvine
Thanvi Nata       Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


History of Appeal

1.   The Respondent, who was born on 15 February  1990,  is  a  national  of
    Somalia.  He entered the United Kingdom with his mother and siblings in
    1998. His mother applied for asylum. Her application was refused but on
    20 December 2000 she and her children were granted exceptional leave to
    remain until 13 December 2004. Then on 3 August  2005  the  Respondent,
    his mother and his siblings were granted indefinite leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom.

2.   On 25 May  2010  the  Respondent  was  convicted  on  three  counts  of
    attempting to cause grievous bodily harm  with  intent,  one  count  of
    causing grievous bodily harm with intent and  one  count  of  dangerous
    driving. On 18 June 2010 he was sentenced  to  6  years  and  6  months
    detention in a  young  offender  institute.  He  was  notified  of  his
    liability to deportation on 10 August 2010 and on 13 May  2013  he  was
    served with a deportation order, dated 3 May 2013, pursuant to  section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

3.    He  appealed  on  asylum  grounds  and  was  interviewed   about   his
    application on 15 February 2013 and released on bail on 22 March  2013.



4.   On 17 March 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean allowed his  appeal  on
    the basis that his deportation would breach Articles 2  and  3  of  the
    European Convention on  Human  Rights.   However,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dean also found that he continued  to  remain  a  danger  to  the
    community and that he had not rebutted the presumption contained within
    section 72(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and,
    therefore,  he  was  excluded  from  protection   under   the   Refugee
    Convention. The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  appealed
    against this decision and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey  granted  her
    permission to appeal on 2 May 2014.  However, on 1  August  2014  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Warr found that there was no error of law in  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Dean's decision. The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department sent a letter applying for permission to appeal to the Court
    of Appeal on 9 October 2014 but Upper Tribunal Judge Warr  refused  her
    permission on 3 November 2014.

 5.  The Appellant did not revoke the Respondent's deportation order and  on
    10 December 2014 she made a further decision to  deport  him  from  the
    United Kingdom. Submissions were made on the Appellant's behalf  on  22
    December 2014 and on 2 February 2015 the Appellant served the Appellant
    with a decision refusing his protection and human rights claim. He  was
    also put on notice that Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 applied, as he had  been  previously  sentenced  to  at
    least two years imprisonment.

6.   The Respondent appealed on 16 February  2015  on  the  basis  that  his
    deportation would give rise to breaches of Articles 2, 3 and 8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights and the Refugee Convention. He also
    submitted that it was an abuse of process for the Appellant to issue  a
    second deportation decision after his previous appeal had been  allowed
    by the Tribunal.

7.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke allowed the Respondent's appeal on  13
    November 2015 and the Appellant appealed  against  his  decision  on  3
    December 2015. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen  extended  time  to
    appeal and granted the Appellant permission to appeal  on  15  December
    2015. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 20 January 2016.

Error of Law Hearing

8.   The Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  said  that  she  relied  on  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department's grounds of appeal and  the
    fact that MOJ & Others (Return to Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG  [2014]  UKUT
    00442 (IAC) had not been promulgated at the  time  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Dean  decided  to  allow  the  Respondent's  appeal.   She  also
    submitted that it was  the  fact  that  the  material  and  information
    referred to in MOJ had been  analysed  and  scrutinised  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal which meant that it represented a change in circumstances.  In
    addition, she submitted that the promulgation of MOJ  gave  rise  to  a
    change in the law and  noted  that  the  Practice  Directions  for  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    Upper Tribunal stated country guidance cases are binding on  First-tier
    Tribunal judges unless there is a reason to depart from them. She  also
    relied on the wealth of evidence and  the  expert  evidence  which  was
    before the Upper Tribunal before it reached its  decision  in  MOJ  and
    which was not before First-tier Tribunal  Judge       .  She  submitted
    that K.A.B. v Sweden (Application No. 886/11) did not go as far as  MOJ
    and that much changed since it was decided.

9.   She further submitted that MOJ was a  weighty  decision  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal and was at the same level as starred decisions. She relied  on
    the fact that it remained  conducive to the public good to  deport  the
    Respondent and that once there had been a change of circumstances there
    was  no  longer  any  barrier  to  the  Respondent's  deportation.  She
    confirmed that the Respondent's deportation order was  still  in  place
    and that his indefinite leave to remain had not been revoked.

10.  Counsel for the Respondent then replied. She relied on the minute by  a
    senior case worker, dated 25 March 2013, which was  at  Tab  2  of  the
    Respondent's Bundle. The minute indicates that prior to  a  deportation
    order being made in relation to the  Respondent  on  3  May  2013,  the
    Appellant believed that the evidence about Somalia indicated  that  the
    country guidance in AMM  and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;
    returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC) should  no  longer  be
    followed.   She  then  relied  on  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v TB (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA Civ 977 and the need for finality
    in litigation. She stressed that this was  even  more  important  in  a
    jurisdiction where there was no issue estoppel.

11.  Counsel for the Respondent then addressed the issue of  the  status  of
    country guidance decisions and noted that they were  authoritative  but
    not binding. She also submitted that country guidance cases  cannot  be
    "binding" in the convention sense as they had to strike an  appropriate
    balance between consistency in decision making and the fact  that  they
    needed to be flexible enough to  be  fair.  Therefore,  a  new  country
    guidance case did not amount to a change in the law. She also addressed
    me about the evidence which was before First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean.

12.  After the hearing counsel for the Respondent submitted further  written
    submissions, dated 2 March 2016, despite my not having made  directions
    for any such additional submissions. As a consequence, I directed  that
    they be served on the Home Office Presenting Officer and she  responded
    in writing on  21  April  2016;  the  delay  being  occasioned  by  the
    Respondent's submissions not being filed on her promptly.

Error of Law

13.  In paragraph 27 of Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  TB
    (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA Civ 977 Lord Justice Stanley Burnton  found  that
    "the principles requiring finality in  litigation,  and  that  a  party
    should not be vexed twice, exemplified by Henderson v Henderson  (1843)
    3 Hare 100 and Johnson v Gore Wood [2002] 2 AC  1,  are  applicable  in
    public law as  in  private  law.  Just  as  applicants  in  asylum  and
    immigration cases are required to put forward all the matters on  which
    they rely by the "one-stop" warning which they are given, so  must  the
    Secretary of State bring forward his  entire  case  when  an  applicant
    applies to the AIT".

14.  In paragraph 32 he also found  that  "as  a  matter  of  principle,  it
    cannot be right for the Home Secretary to be  able  to  circumvent  the
    decision of the IAT by administrative decision. If she could do so, the
    statutory appeal system would be undermined".

15.  I accept that in paragraph 35 of  TB  (Jamaica)  Lord  Justice  Stanley
    Burnton found that "different considerations may apply, where there  is
    relevant fresh evidence that was not  available  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing, or a change in the law [or] a change in circumstances". I find
    that, as submitted by counsel for the Respondent, that these are narrow
    exceptions.

16.  The Appellant submitted that the promulgation  of  MOJ  amounted  to  a
    change  in  the  law.  However,  section  107(3)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 states  that  practice  directions  may
    require the Upper  Tribunal  to  treat  a  specified  decision  of  the
    Tribunal as authoritative of a particular matter. Paragraph 12.2 of the
    Practice Directions of Immigration and Asylum Chambers  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  the   Upper   Tribunal   states   that   "reported
    determinations of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT bearing the  letters
    "CG" shall be treated  as  an  authoritative  finding  on  the  country
    guidance issue identified in the determination, based upon the evidence
    before the members of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT  that  determine
    the appeal As a result, unless it  has  been  expressly  superseded  or
    replaced by any later "CG" determination, or is inconsistent with other
    authority that is binding on the Tribunal, such a country guidance case
    is authoritative in any subsequent appeal, so far as that appeal:-
         (a) relates to the country guidance issue in question; and
         (b) depends upon the same or similar evidence".

17.  Therefore, I find that country  guidance  cases  are  authoritative  in
    relation to the evidence available at that  particular  point  in  time
    about an individual country.

18.  This approach was  approved  in  paragraph  12  of  SA  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    Secretary of State of the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  683,  where
    Lord Justice  Patten  held  that  "country  guidance  decisions  whilst
    determining the rights of the parties to the actual  decision,  are  no
    more than a compilation and  statement  of  evidence  relevant  to  the
    position of asylum seekers from the country in question. They therefore
    provide a convenient guide to the likely treatment of asylum seekers in
    that jurisdiction but they are no more than a  judicial  assessment  of
    the probative value of the evidence on which they are based and are not
    intended to exclude  other  relevant  evidence  which  the  parties  in
    particular cases are able to adduce.....A change in country guidance is
    in no sense a change in the law".

19.  In paragraph 140 of NM and Others (Lone  women  -  Ashraf)  Somalia  CG
    [2005] UKIAT 00076 the Upper Tribunal also held that  country  guidance
    decisions "are now denoted as "CG". They  are  not  starred  decisions.
    Those latter are decisions which are binding  on  points  of  law.  The
    requirement to apply CG cases  is  rather  different:  they  should  be
    applied except where they do not apply to the particular facts which an
    Adjudicator or the Tribunal faces and can properly be held inapplicable
    for legally adequate reasons...The system does not have the rigidity of
    the legally binding  precedent  but  has  instead  the  flexibility  to
    accommodate  individual  cases,  changes,  fresh  evidence  and   other
    circumstances which we have set out.

20.  At paragraph 17 of R on the application of  Saribal  v  Home  Secretary
    [2001] EWHC 1542 (Admin) Moses J  found  that  there  is  an  important
    principle  at  the  heart  of  these  proceedings  which  is  that  the
    Respondent is not entitled to disregard the determination  of  the  IAT
    and refuse a claimant's right to ILR as a refugee  unless  he  can  set
    aside  that  determination  by   appropriate   procedure   founded   on
    appropriate evidence.

21.  In her further written submissions the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that a country guidance case amounted to a binding  precedent
    in law even if it did not amount to a change in the  law.  She  further
    submitted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean  was  obliged  to  follow
    MOJ. However, as made clear in paragraph 10 of his decision, the issued
    before him was whether the further decision was an  abuse  of  process.
    Until that issued had been resolved there was no new decision to  which
    MOJ applied. Therefore, I find that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clarke
    was correct to find that the promulgation of MOJ did not  amount  to  a
    change in the law or a binding precedent in law.

22.  In the alternative, the Appellant had submitted that  the  promulgation
    of MOJ amounted to a "change  in  circumstances".  However,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Dean had been provided with a copy of KAB v  Sweden  and
    in paragraph 87 the European Court of Human Rights found that "the most
    recent information suggests that the security  situation  in  Mogadishu
    has improved since 2011 or the beginning of 2012". In paragraph  88  it
    also found that "the sources appear to agree that the general level  of
    violence in the city has decreased" and in paragraph 91 it  found  that
    "the available country information does not indicate that the situation
    is, at present, of such a nature as to place everyone who is present in
    the city at real risk  of  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  of  the
    Convention".

23.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean also  had  a  copy  of  the  Operational
    Guidance Note on Somalia, dated September 2013, which said that  "since
    the determination of AMM and others was handed down there  has  been  a
    sustained and significant improvement in the situation in Mogadishu and
    case owners should consider the new country of origin  information  and
    the individual circumstances of each claimant to establish whether  the
    guidance contained  in  AMM  in  relation  to  internal  relocation  to
    Mogadishu remains applicable to the individual claimant concerned".

24.  Counsel for the Respondent also relied on  a  note  by  a  senior  case
    worker, dated 25 March 2013. This stated that "case law since  AMM  and
    others [2011] had  been  taken  into  account  and  country  of  origin
    information has been used to  show  that  there  has  been  significant
    change in Mogadishu since AMM was promulgated which has led to  a  vast
    improvement  in  the  security  situation  there".  I  find  that  this
    indicates that First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean was well aware that there
    had been a change of circumstances in Mogadishu  when  he  allowed  the
    Respondent's appeal.

25.   The  Appellant  relied  on  the  fact  that   there   was   additional
    information, including expert evidence, before the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    MOJ.  However, the Home Office Presenting Officer did not refer to  any
    of this evidence in particular to show that the situation in Mogadishu,
    at the date of the promulgation of MOJ, had significantly changed  from
    that when KAB v Sweden was decided or the OGN  published.   She  argued
    that MOJ provided the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  with
    additional analysis but I find that this did not alter  the  fact  that
    the evidence before First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean about the  situation
    in Mogadishu had been substantially the same as that before  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MOJ.

26.  The Secretary of State for the Home Department was a party to  MOJ  and
    it is clear that the relevant evidence she relied  upon  in  that  case
    could also have been submitted in the appeal before First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Dean. I remind myself that in paragraph 20 of  Chomanga  (binding
    effect of unappealed decisions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT  00312  (IAC)  the
    Upper Tribunal found that "the respondent had had  the  opportunity  of
    filing evidence in support ...but had failed to do so ........By making
    a further decision by relying on evidence which could and  should  have
    been  produced  at  the  hearing,  the  respondent  was  in   substance
    attempting to circumvent the judge's decision".

27.  In the current case, the Appellant could have sought to  permission  to
    rely on MOJ,  when she sought permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal, but failed to do so. In particular, as was noted by counsel for
    the Respondent, the  Appellant  could  have  sought  to  rely  on  E  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49  but  had
    not done so. Such an application would have been  consistent  with  her
    current assertion that new country guidance cases can be said to amount
    to a change in circumstances. The fact that she chose not to do so also
    offended against the principle of finality upheld in TB.
28.  I have also reminded myself of the decision in Greenwood (No  2)  (para
    398 considered) [2015] UKUT 629 (IA) and note that First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Clarke correctly made a decision that  the  Appellant's  decision
    was unlawful in public law terms.
29.  As a consequence of all of the above, I find that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Clarke did not make any errors of law in his decision.
 Decision

    1. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.
    2. I uphold First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke's decision  to  allow  the
       Respondent's appeal against the decision,  dated  20  January  2015.







Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date:  25 April 2016

Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch













