
[pic]
IAC-CH- CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02620/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24th October 2014                          |On 11th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

                                     btt
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rebecca Harrington, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant claims to be a male citizen of Eritrea, born  1  January
      1994.  He claimed asylum, but his claim was rejected by the respondent
      in April 2014.  He appealed that decision and a decision to remove him
      from the United Kingdom.  The appellant claims to have left Eritrea in
      2002 when he travelled to Sudan.  He stayed there for 3  years  before
      moving to Ethiopia where he stayed for 9 years before travelling  back
      through Sudan, Libya, Italy and France arriving in the United  Kingdom
      in February 2014.

   2. In claiming to  be  Eritrean  the  appellant  also  claimed  to  be  a
      Pentecostal Christian.  He suffered  persecution  as  a  result.   The
      respondent (following a SPRAKAB Analysis) was of  the  view  that  the
      appellant was from Ethiopia based on questions  relating  to  religion
      and was of the opinion that he was not a Pentecostal Christian.

   3. The appellant appealed that decision.  His appeal came before Judge of
      the First-Tier Tribunal Woolley sitting at Newport on 23 May 2014.  An
      oral hearing was held.  Both parties were legally represented.

   4. In a determination dated 28  May  2014  Judge  Woolley  dismissed  all
      aspects of the appellants claim.

   5. The appellant sought leave to appeal.  Error on the part of the  judge
      is alleged  in  three  aspects  of  the  determination.   Firstly  the
      treatment of the SPRAKAB Report, secondly on the appellants  knowledge
      of Eritrea and Assab, and thirdly that aspect of the  appellants  case
      that involved his flight from Eritrea in 2002.

   6. The  appellants  application  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal McDade who granted leave having summarised the grounds  Judge
      McDade said "These issues are arguable.  There is an arguable error of
      law".

   7. Hence the matter comes before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   8. Ms Harrington indicated that the  appellant  was  present,  but  spoke
      virtually no English.

   9. Ms Harrington relied upon the grounds seeking leave.   In  respect  of
      Ground 1 based upon the SPRAKAB Report she referred to paragraph 27 of
      the determination.  The issue was one of the weight to be attached  to
      the report bearing in mind the CV of  the  Analyst  and  the  mistakes
      contained within the report.  These mistakes should have affected  the
      weight attributed to the  report.   In  addition  the  judge  had  not
      considered (at paragraph 27) the social history of the  appellant  and
      that the judge had failed  to  acknowledge  the  "objective  evidence"
      referred to in paragraph 7 of the grounds seeking leave.  The  judge's
      appraisal of the report is not sufficient considering  the  appellants
      background and also the background of the SPRAKAB Analyst.

  10. Ms Harrington then referred to paragraph 28 of the determination  with
      regard  to  the  appellant's  knowledge  of  Eritrea  and   Assab   in
      particular.  The judge's findings implied that the appellant had  time
      to learn answers.  In fact he only had twenty minutes.  This point had
      not been put to him.

  11. Finally Ms Harrington referred to paragraph 29  of  the  determination
      with  regard  to  the  appellants  claimed  Pentecostal  belief.   She
      considered the  judge  had  fallen  into  error  with  regard  to  the
      situation as to Pentecostalists in Eritrea.   Reference  was  made  to
      paragraph 11 of the grounds seeking leave with regard to  the  arrests
      of as many as 3,000 people from unregistered religious  groups.   This
      was a misunderstanding on the part of the judge that may have led to a
      different conclusion.

  12. Ms Harrington submitted that individually and collectively the  errors
      were material in that they would have  affected  the  outcome  of  the
      appeal.

  13. Mr Richards in reply submitted that there was no error  of  law.   The
      judge had properly dealt with the  SPRAKAB  Report.   He  clearly  had
      adopted a cautious approach and had directed himself  properly.   Only
      after doing this did he consider the report and the amount  of  weight
      that should be attributed to it.

  14. Mr Richards submitted that a twenty minute  gap  would  be  sufficient
      time to gain information.

  15. As  to  the  point  regarding  the  contents  of  the  refusal  letter
      (paragraph 29) Mr Richards indicated that the appellant was of  course
      legally represented at the hearing and any incorrect  point  taken  in
      the refusal letter could have been drawn to the judge's attention.  It
      was not an error on the part of the judge.

  16. In conclusion Mr Richards indicated that it was an extremely  detailed
      determination and the judge was entitled to come  to  the  conclusions
      that he did.

  17. Ms Harrington chose not to respond.

  18. At this stage I indicated that for the reasons now given  I  found  no
      material error of law contained within the determination.

  19. The first issue relates to the SPRAKAB  Report  and  the  weight  that
      should  be  given  to  the  Analysts  view  as  to   the   appellant's
      nationality.  Consideration of the appellant's  nationality  commenced
      at paragraph 24 of the determination and continued until  the  end  of
      paragraph 28.  Paragraph 24 clearly shows that the judge  had  at  the
      forefront of his mind the appellants claimed nationality.

  20. Judge Woolley set out in some detail the contents of  the  report  the
      weight that had to be attributed  to  the  findings  of  the  Analyst.
      Paragraph 26 is a clear self direction.

  21. It has to be acknowledged that the judge did  find  some  difficulties
      with certain aspects of the  report.   The  judge  identified  certain
      errors or misunderstandings and rejected that part of the report  that
      offered opinion outside the remit of the Analyst.

  22. Paragraph 27 found that weight could be placed on the SPRAKAB Analysts
      Report "subject to these reservations".  The judge  then  went  on  in
      paragraph 27 to explain why the judge placed weight on the  report  to
      the extent of accepting its findings.

  23. The judge (paragraph 28) went on to consider  the  appellants  claimed
      knowledge of Eritrea in general and Assab in  particular.   The  judge
      set out in detail  the  information  given  by  the  appellant  before
      explaining why the appellant's credibility had been damaged.

  24. In a very  thorough  and  closely  reasoned  determination  the  judge
      properly directed himself  to  the  evidence  (including  the  SPRAKAB
      Report) and reached clear findings to which he was perfectly entitled.
       In each case the judges reasoning set out in detail.   In  particular
      the judge was entitled to reach  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant
      subsequently gained  information  to  support  his  claim  and  having
      reading the determination as a whole I can see no material error in  a
      failure of the judge to put this point to the appellant.  The  overall
      outcome was not adversely affected from  the  point  of  view  of  the
      appellant.

  25. Dealing now with the suggested error regarding  the  judge's  findings
      with regard to the appellant's Pentecostal faith.  Paragraph 29  deals
      with the appellants alleged flight  from  Ethiopia  in  2002.   It  is
      arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  objective
      information (not evidence).  The judge had before him the reasons  for
      the refusal letter in particular paragraphs 23 onwards.  However  this
      aspect of the determination must be read in the light  of  the  judges
      findings both  as  to  the  appellants  nationality,  his  credibility
      (taking into account Section 8 of the 2004 Act)  and  with  regard  to
      "the appellants Pentecostalism".

  26. Paragraph 33 of the determination deals with  the  appellants  claimed
      religion.  For the reasons set out in that paragraph the  judge  found
      that the appellant's credibility  was  again  undermined.   The  judge
      found that the appellant knew very little about Pentecostalism outside
      the United Kingdom and the judge found that his  answers  were  "vague
      and often incorrect".  The judge was perfectly entitled to reach those
      conclusions.  The concluding sentences of paragraph 33 found  a  "luke
      warm endorsement of his faith".

  27. The judge then went on to consider in detail Section 8 of the 2004 Act
      before reaching conclusions on the "global conclusion on  nationality"
      (paragraph 35).  He then went on to consider (paragraphs 36 to 37) the
      risk upon return.

  28. I therefore find  no  material  error  of  law  contained  within  the
      determination.  The findings and  decisions  stand.   This  appeal  is
      dismissed.

  29. An anonymity direction had been made.  No application has been made to
      remove that and it therefore continues in force.


Decision

  30. Appeal dismissed.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole                   10th November 2014


