
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02518/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Date Sent                    |
|On 9th December 2013                          |On 22nd April 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                           MR BAHADER TANHA SAHAK

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Timson of Counsel, instructed by Manchester
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born  on  6th  June,
    1993, and who entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 2nd December,
    2009, when he claimed asylum.  He was granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain on 19th August, 2010, until 3rd  December,  2010,  and,  shortly
    before the expiry of this leave, the appellant made an application  for
    leave to remain to be extended on the basis that he was a  refugee  and
    also on human rights grounds.  By way of decisions dated 14th February,
    2011, the Secretary of State refused to vary the appellant's leave  and
    made  a  decision  to  remove  him  pursuant  to  Section  47  of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The appellant appealed that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    his appeal was heard by Immigration Judge De Haney on 29th March, 2011.
     The judge allowed  the  appellant's  asylum  appeal  and  allowed  the
    appellant's human rights appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State  challenged
    that decision and the Upper Tribunal, comprising Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Dawson  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor,  heard  that  appeal  at
    Piccadilly Exchange Manchester on 23rd August, 2013.

3.   They set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge De Haney,  but
    preserved  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  him.   A  copy  of  their
    determination  is  set  out  in  Part  1  of  the  Appendix   to   this
    determination.  The only findings of fact are set out in paragraphs 17,
    18 and 19 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination.

4.   At the hearing before me, both representatives  agreed  that  the  only
    live issue before me is the question of proportionality under Article 8
    jurisprudence.  It was agreed by both representatives  that  the  claim
    could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.

Oral Evidence of the Appellant

5.   I ensured that the appellant and the interpreter understood each  other
    and told them to inform me if  at  any  time  they  had  difficulty  in
    understanding each other.

6.   The appellant confirmed his full names,  his  date  of  birth  and  his
    nationality.

Evidence-in-chief

7.   In answer to questions  put  to  him  by  his  Counsel,  the  appellant
    identified his signature on the  last  page  of  a  four  page  witness
    statement dated 12th September, 2013.  He told me that the contents are
    true and correct and that it was read back to him in his own  language.
    He told me that he had also read it and that he could read English.  He
    told me that he wished to adopt the statement as his evidence and  that
    everything in it was true.

8.   A copy of the appellant's statement  is  set  out  in  Part  2  of  the
    Appendix to this determination.

Cross-Examination

9.   In answer to questions  put  to  him  by  Mr  Harrison,  the  appellant
    confirmed that his girlfriend was not attending the hearing today.   He
    agreed that her parents do not want her to have any  relationship  with
    him.  She lives in Accrington and suggested that the  appellant  should
    move away, but he refused.  His girlfriend's father has  said  that  he
    wants his girlfriend to have nothing further to do with the  appellant.
    She is 19 years of age and works with her father.

10.  She did not tell her parents about making a statement.  She was sick.

Re-Examination

11.  The appellant agreed that his girlfriend was under  pressure  from  her
    parents and he thought that they might send her back to Pakistan.  That
    is the reason she has given for not attending the hearing.

Questions Put by Me in Order to Clarify the Appellant's Evidence

12.  The appellant told me that he had not contacted the Red Cross  to  find
    out about his mother and other family members.   Social  services  have
    told him about these things.  He believed that  his  mother  had  moved
    from her home.

Submissions

13.  Mr Harrison relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  He  reminded  me
    that this is a simple Article 8 appeal and that the  appellant  arrived
    in the United Kingdom as a minor.  His evidence previously was that  he
    was in regular contact with his mother.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  De
    Haney recorded that the appellant had  received  a  document  from  his
    mother which had been sent to him by his maternal  uncle  in  Pakistan.
    He also recorded that in oral evidence before him,  the  appellant  had
    last spoken to his mother two weeks before the hearing in  August  2013
    and that the appellant had said that he keeps in touch with his  mother
    on a regular  basis  and  tends  to  phone  her  after  he  has  had  a
    particularly bad dream.   Under  cross-examination  the  appellant  and
    confirmed that his  mother,  two  brothers  and  maternal  uncle  lived
    together in Kunar where they  had  moved  from  Helmand.   Mr  Harrison
    suggested that there was a clear  line  of  communication  between  the
    appellant and his family members.  If, as the appellant  maintains,  he
    has now lost contact with  his  family,  then  it  is  clear  from  his
    evidence that he has made no attempt at all to contact the Red Cross to
    find his mother.

14.  Mr Harrison asked me to bear  in  mind  that  the  appellant  would  be
    returning to Afghanistan as a fit, young adult.  He is resourceful  and
    speaks Pushtu.  His girlfriend's family is opposed to the  relationship
    between him and her and she is bowing to that pressure.  She has chosen
    not to attend the hearing and give evidence  which  suggests  that  the
    relationship is not quite as strong as the appellant  may  believe,  or
    alternatively is stronger on one side than on the other.   Mr  Harrison
    suggested that it would be wholly proportionate for him to be removed.

15.  Counsel suggested that it was not surprising that the appellant  has  a
    girlfriend and that the parents do not approve.  The appellant  clearly
    has built up a strong private life in the United Kingdom and has  built
    strong ties with this country, having been here since  his  arrival  on
    2nd December, 2009.  He indicated that there was  nothing  between  him
    and Mr Harrison on the facts of the appeal but, so far as the  question
    of proportionality is concerned, it must be  borne  in  mind  that  the
    appellant is now settled in the United Kingdom.  He has simply lost his
    social and cultural ties in Afghanistan.

16.  I reserved my decision.

Discussion

17.  I am most grateful to the representatives for  confirming  to  me  that
    the only issue before me is the question of  proportionality  and  that
    the appellant's appeal could not succeed on Article 8 grounds under the
    Immigration Rules.

The Law

18.  Article 8 of the  European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms provides for  respect  for  a  person's
    private and family life, their home and correspondence.  The  appellant
    has to show that the subject matter of the Article 8 subsists and  that
    the decision of the respondent will interfere with it.  If he does  so,
    it is for the respondent to show that the  decision  is  in  accordance
    with the law, that it is one of the  legitimate  purposes  set  out  in
    Article 8(2) in this case for the economic well-being of  the  country,
    for the prevention of disorder or crime and for the protection  of  the
    rights and freedoms of others, and that it is necessary in a democratic
    society, which means that it must be proportionate.

19.  At paragraph 17 of Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27, Lord Bingham of Cornhill said this:

         "17. In considering whether a challenge to the Secretary of State's
             decision to remove a person must clearly fail,  the  reviewing
             court must, as it seems to me, consider how an appeal would be
             likely  to  fare  before  an  adjudicator,  as  the   tribunal
             responsible for deciding the appeal if there were  an  appeal.
             This  means  that  the  reviewing  court   must   ask   itself
             essentially the questions which would have to be  answered  by
             an adjudicator.  In  a  case  where  removal  is  resisted  in
             reliance on article 8, these questions are likely to be:


             (1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a  public
                  authority with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to
                  respect for his private or (as the  case  may  be)  family
                  life?


             (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences  of  such
                  gravity as potentially to engage the operation of  Article
                  8?


             (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


             (4)  If so, is such interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
                  society in the  interests  of  national  security,  public
                  safety or the economic well-being of the country, for  the
                  prevention of disorder or crime,  for  the  protection  of
                  health or morals, or for the protection of the rights  and
                  freedoms of others?


             (5)   If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate  to   the
                  legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"

Discussion

20.  I am satisfied that the appellant does enjoy  a  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom, but I find that he does not enjoy a family life in  the
    United Kingdom, although his relationship with Ms  Khan  is  clearly  a
    significant part of his private life.  I am  not  sure,  however,  that
    their relationship is necessarily as strong on part of Ms Khan's as the
    appellant would have me believe, but I  accept  that  his  relationship
    with Ms Khan is a significant part of his private life.

21.  Within the appellant's bundle is  a  signed  statement  from  Ms  Khan,
    dated 12th September, 2013.  I have caused a copy of it to be  set  out
    at Part 3 of the Appendix to this determination.  The appellant and  Ms
    Khan became friends after  meeting  at  college  in  March  2011.   Her
    parents disapprove of the relationship she has with the  appellant  and
    because he did not have a job and was an asylum seeker.  They  were  no
    doubt concerned that at some stage in  the  near  future  he  might  be
    removed from the United Kingdom.  Ms  Khan  indicates  that  she  could
    never live in Pakistan and that, quite understandably, her life was  in
    the United Kingdom.  She is a British  citizen  and  was  born  in  the
    United Kingdom and permanently settled here.  The  appellant  suggested
    that it was possible that Ms Khan's parents may "send Ms Khan  back  to
    Pakistan" and Ms Khan speaks about  forced  marriage  being  common  in
    Pakistan.

22.  I do give that statement some weight but not the weight  that  I  would
    feel able to give if Ms Khan had attended the hearing  and  given  oral
    evidence and been cross-examined.

23.  I am afraid that I did not believe the appellant was  being  completely
    honest with me when he said in his witness statement that  he  has  now
    lost all contact with his mother in Afghanistan.  His  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal was that he was in  regular  contact  with  his
    mother.  I believe that the appellant has realised the significance  of
    him having contact with his family members in Afghanistan and  has  now
    decided to change his evidence, in the hope that that  would  help  his
    appeal.  Given that he has always accepted that was in regular  contact
    with his mother for some time after his arrival and that she would  not
    unnaturally be concerned with his welfare, I do not  believe  that  the
    appellant has suddenly lost all contact.  He told me that  he  had  not
    been in  touch  with  the  Red  Cross  to  make  enquiries  as  to  her
    whereabouts.  I believe that if he had been regularly in  contact  with
    his mother by telephone since his arrival in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    then suddenly not been able to make contact with  her,  he  would  have
    immediately sought help in locating her.

24.  I also believe that the appellant has exaggerated  the  extent  of  his
    relationship with Ms Khan.  I believe that if she truly  did  love  the
    appellant and want to spend the rest of her life with  him,  she  would
    have attended the hearing and given oral evidence on his  behalf.   She
    clearly attended solicitors and made a statement and I believe that  if
    she truly wanted to spend the rest of her life with the  appellant  she
    would have found a way of attending the hearing.

25.  The appellant has now been in the United Kingdom for  approaching  five
    years and during that time he will inevitably have  formed  friendships
    and ties with the United Kingdom.  He has been studying at college  and
    speaks English.

26.  The appellant is a 20 year old,  fit  male.   I  have  disbelieved  his
    claim to have lost contact with his  mother  for  the  reasons  I  have
    given.  I accept that he is in a relationship with  a  British  subject
    but I do not believe that it is as strong as he would have me  believe.
    I have read letters from Ahmad Javid Mohebi, Abdul  Hotak  and  Melanie
    Riley.  None of these individuals attended to give oral evidence before
    me and submit themselves to cross-examination.  As a  result,  I  place
    far less weight on their evidence than I would do if they had attended.
     I am sure that Ahmad Mohebi and Abdul  Hotak  value  their  friendship
    with the appellant but they do not indicate whether  they  are  British
    subjects or not.  Likewise, I am sure that the appellant is a  pleasant
    young man who is respectful and a good tenant.

27.  I notice from City  &  Guilds  certificates  in  the  bundle  that  the
    appellant has achieved Entry Level Certificate in Adult Numeracy, Entry
    Level Certificate in ESoL Skills for Life and has completed a full-time
    Entry Level Three course at Blackburn College gaining qualifications in
    English, ICT and maths.  I have read the letter of 11th September, 2013
    from West  Berkshire  Council  and  I  have  seen  the  Certificate  of
    Functional  Skills  qualification  in  Information  and   Communication
    Technology, together with the Certificate  of  Achievement  in  Further
    Education awarded to the appellant.  The skills he has acquired  whilst
    he has been in the United Kingdom would no doubt be of benefit  to  the
    appellant on his return to Afghanistan.

28.  I accept that, given that Ms Khan is a British  subject,  it  would  be
    wholly  unreasonable  to  expect  her  to  go  with  the  appellant  to
    Afghanistan.  However, they do not enjoy family  life  at  the  moment.
    They do  not  and  never  have  lived  together.   I  accept  that  the
    appellant's removal will probably mean that he will  lose  all  contact
    with Ms Khan and she will lose all contact with him.  It would be  open
    to them, should they choose, to continue their  friendship  by  writing
    letters to each other and using email, but I  accept,  and  assess  the
    question of proportionality in the likelihood, that their  relationship
    will be permanently ended by  his  removal.   When  balancing  all  the
    factors in favour of the appellant  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom
    against the interests  of  the  wider  public  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control, I have concluded that the appellant's  removal  is
    entirely proportionate.  The appellant's Article 8 appeal is dismissed.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
