
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02124/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th November, 2016                        |On 20th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                mohammad [m]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Johnrose, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson
Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is  an  Iranian  national  who  was  born  in  1974.   He
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent taken on 23rd January, 2015, to refuse his claim for  asylum
    and to direct his removal from the  United  Kingdom.   The  Immigration
    Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's   appeal,   but   before   me   both
    representatives agreed that  his  determination  could  not  stand  and
    should be set aside, save for  that  part  of  his  determination  from
    paragraph  34  onwards,  dealing  with  his   claimed   conversion   to
    Christianity and the finding in favour of the  appellant  at  paragraph
    26, namely that he has  extensive  injuries  consistent  with  being  a
    victim of torture.  Those findings have not been challenged  and  shall
    stand.  The other findings of the judge are set aside.

2.    The  judge  accepted  the  medical  evidence  which  showed  that  the
    appellant had sustained extensive  injuries  consistent  with  being  a
    victim of torture, but failed to consider the future risk  which  might
    confront the appellant on his  return  to  Iran  and  the  question  of
    sufficiency of protection and internal flight.  The judge  also  failed
    to consider the risk this appellant might face on his  return,  because
    he claimed to have fled whilst he  was  on  bail.   The  appellant  has
    produced an arrest warrant, but the judge has made no clear findings on
    that.  For these reasons it was accepted that the appeal needed  to  be
    reconsidered by the First-tier Tribunal, save  for  those  findings  at
    paragraph 37 onwards.  I also preserve the finding  in  favour  of  the
    appellant at paragraph 26.  A Farsi interpreter should  be  booked  and
    two hours should be allowed for the hearing of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The judge's  determination  is  set  aside,  save  as  to  the  findings  at
paragraphs 26 and 37 and shall be heard afresh by  a  different  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge.

No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

