
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02355/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 20 August 2013                               |On 25 September 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                           hassan shojae shaffiei
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan, instructed by Switalskif Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wardle, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Hassan Shojae Shafiei, was born on 7 January 1979 and is
    a citizen of Iran.  On 15 February  2013,  the  respondent  decided  to
    remove the appellant from the United Kingdom  as  an  illegal  entrant.
    The appellant appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Saffer) which, in a determination which is dated 15 April  2013,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The respondent has filed a reply under Rule 24.  The  second  paragraph
    of this letter reads: "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's
    application for permission  to  appeal  and  invites  the  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing (sic)"

 3. The judge's findings of fact at [21] et seq  amount,  as  Judge  Blandy
    observed when granting permission, to nothing more  than  a  series  of
    statements to the effect that the judge did not consider parts  of  the
    appellant's account of past events in  Iran  to  have  been  reasonably
    likely to have occurred.   The  appellant's  explanations  of  apparent
    implausibilities in his account have not been addressed  by  the  judge
    and no attempt has been made to distinguish  "core"  from  "peripheral"
    parts  of  the  appellant's  account.   If  the  appellant  offers   an
    explanation, this does not, of course, mean that the judge must  accept
    it. He should, however, have given details of any explanation  and  his
    reasons for rejecting it. Judge Saffer was right to observe that he was
    not obliged to accept  as  true  the  uncorroborated  evidence  of  the
    appellant but that observation  does  not  justify  the  wholesale  and
    unreasoned rejection of the appellant's credibility.  As  Judge  Blandy
    observed, "a finding that something is not reasonably likely  does  not
    necessarily amount to a finding that is not actually  true."   Further,
    there has been no attempt by the judge to examine  the  credibility  of
    the appellant's account against  the  background  of  general  evidence
    relating to Iran.  In the circumstances, I  find  that  the  judge  has
    erred in law and I set aside his determination.  I find  that  none  of
    the findings of fact may stand.  Given the need  to  make  new  primary
    findings of fact and to  hear  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant,  I
    consider it appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
    so that that Tribunal may remake the decision.

DECISION

 4. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which is  dated  15  April
    2013 contains errors of law such that it falls to be  set  aside.   The
    appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not  Judge  Saffer)
    to remake the decision.






Signed                              Date 12 September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

