
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02908/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 2 November 2015                   |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGES DEANS AND MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                MISS PING LIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate instructed by Katani & Co
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal  against  a  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Mozolowski dismissing an appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.

 2) The appellant was born in June 1992 and is a national  of  China.   She
    came to the UK in 2009 as a student.   Her  leave  was  extended  until
    October 2011 but she has been without leave since  then.   She  entered
    into a relationship early in 2013 which lasted for about a year.  As  a
    result of this relationship the appellant gave  birth  to  a  child  in
    November 2014.

 3) In August 2014 the appellant claimed asylum and this claim was  refused
    by the respondent.  The  appellant  appealed  against  the  refusal  on
    asylum and human rights grounds.

 4) The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was that she was at  risk  in
    China for attending a "house church" considered by the  authorities  to
    be part of a sect referred to as Hu Han Pai.  She also claimed to be at
    risk as a result of having had a child outwith marriage.

 5) The Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  find  credible  the
    appellant's claim to have belonged to  an  unregistered  house  church.
    This finding is not challenged.

 6) The judge considered the appellant's circumstances as a single  mother,
    having regard to the family planning regime in China  and  the  country
    guideline case of AX (family planning  scheme)  China  CG  [2012]  UKUT
    00097.   At paragraph 36 of the decision the judge noted that in  terms
    of paragraph 186 of AX the consequences of any unauthorised birth  were
    social and financial but the attitude taken by provincial birth control
    authorities to parents returning with foreign  born  children  remained
    unclear.  Parents returning with a foreign born child were expected  to
    produce a birth certificate and to pay a social  compensation  payment,
    or "social upbringing charge" but in general the rate of  the  payment,
    even where it was imposed, was not likely to be beyond the means of  an
    appellant who had been  living  abroad  for  some  years.   In  general
    Chinese nationals with foreign born children would not be at real  risk
    of persecution on return to China.

 7) The judge then found, at paragraph  43,  that  even  if  the  appellant
    encountered difficulties  in  her  local  area  in  Fujian,  she  could
    relocate to another part of China and this would not be  unduly  harsh.
    At paragraph 44 the judge found that on return the appellant  would  be
    able to pay the social  compensation  fee.   The  appellant  might  not
    qualify for free birth control, medical treatment and education for the
    child but medical treatment  and  education  for  the  child  would  be
    available on payment.  There were many  Chinese  parents  who  did  not
    qualify for free medical treatment or education.

 8) At paragraph 46 the judge accepted that the  appellant  and  her  child
    might be discriminated against because initially  the  child  would  be
    unregistered if they were to move to a different province.  This  could
    be  resolved  on  payment  of  a  financial  sanction.   The  level  of
    discrimination would not be such as to preach Article 3, neither  would
    the financial sanction.  The law  in  China  prohibited  discrimination
    against children born outside marriage.

 9) Permission to appeal was sought on the principal ground that the  judge
    had not properly considered the best  interests  of  the  child  as  an
    integral part of the Article 8 balancing exercise.  The  Supreme  Court
    in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC74  had  said  that  when  considering  the  best
    interests of the child it was important to ask the right  questions  in
    an orderly manner.  It was stated  in  JO  (section  55  duty)  Nigeria
    [2014]  UKUT  00517  that  decision  makers  should  be  properly   and
    adequately informed about the interests of the  child.   There  was  no
    indication of this in the decision  of  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

10) Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal but was granted
    by the Upper Tribunal.

Submissions

11) At the hearing before us Mr Forrest submitted that  the  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal had given insufficient consideration  to  the  best
    interests of the child when making a  decision  under  Article  8.   He
    relied upon the decision in JO, in which it was said  that  a  decision
    maker must be properly informed.  There might not be a duty to look for
    facts but the exercise was a fact sensitive one.

12) Mr Forrest drew our attention to evidence in the  Home  Office  bundle.
    He pointed out that at her screening interview (C9, at  paragraph  4.2)
    the appellant was not  recorded  as  having  referred  to  difficulties
    arising as a result of having had a child.   Following  the  interview,
    however, on 25 August 2014, the appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the
    Home Office seeking to amend this answer to include fears expressed  by
    the appellant on behalf of her Christian beliefs, and as  a  result  of
    breaking family regulations.

13) At her asylum interview (E7, Q16) the appellant confirmed that she  was
    not married.  At Q28 she stated that according to Chinese law  she  had
    to be married before having children.  She did not dare go back because
    she already had a  child  and  she  was  worried  that  they  would  do
    "something really bad" to the child in China.  Reference was also  made
    to the appellant's response to Q141 where she said that she  wanted  to
    protect her child and give him a better future.

14) Mr Forrest submitted that  in  the  respondent's  reasons  for  refusal
    letter of 2 February 2015 no specific consideration was  given  to  the
    concerns expressed by the appellant in respect of her child.  This  was
    notwithstanding that a decision  maker  should  be  properly  informed.
    Information supplied by the appellant was  ignored.   In  terms  of  JO
    there was a duty to have regard to guidance issued by the Secretary  of
    State.  There was evidence before the  judge  at  pages  54-57  of  the
    appellant's bundle relating to the treatment of  unregistered  children
    born outside the Chinese family planning policy.   Such  children  were
    treated poorly.  This evidence  should  have  been  considered  by  the
    judge.  The judge should have carried out a careful examination of  all
    the relevant facts. This judge had carried out no examination  at  all.
    The appeal should be allowed and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

15) For the respondent, Mrs O'Brien submitted that it was difficult to know
    how the best interests of the child were put forward before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  It appeared from paragraph 5 of the  decision  that  no
    argument under Article 8 was advanced on behalf of the appellant.   The
    only issue before the judge was whether the appellant's fears under the
    family planning policy were made out.  Mrs O'Brien  continued  that  it
    was not clear whether the criticisms made by Mr  Forrest  were  of  the
    Secretary of State or of the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    expression of fear on behalf of the child was different from  providing
    information about that child.  There was suitable  consideration  under
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in  the
    respondent's decision letter.

16) Mrs O'Brien continued by saying that in her decision the Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal accepted that there might be discrimination against
    the appellant and her child and a social compensation fee would have to
    be paid.  The relevant facts were set out by the judge at paragraph 44.
     These facts were within the focus of the best interests of the  child.
    The judge compared free education and health care in the  UK  with  the
    arrangements in China for which the appellant would have to  pay.   The
    judge clearly took account of the best interests of the child.  If  the
    judge's consideration was lacking, however, it was not  clear  on  what
    basis  the  appeal  might  be  allowed.   There  was  no  consideration
    affecting this child such as disability, or having integrated into  the
    education system.  The child was very young and it was difficult to see
    how consideration of the best interests of the child would  lead  to  a
    different outcome.

17) In response, Mr Forrest referred to paragraph 44  of  the  decision  in
    which the circumstances of the child were mentioned but not in terms of
    the child's best interests, only in terms of the effect on the child of
    the family planning policy and other matters.  The judge  had  observed
    at paragraph 6 of the decision that section 55 of the 2009 Act  had  to
    be taken into account but the way  in  which  this  was  done  was  not
    apparent.

Discussion

18) In making our decision we note that at the date of the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, 31 March 2015, the appellant's child was  just
    over 4 months  old.   There  appeared  to  be  no  significant  medical
    circumstances relating to the child.   It  was  the  intention  of  the
    Secretary of State to  remove  the  mother  and  child  together.   The
    appellant appeared to have lost contact with the  child's  father,  who
    was himself a Chinese asylum seeker.

19) Taking these matters into  account,  we  have  to  ask  ourselves  what
    considerations there might have been in relation to the best  interests
    of the child which the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  left  out  of
    account.  As was pointed out before us, at paragraph 5 of her  decision
    the judge stated that the appellant was not expressly  arguing  a  case
    under Article 8.  Nevertheless at paragraph 6 the judge  recorded  that
    it was argued that consideration must be given under section 55 of  the
    2009 Act to the need to  have  regard  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children who  are  in  the  UK.   This  was  borne  in  mind
    throughout the decision.

20) The only significant factor brought to the attention of the judge  with
    regard to the welfare of the child was how the child might be  affected
    on return to China as a consequence of his birth in a  foreign  country
    without authorisation under the Chinese family  planning  scheme.   The
    judge, at paragraph 36 of the decision, referred  to  the  guidance  at
    paragraph 186 of AX in relation to this.  The terms in which she did so
    have already been summarised above, at paragraph 6.  In  the  following
    paragraph of the First-tier decision, paragraph 37, the judge observed,
    in terms of AX, that hundreds of thousands of unauthorised children are
    born every year and family planning officials are required to  register
    them once the relevant penalty has been paid.   Education  and  medical
    treatment were available but were no longer free.

21) As already pointed out, at paragraph 44 of the decision the judge found
    that on return the appellant would be able to make arrangements to  pay
    the social compensation fee.  The judge then went on to say:

         "Although the appellant and family may or may not qualify for  free
         birth control, medical treatment and education for the  appellant's
         child, medical treatment and education for the child is  available,
         albeit at a price and there are many Chinese  parents  who  do  not
         qualify for such free medical treatment or  education.   The  child
         would not therefore be denied education or medical treatment.   The
         child would have the opportunity to  learn  about  the  appellant's
         family and deepen his knowledge of his heritage.   I  do  not  find
         that a claim under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  for  humanitarian
         protection can be made out on consideration of the above."

22) The judge then stated, at paragraph 46:

         "I note that it may well be that the appellant and her child may be
         discriminated against because initially they would be  unregistered
         if they moved to  a  different  province.   However,  this  can  be
         resolved on payment of financial sanctions.  I do not consider that
         the level of discrimination showed would  be  such  to  breach  the
         appellant's Article 3 rights and the case of AX does  not  consider
         that the financial sanctions would  be  such  as  to  breach  their
         Article 3 rights either.  The Chinese family  planning  regulations
         do not include the concept of  an  illegal  child  or  unauthorised
         child and the law prohibits discrimination  against  children  born
         outside marriage.  However, I accept that children from pregnancies
         outwith the family planning regulations may not  be  registered  or
         treated  equally  until  their  parents  have  paid  the  financial
         sanctions imposed."

23) We acknowledge entirely the submissions made by Mr Forrest  in  respect
    of JO.  In particular, it is clear that a duty is imposed by section 55
    of the 2009 Act requiring the decision maker to be properly informed of
    the position of a child affected by the  discharge  of  an  immigration
    function.  The decision maker must conduct a careful examination of all
    relevant  information  and  factors.   What  we  have   difficulty   in
    ascertaining is what information about the child the Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal should have had which she did not have and what  relevant
    information or factors she left out of account.  On the  basis  of  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal there does not appear to be any
    information about the child's position which the judge required to know
    and which she did not know and there do not appear to be  any  relevant
    factors which the judge did not take into account.

24) Part of Mr Forrest's argument was that the  judge  did  not  adequately
    direct herself as to the  proper  approach  in  terms  of  Section  55.
    Nevertheless, the judge did refer to this provision at paragraph  6  of
    the decision and stated that it would be borne in mind  throughout  the
    rest of the decision.  Looking at paragraphs 44 and 46 of the  decision
    it does indeed seem that the judge did bear  in  mind  the  duty  under
    section 55 in reaching her conclusions.

25) The grounds for permission to appeal refer to the case of  Zoumbas  but
    the best interests of the child are a primary, rather than a  paramount
    consideration.   Nowhere  in  Zoumbas  is  there  authority   for   the
    proposition that a child who is not either  a  British  or  a  European
    citizen would be entitled to remain  in  the  UK  for  the  purpose  of
    obtaining the benefits of free medical treatment  and  free  education.
    Indeed, observations to the  contrary  are  made  in  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 in respect of education, and in GS  (India)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 40 in respect of medical treatment.

26) The conclusion we reach is that the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    adequately and properly considered all the relevant factors in relation
    to the child as well as to the appellant.   The  judge  had  regard  to
    relevant country guideline cases, particularly  the  case  of  AX,  and
    reached a valid and sustainable decision without making  any  error  of
    law.

Conclusions

27) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

28) We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

29) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.   We  have
    not been asked to make such an order and we see no reason of  substance
    for doing so.


Signed      Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
