
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02651/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2014                  |On 28 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                                    S.T.
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bonavero (Counsel, instructed by Kilby Jones)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought against a  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, (FtT Judge Oliver) dated 6 September 2014.   The  grounds  of
    appeal are, in essence, that there was  a  failure  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to deal with a very substantial part of the appellant's  case.
    In order to put this into context we should say a little about what the
    case was all about.

 2. The appellant is an Albanian citizen.  He was born on 4 November  1991.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom  in  around  September  2011.  He  was
    apprehended by the UK Border Agency on around 28  October  2011  whilst
    working in the country, and subsequently claimed asylum.  The Secretary
    of State refused his application for asylum under paragraph 336 of  the
    Immigration Rules in a decision of  8  April  2014,  and  it  was  that
    decision which was the subject matter of the appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal both on  asylum
    and humanitarian protection grounds and on human rights grounds.

 3. The appellant said, in essence, that he was a member  of  a  family  in
    Albania, the
    T family, which was the subject of an  active  blood  feud  by  another
    family.  The blood feud is said to have gone back to 1995.  It is  said
    that the appellant's father had killed a prominent member of the  other
    family and that he in turn was killed by a member of that family.   The
    appellant himself is the only son, and whilst in normal blood feuds  he
    would be the next one to seek revenge, his  case  was  that  the  other
    family, despite attempts to appease them and explain  that  he  had  no
    intention of violence towards them, were determined to act against  him
    in a pre-emptive strike. He said that this was manifested by  the  fact
    that, having fled to Italy in his late teens, he came back  to  Albania
    in 2010 and was allegedly beaten by members of  the  other  family  and
    subsequently  shot  at.   His  evidence  was  that  they  had  powerful
    connections within the government, and that therefore the  police  were
    unlikely to be able to protect him, notwithstanding that at  one  point
    (as noted in the determination) he had said that the police  were  very
    active on his family's side in 1995.

 4. There are a number of criticisms  made  of  the  determination  in  the
    grounds of appeal and we need not set out all of them here. Suffice  it
    to say that there were no findings made  in  relation  to  the  alleged
    threat that was posed to the appellant himself by the beating  and  the
    shooting when he went back to Albania from Italy.

 5. Moreover, the reasoning in paragraph 31 of the determination appears to
    us to be seriously deficient.  The Judge has said that the other family
    would have accepted an offer of reconciliation in order to ensure their
    own safety, and that he did not accept that a family which was said  to
    be some 40 people strong would have the ability to locate the appellant
    if he moved from a particular area of Albania.  That falls a  long  way
    short of a clear finding that internal relocation would be available to
    the appellant, even though that is a possible finding that  could  have
    been made on the evidence.

 6. We regret to say that the deficiencies in relation to the findings  and
    the reasoning in this determination  are  so  serious  that  it  cannot
    really be said that the determination is capable of being sustained, or
    that there is no material error of law in it. The judge simply  appears
    to have failed to engage with large parts of the case  that  was  being
    put before him by the appellant. If adverse findings are to be made  on
    credibility they have to be made in the light of consideration  of  the
    evidence as a whole, and a determination of what did or did not happen.



 7. In those circumstances it seems to us that we have  no  choice  but  to
    quash this determination and to send it back to the First-tier Tribunal
    so that the matter can be re-heard.

 8. We therefore allow the appeal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Signed  [pic]Date 27th November 2014

Mrs Justice Andrews


