
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/02710/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 April 2018                           |On 18 April 2018                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                      SS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, of Counsel, instructed by York
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 6 January  1992  appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Garro who,  in
    a determination promulgated on 22 January 2018, dismissed  her  appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 30  June  2016  to
    refuse to grant her asylum and humanitarian protection under paragraphs
    336 and 339F of HC 395.

2.   At the hearing of the appeal  before  me  both  representatives  agreed
    that there was a material error of law  in  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Judge.  The judge had considered the  appellant's  claim  in
    detail  and  I  consider  that  she  properly  took  into  account  the
    background evidence  before  her,  as  well  as  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and that she again correctly stated  what  she  believed  and
    what she did not.  However, the concern  of  both  representatives  was
    that the judge had before  her  medical  evidence  which  she  did  not
    consider until after she had made strong  findings  of  fact  that  the
    appellant was not credible.

3.   The grounds of appeal referred to the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal
    in Mibanga v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 367 where Wilson J had said:-

         "What the fact-finder does at his peril is to reach a conclusion by
         reference only to the appellant's  evidence  and  then,  if  it  be
         negative, to ask whether the conclusion should be  shifted  by  the
         expert evidence."

4.   The grounds also referred to  the  judgment  in  SA  (Somalia)  v  SSHD
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1302 and R v Special Adjudicator, ex  p  Virjon  [2002]
    EWHC 1469 (Admin) where it was stated that:-

         "The Adjudicator uses her  adverse  findings  of  credibility  with
         regard to the claimant and his wife as a means  whereby  to  reject
         the important significant  evidence  of  [two  doctors].  That  was
         putting the cart before the horse."

5.   Moreover, the judge had not made any findings  regarding  the  risk  to
    the appellant as a lone woman returning to her home area in  Sri  Lanka
    and it was asserted that the judge had erred in  her  consideration  of
    the evidence of the supporting witness, as  well  as  failing  to  make
    sustainable findings on suicide risk.  The parties  agreed  that  those
    grounds of appeal had merit and indicated a material error  of  law  in
    the determination.

6.   I agree with the joint submissions made to me by  both  representatives
    and I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Judge.   Although  Mr
    Mackenzie asked that I preserve the positive findings of the judge I do
    not  consider  that  that  is  appropriate  and  I  consider  that  the
    appropriate action is for the appeal to be heard afresh on all grounds.



7.   I consider it  appropriate  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal taking into account the guidance in the Practice Directions of
    the Senior President of Tribunals where findings of fact are  required.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Judge is set aside.

Directions

The appeal is to proceed to a hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  at  Hatton
Cross. Time estimate, three hours.  A Tamil interpreter is required.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed:  [pic]                          Date: 13 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy












