
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02116/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 13 January 2016                   |On 3 February 2016                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     E S
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Turner, Counsel instructed by Greater London
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cassel ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 07 July 2015.

2.    The  judge  outlined  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  the
    background to her asylum claim [1-4]. She entered the UK  on  26  March
    2014 with entry clearance as a Tier 1 Dependent  Partner.  She  claimed
    asylum on 19 August 2014. He went  on  to  summarise  the  issues,  the
    evidence and the submissions made at the  hearing  [5-13].   Under  the
    heading "Findings of Fact" the judge went on to make "findings based on
    the standard of proof" [14]. He outlined her family  history  [15]  and
    then went on to state: "There are reports of her arrest and the  attack
    on her father's shop and his abduction and injury" [16]. The judge then
    outlined the dates when her husband came to the UK and his  immigration
    history. He noted her husband had leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  (Post
    Study Work) Migrant but when he applied to vary and extend his visa  to
    that of a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) it was refused in  July  2014.  It  was
    only after the refusal of her husband's application for leave to remain
    that the appellant claimed asylum [17-18].

3.    The judge directed himself correctly to the relevant  legal  framework
    [19-24]. Under the heading "Appellant's Credibility"  he  outlined  the
    factors contained in section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment
    of Claimants etc) Act  2004  and  found  that  there  was  no  credible
    explanation for the appellant's delay in claiming asylum. He  concluded
    that the claim was made in response to the  refusal  of  her  husband's
    application "and not because she truly feared for her life and  safety"
    [30].

4.     The  judge  then  went  on  to  make  further  findings  relating  to
    particular  aspects  of  the  appellant's  claim.  He  noted  that  the
    appellant relied on a newspaper report as evidence to support her claim
    that her father had been kidnapped. He noted that there might  be  some
    difficult in obtaining evidence from Sri Lanka but observed that  there
    would be no such difficulty in obtaining other evidence  "for  example,
    from her mother who has remained safely in India". He observed that the
    newspaper report gave little detail of the circumstances of her  arrest
    but made no particular finding on the evidence, simply referred  to  it
    as a "brief report to which I will refer later" [32].  The  judge  then
    went to conclude that, at its highest, all the appellant could say  was
    that she suspected that there was a link between  her  arrest  and  her
    father's kidnapping. It was only  her  belief  that  he  was  kidnapped
    because of his links to the LTTE. She had no links to the LTTE  herself
    [32].

5.    Under the heading "Arrest Warrant" the judge  noted  once  again  that
    the appellant relied on the newspaper report and  confirmation  of  the
    authenticity of that report from a Sri Lankan lawyer. Again, he  seemed
    to place some weight on the fact that there was no  evidence  from  the
    appellant's mother [33]. He recorded that the  appellant  had  said  in
    evidence that she was not the subject of an arrest  warrant  and  noted
    that in interview she said  that  she  was  not  given  a  court  date.
    However, in the very next answer in interview she  said  that  she  was
    told the next hearing would be on 24 April. For this reason  the  judge
    concluded that her account had been inconsistent and lacked credibility
    [33]. The judge then referred to the decision in Tanveer Ahmed  v  SSHD
    [2002] UKIAT 00439 and concluded that he could place no reliance on the
    documents produced by the appellant. At their highest they referred  to
    the kidnapping and injury  of  her  father  and,  as  quoted  from  the
    translation, the fact that she had been "taken for enquiry by terrorism
    prevention group" and that "no further details were known".  The  judge
    concluded that "there is  no  supporting  evidence  she  was  detained,
    placed on bail or required to attend Court."[35]. He  went  on  to  say
    that she had failed to produce a copy of  the  arrest  warrant.  Having
    considered the evidence before  him  he  concluded  the  appellant  was
    entirely lack in credibility [36] and that she would not be at risk  on
    return [39].

6.    The appellant seeks to challenge the First-tier Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds:

      i) The  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
         rejecting the evidence of the Sri  Lankan  lawyer.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal ought to have adopted the approach in  PJ  (Sri  Lanka)  v
         SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1011.

     ii) The  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
         rejecting the documents that supported the appellant's  account  of
         detention and release on bail and applied too high  a  standard  of
         proof.

    iii) The First-tier Tribunal erred in placing too  much  weight  on  the
         absence of corroborative evidence from the appellant's mother.

Decision and reasons

7.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

8.    The First-tier Tribunal's findings of  fact  are  unclear,  incomplete
    and in places fail to take into account evidence that was material to a
    proper assessment of the appeal. In paragraph 16 the judge  noted  that
    there were reports of  the  appellant's  arrest  and  of  her  father's
    abduction. He also took them  into  account  in  paragraph  35  of  the
    decision but found that he could place no weight on them "because there
    is no supporting evidence she was detained, placed on bail or  required
    to attend Court." Having acknowledged  that  there  was  evidence  that
    might support the appellant's account he failed to give  clear  reasons
    for rejecting that evidence and for concluding  that  her  account  was
    "entirely  lacking  in  credibility"  [36].  In  appearing  to  require
    additional corroboration it is at least arguable that  the  judge  also
    erred in applying too high a standard of proof.

9.    In any event, the judge erred in stating that there was no  supporting
    evidence to show that she was detained. He failed to take into account,
    or make any clear findings in relation to, material evidence from a Sri
    Lankan lawyer who stated that he had made  enquiries  at  the  relevant
    police station. The officer in charge was able to confirm that she  was
    arrested on 05 December 2013 and released on 19 December  2013  by  the
    court. On the face of it the letter was capable of verification because
    the lawyer had provided his full contact details. The letter  was  also
    addressed directly in response to an enquiry made  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors. This evidence  was  material  to  a  proper  assessment  of
    credibility and risk on return.

10.   It is not necessary to make detailed findings as to whether the  judge
    placed too much weight on the absence of evidence from the  applicant's
    mother save to say that no doubt  any  such  evidence  might  be  given
    little weight. It is also difficult to see  how  she  could  have  been
    expected to produce a copy of an arrest warrant if her mother now lives
    in India. It is also unlikely that an arrest warrant would be served on
    a person who is the subject of the warrant or any member of her family.
    In the circumstances the  judge  also  erred  in  apparently  requiring
    additional corroboration in the form of a copy of an arrest warrant.

11.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of  an  error  on  a  point  of  law.  The
    decision is set  aside  and  the  appeal  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal


Signed      [pic]      Date  01 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
