


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02675/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On : 9 March 2016                         |On: 18 March 2016                |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     ZS
                         (Anonymity Direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on [ ] 1990. He arrived in  the
UK on 14 May 2011 and entered with leave as a Tier 4 Student  Migrant  valid
until 6 September 2012. He was subsequently granted further leave  until  15
August 2014. On 13 August 2014 he claimed asylum. His claim was  refused  on
4 February 2015 and a decision was made to refuse to vary his leave  and  to
remove him from the UK.

The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal came before  First-
tier Tribunal Young on 16 June 2015. At the hearing there was no  appearance
by or on behalf of the appellant. The judge proceeded in  his  absence  and,
in his decision of 30 June 2015, made adverse credibility  findings  against
the appellant, rejecting his claim on the basis of the reasons given by  the
respondent and finding that he would be at no risk  on  return  to  Pakistan
and that his removal would not breach  his  human  rights.  The  appeal  was
dismissed on all grounds.

Permission was sought on behalf of the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal, on grounds of  procedural  unfairness.  It  was  asserted  in  the
grounds that the appellant was unaware of the hearing as  he  had  left  his
address some months ago and  had  expected  his  solicitors  to  inform  the
Tribunal of his new address. Had he known  of  the  hearing  he  would  have
attended and could  have  addressed  the  discrepancies  relied  on  by  the
respondent and produce evidence in support of his claim. He had only  become
aware of the hearing when the decision was forwarded to him by the  occupier
of his former address.

Permission to appeal was granted on 14 August 2015.

Appeal hearing in the Upper Tribunal

At the hearing there was no appearance by or on  behalf  of  the  appellant.
Having  consulted  the  Tribunal's  records  and  upon  Mr  Jarvis'  further
enquiries into the  Home  Office  records,  I  was  able  to  ascertain  the
following history:

The address held  by  the  Tribunal  was  the  same  address  given  by  the
appellant to the respondent when he claimed asylum and which  is  still  the
address held by  the  respondent.  The  refusal  of  his  asylum  claim  was
notified to his solicitors at that time, Zoi Biderberg Law Practice.  Notice
of Appeal was lodged by  those  solicitors,  with  the  appellant's  address
given as c/o the solicitors. A Notice of Hearing for  a  pre-hearing  review
and the full hearing was sent to Zoi  Biderberg  Law  Practice  and  to  the
appellant c/o his solicitors, on 17 February 2015, giving the  date  of  the
full hearing as 16 June 2015, and  was  accompanied  by  Directions.  On  18
March 2015 Zoi Biderberg Law Practice informed the Tribunal that  they  were
no longer acting for the appellant, but giving his last-known address.  That
was the address to which the Tribunal then sent the decision in  the  appeal
and is the same address now held by the Tribunal.


The appellant claims, in his grounds, that he had no notice of  the  hearing
and that he received the decision in the third week of  July  2015  when  it
was forwarded to him by the occupier of his former address.


The Tribunal's records show that he then instructed new  solicitors,  Norman
Lewis & Co Solicitors, on  25  July  2015,  who  made  the  application  for
permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  4  August  2015.  In  that
application  the  appellant's  address  was  given  as  Dungavel   IRC,   an
immigration detention centre. The  Tribunal's  decision  in  the  permission
application  was  sent  to  the  appellant  at  Dungavel  IRC  and  to   his
representatives Norman Lawson & Co Solicitors,  on  12  August  2015.  In  a
letter dated 17 August 2015, Katani & Co  advised  the  Tribunal  that  they
were acting for the appellant and requested a copy of the  decision  in  the
appellant's appeal. The First-tier Tribunal's  decision  and  the  grant  of
permission were sent to them  on  27  August  2015.  In  the  meantime,  the
appellant was released from Dungavel on 21 August 2015. On 23 December  2015
Katani & Co advised the  Tribunal  that  they  had  ceased  acting  for  the
appellant from 9 October 2015.


On 26 January 2016 the  Detained  Escorting  &  Population  Management  Unit
(DEPMU) at the Home Office informed the Tribunal that the appellant  had  no
fixed address but provided the last known address  on  their  system  (which
was the address held by  the  Tribunal).  The  Notice  of  Hearing  for  the
hearing today was sent to the appellant, on 9 February  2016,  at  his  last
known address. It was not returned to the Tribunal. As  Mr  Jarvis  informed
me, that was the same address held by the Home Office for the appellant  and
their records showed that he was of no fixed abode from July 2015.

In light of the above  I  could  not  be  certain  that  the  appellant  had
received today's Notice of Hearing, but  I  was  satisfied  that  the  Upper
Tribunal had, nevertheless, properly served the Notice  of  Hearing  on  the
last-known  address  held  for  him.  There  was  clearly  little  point  in
adjourning the proceedings. I therefore proceeded with the appeal and  heard
submissions from Mr Jarvis.


Mr Jarvis submitted,  with  regard  to  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal, that if the Tribunal had served  the  Notice  of  Hearing  on  the
appellant's last-known address, there was no procedural  unfairness  in  the
appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


Consideration and findings.

In  his  grounds,  the  appellant  claims  to  be  a  victim  of  procedural
unfairness through no fault of his own, having left the address held by  the
Tribunal some five or six months previously (which would have been  February
or March 2015) but in the expectation that his solicitors, with whom he  had
provided his change of address, would have notified  the  Tribunal.  However
that is clearly inconsistent with the fact that his solicitors at the  time,
Zoi Biderberg Law Practice, when informing the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  18
March 2015 that they were no longer  acting  for  the  appellant,  gave  his
address as the same address previously and currently held by  the  Tribunal.
Furthermore, as the respondent, in her Rule 24 response submitted, there  is
no evidence to support the appellant's assertion that he  had  notified  his
solicitors of his change of address. There is no reason why  the  appellant,
through his new solicitors,  could  not  have  sought  confirmation  of  his
instructions about his change of address from his former solicitors.

In addition, it is clear that the Notice of Hearing for  the  appeal  before
the First-tier Tribunal was sent to the appellant  c/o  his  solicitors,  as
well as to his solicitors and that they were still representing him at  that
time. Accordingly,  the  Notice  of  Hearing  was  properly  served  by  the
Tribunal. That was indeed a matter considered by Judge Young,  and  recorded
at [9] to [13] of his decision, when  deciding  whether  or  not  he  should
proceed to hear the appeal in the appellant's absence.

It is also relevant to note that the appellant has  made  no  effort,  since
his application for permission, to inform the Tribunal  or,  it  seems,  the
respondent, of his current address following  his  release  from  detention,
either through his solicitors Katani & Co. or directly himself.


In the circumstances it seems  to  me  that  it  cannot  be  said  that  the
appellant has been a victim of procedural unfairness  through  no  fault  of
his own. Had he remained in contact with the Home Office  and  the  Tribunal
following his release from detention and provided an  updated  address,  and
had he then appeared before me, I may well have considered otherwise  or  at
least been prepared to give him the benefit of the doubt.  However  that  is
not the case and I therefore see no reason to  set  aside  the  decision  of
Judge Young.


Judge Young gave  careful  consideration  to  the  appellant's  absence,  he
provided reasons for proceeding with the appeal in his absence  and  he  was
entitled to do so. He was entitled to rely  on  the  reasons  given  by  the
respondent  for  refusing   the   appellant's   claim,   including   various
inconsistencies in the appellant's account, and was entitled  to  reach  the
conclusion that he did in the appellant's appeal. I find no  errors  of  law
in his decision and find that there  was  no  procedural  unfairness  giving
rise to an error of law.

DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.


     Anonymity

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.







                               Signed                          Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
