

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02349/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 April 2016                          |On 8 April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [s i]
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A White, instructed by Genesis Law Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Jerromes promulgated on 5 May 2015.

 2. At the outset Mr McVeety agreed that he was in considerable  difficulty
    in arguing the grounds.

 3. Mr McVeety conceded that paragraph 51 of the reasons for refusal letter
    contained an explicit concession that the appellant  was  not  excluded
    from humanitarian protection and accepted that at no juncture prior  to
    the First-tier Tribunal determining the appeal had that concession been
    withdrawn, amended or restricted.  No  supplementary  letter  had  been
    issued by the Home Office and the point was not taken by the presenting
    officer.  Mr McVeety acknowledged that  a  judge  cannot  go  behind  a
    factual concession of this kind and that in reality it was too late  to
    raise any problems with this approach at this stage in proceedings.

 4. Mr McVeety also acknowledged that the grounds did not seek to challenge
    the judge's finding that the  appellant  was  credible.   Although  the
    grounds acknowledge that the judge accepted the appellant's own account
    that he had killed a person, the grounds failed to acknowledge that the
    judge had found that the appellant had done so in self  defence.   Once
    this finding was taken into account, there could be no accusation  that
    the appellant committed a serious crime prior to arriving  in  the  UK.
    Even if the judge had taken the approach suggested in the  grounds,  on
    the findings made, the outcome could only be that the  appellant  would
    not be excluded from humanitarian protection  (paragraph  339D  of  the
    immigration rules (which transpose  article  17  of  the  Qualification
    Directive (2004/83/EC) considered).

 5. With such factors in mind, Mr  McVeety  did  not  seek  to  pursue  the
    remaining  ground  because  it  would  be  immaterial.   The  remaining
    argument  was  that  a  judge  should  have  regard  to  the  exclusion
    provisions whether raised by the Home Office or not.  Such  a  duty  is
    well established in terms of the provisions  excluding  a  person  from
    benefiting from the Refugee Convention and no doubt it can be argued by
    analogy that the same approach  should  be  taken  in  respect  of  the
    provisions excluding a person from  humanitarian  protection.   But  in
    this case it would make no difference to the outcome and I am not asked
    to make a finding either way.

 6. Given the candour shown by Mr McVeety, for which I am  grateful,  there
    was no need to trouble  Ms  White  for  her  submissions.   Mr  McVeety
    informed me that he was unable to concede the appeal (for reasons  that
    remain hidden to me) and that he had no submissions to make other  than
    to rely on the grounds as submitted.

 7. As I announced at the end of the  hearing,  I  have  no  hesitation  in
    dismissing the Secretary of State's appeal and  thereby  upholding  the
    decision of Judge Jerromes.  The appellant is entitled to  humanitarian
    protection.

 8. I add that as stated in the grounds there has never been any  challenge
    to the finding that the appellant  is  entitled  to  benefit  from  the
    protection offered by article 3 ECHR.  The question  has  been  whether
    the appellant is entitled to the benefits  of  humanitarian  protection
    which gives him potentially stronger rights in the UK.   It  should  be
    clear from my findings and decision that he is so entitled.

Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision and reasons statement of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Jerromes
does not contain an error of law and is upheld.


                               Signed                     Date
                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
