
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02199/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2016                |On 2nd September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                KANTHIRAJ [G]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott (Broudie Jackson & Canter, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr Chenciner Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Appellant in relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Herwald) promulgated on 8th May 2015.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and his date of birth is  11th
      February 1985.


   3.  He  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  22nd  of   December   2013
      clandestinely. He claimed asylum on 10 January 2014.

   4. On 20th March 2014 the Secretary of State made a decision to refuse to
      grant asylum and on 25th March  2014  to  remove  him  as  an  illegal
      entrant.

   5. It was the appeal  against  that  decision  which  came  before  Judge
      Herwald on 1st May 2015.

   6. It is important to stress at this point that Judge Herwald  found  the
      Appellant's claims as to what took place in Sri Lanka to  be  credible
      in their entirety. He also found a letter  dated  21st  January  2014,
      addressed to the Appellant requiring him to report to  an  officer  in
      charge at Headquarters on 3rd February 2014 at 08.30 for the  purposes
      of further investigation because he had  previously  been  taken  into
      custody on conviction of suspicious activities to  be  genuine.  Those
      findings have not been challenged by the Secretary of State.

   7. Having made the positive credibility findings the Judge considered, at
      paragraph 16 (p) of his Decision and  Reasons,  the  country  guidance
      case of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]
      UKUT 00319 (IAC) and in particular paragraph 311  thereof  which  made
      clear that the government's concern was not with  past  membership  or
      sympathy with LTTE, but with  whether  a  person  is  a  destabilising
      threat now. The judge indicated that he had scoured sub paragraph 5 of
      the head note to GJ and also the full judgement  and  found  that  the
      Appellant could not bring himself within a  risk  category.  He  noted
      that a person whose name appears on a watch  list  is  not  reasonably
      likely to be detained at the airport but  will  be  monitored  by  the
      security services after his or her return. It had been  accepted  that
      the Appellant was not on a stop list nor that an  arrest  warrant  had
      been issued. The Appellant  did  not  claim  to  have  undertaken  any
      diaspora activities  against  the  Sri  Lanka  government.  For  those
      reasons the judge dismissed the appeal.

   8. On the Appellant's behalf and in support of his appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal Dr Mynott  argued  that  the  letter  of  21st  January  2014
      bolstered the Appellant's  claim.  The  grounds  themselves  argue  at
      considerable length and with some force that the list categories in GJ
      are not an exhaustive list and there may  be  other  persons  who  can
      satisfy the Tribunal that they would be at risk based on the facts  of
      their case. That must be right.

   9. On the Secretary of State's behalf Mr Bates  argued  that  the  letter
      from the police could simply be part  of  the  monitoring  process  in
      relation to people who  may  be  on  a  "watch  list";  monitoring  to
      establish whether the Appellant is of interest. Mr Bates accepted that
      there were some contradictions in the Judge's finding  that  while  he
      had not disputed the validity of the letter he did  dispute  the  fact
      that the Appellant had a conviction and yet  the  letter  referred  to
      one. He argued that given the identification of persons of interest to
      the authorities is based on intelligence and given that  he  currently
      presents no threat and  has  not  acted  against  the  authorities  in
      diaspora activities, he would be  unlikely  to  be  detained.  He  did
      accept that if he  were  to  be  detained  that  would  be  amount  to
      persecution. He argued that  the  Judge's  conclusions  were  properly
      based on guidance contained in the country guidance case and were  not
      tainted by error of law.

  10. The circumstances of this case are quite unusual. It is of  note  that
      the country guidance case of GJ was heard  in  2013.  The  Appellant's
      claims have been accepted as credible and at  the  time  that  GJ  was
      being  decided  the  Appellant  was  actually  in  custody  and  being
      tortured. He was in custody between February 2011 and  November  2013.
      Thus at the time the Upper Tribunal was deciding the risk  categories,
      as a matter of fact this Appellant was of interest to the authorities.
      That I find dispenses with the argument that he does not fall  into  a
      risk category identified by the UT in the country guidance case.

  11. Furthermore, two short months after his release from being  persecuted
      in detention the authorities were requiring his attendance  once  more
      for questioning. That again indicates that in January 2014 he remained
      of interest.

  12. Of course there is force in Mr Bates argument that that could be  part
      of the monitoring of a person previously involved with LTTE and  would
      not lead to further detention and persecution. However, I bear in mind
      the very low standard of  proof  in  asylum  cases.  I  need  only  be
      satisfied that there is a real risk or a  reasonable  likelihood  that
      the Appellant will be detained and suffer persecution and on the facts
      of this case that is an inescapable conclusion which inevitably  leads
      to a result in the Appellant's favour.

  13. That being the case I find that judge Herwald did not go far enough in
      scrutinising the facts of this case and fitting them into the  country
      guidance case, particularly  the  timeline  and  the  timing  of  this
      Appellant's detention and how it fitted with the findings made by  the
      country guidance case. I therefore set aside the First-tier Tribunal's
      decision, while preserving the unchallenged findings. In remaking  the
      decision, for the reasons given above I allow the Appellant's appeal.

  14. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

  15. There was no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  I  see  no
      justification for making one.


Signed
     Date 2nd September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
