
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02422/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th October 2015                 |On 4th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     LB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Gaisford, Counsel instructed on behalf of Good
Advice UK
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq.  Pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
       Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/269  as
       amended) I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
       court  directs  otherwise,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
       directly or indirectly identify the applicant. For the  avoidance  of
       doubts, this order also applies to both  the  applicant  and  to  the
       Respondent. The failure to comply  with  this  order  could  lead  to
       contempt of court proceedings.

    2. She arrived in the United Kingdom on 19th  August  2014  and  claimed
       asylum on  13th  September.   The  application  was  refused  by  the
       Secretary of State in a decision  made  on  29th  January  2015  with
       reasons given in a detailed reasons for refusal  of  the  same  date.
       The Appellant exercised her right to appeal against the  decision  of
       the Respondent and on 1st April 2015 the  appeal  was  heard  by  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Bradford.   In   a   determination
       promulgated  on  9th  April  2015,  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
       dismissed the appeal of the Appellant on human rights grounds.

    3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision based on  two
       grounds relating to issues of credibility and findings of  fact  that
       were made on the evidence and also upon a mistake of fact.

    4. On 5th May  2015,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  granted  permission  to
       appeal.  Thus the matter was listed before the Upper  Tribunal.   The
       Appellant was represented by Mr Gaisford and  the  Respondent  by  Mr
       Wilding.  At the hearing, after consideration of matters outlined  by
       Mr Gaisford, Mr Wilding conceded that the decision of the  First-tier
       Tribunal did disclose an error of law and in those circumstances  the
       appropriate outcome was that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
       be set aside.  Both parties invited the Tribunal to remit the case to
       the First-tier Tribunal in order for the appeal to be  determined  by
       way of a fresh oral hearing bearing in mind that the  issues  related
       to  credibility  and  consideration  and  analysis   of   documentary
       evidence.

    5. In the light of the concession made before me, there is no  basis  on
       which I could possibly do otherwise than to  accept  that  concession
       and find that the determination cannot  stand  as  a  consequence.  I
       would have found that there was a  material  error  of  law  for  the
       reasons I shall give. It  is  therefore  common  ground  between  the
       parties that the judge made a material error  of  law  and  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal to  whom  the  case  is  to  be  remitted  should
       consider the appeal on its fact afresh.  In those circumstances it is
       necessary only briefly to explain why the Tribunal finds that  to  be
       the case.

    6. At the heart of the Appellant's claim was the  issue  of  credibility
       concerning the risk on return and the claim  made  by  her  that  she
       would be at risk of harm based not only on her own prior associations
       with the Ba'ath Party but that her family members, each  of  whom  it
       was claimed had suffered harm in  Iraq  as  a  result  of  their  own
       particular associations and  background.   In  her  claim,  she  made
       reference to serious harm to her father and two of her  brothers  and
       also related to fear of harm from threats from the organisation known
       as "AAH."

    7. In the judge's  decision  he  referred  to  the  lack  of  supporting
       material and in particular highlighted at a number of paragraphs that
       the evidence from the Appellant relied upon what she  had  been  told
       (see [34] and [35])  or  what  she  had  believed  to  be  the  case.
       Therefore matters going to her general credibility were relevant when
       considering the overall assessment of her claim as a reliable witness
       and as to the veracity of her account.

    8. In the light of the above, and the judge's reference to the  lack  of
       evidence in support, it was a material error of law not  to  consider
       the documentary evidence that she in fact did produce when making  an
       assessment of her credibility and in particular the account  provided
       and threats from ISIS and in accordance with the expert report.   The
       document was a letter sent from the AAH (A's bundle at [14]) and  was
       referred to in the refusal letter at [27] whereby  the  Secretary  of
       State considered its contents and recorded at [28] that the  contents
       of the letter were internally consistent  and  as  such  some  weight
       should be placed on the letter.  It is  right  to  observe  that  the
       Secretary of State went on to say that the account as to threats  was
       lacking in detail and  also  gave  consideration  to  the  background
       material.  However it is plain that  the  judge  was  aware  of  that
       letter and made reference to it  at  paragraph  30(vii)  noting  that
       there was documentary evidence in support  and  that  "the  documents
       should be given appropriate weight".   However,  as  conceded  by  Mr
       Wilding  the  judge  failed  to  consider  that   evidence   in   his
       determination when considering and reaching a view as to the  factual
       account given by the Appellant and  the  credibility  of  her  claim.
       There was no reference to the documentation  as  to  whether  it  was
       reliable or a document upon which he could attach  weight  and  there
       was no consideration of its contents or how it came into the hands of
       the Appellant in making an overall assessment of it in the  light  of
       the evidence as a whole, and in accordance with  the  principles  set
       out in the well-known case of Tanveer Ahmed.  As this was a  case  in
       which the judge had made reference to the lack of  evidence,  it  was
       material and important to consider and assess this evidence that  was
       provided in support, when making an overall assessment of the claim.

    9. As to general credibility it was also conceded by Mr Wilding that the
       judge made a finding on her general  credibility  at  [37]  which  is
       based  on  a  mistake  of  fact.   The  judge  wrongly  recorded  her
       immigration history and noted she had entered the UK on  19th  August
       2013 and that she had not claimed asylum until 13 September 2014 when
       it was common ground that she had entered on 19th August 2014.   This
       was not a typographical error as Mr Gaisford pointed out  as  it  was
       reflected in her immigration history earlier on in the determination.
        This was a material mistake of fact as  the  judge  considered  this
       issue under Section 8 of the 2004  Act  and  her  delay  in  claiming
       asylum and therefore the length of time and the delay was relevant to
       the issue  of  credibility.   The  finding  that  he  made  that  the
       Appellant's credibility is "damaged by her own actions" was based  on
       a false premise that she had delayed her claim by  a  year  which  is
       factually incorrect.

   10. The judge also reached a conclusion on  her  general  credibility  at
       [38] and [39] which related to  her  failure  to  produce  a  divorce
       document.  He found in strong terms  that  she  had  not  provided  a
       satisfactory explanation for not providing the divorce  document  and
       that her failure to do so was  "something  that  must  count  against
       her".  At [38] he  found  that  her  credibility  was  damaged.   The
       evidence now demonstrates that such evidence was  available  although
       not brought to the attention of the judge. He cannot of course be  at
       fault for not taking into account that document  which  was  not  put
       before him but nonetheless it was a  mistake  of  fact.   Whilst  the
       issue of the divorce itself was not material to the risk  on  return;
       it being accepted by the Secretary of State that  she  would  not  be
       returned to the UAE and risk was assessed on the basis of  return  to
       Iraq, it is plain that  on  this  issue  that  the  judge  found  her
       credibility to be damaged and that it counted against her.   In  view
       of the findings made and how they  were  made,  it  is  difficult  to
       maintain that the judge was not placing weight and reliance  on  this
       omission particularly  in  view  of  the  earlier  finding  that  the
       Appellant had not provided evidence.

   11. Whilst by itself this would not undermine the findings,  when  viewed
       alongside the failure to consider material evidence and  the  mistake
       of fact relating to the Section 8 issue, I consider  and  Mr  Wilding
       accepted, that the assessment of credibility and consequent risk  was
       undoubtedly affected and therefore was not sustainable.

   12. Both advocates have invited the Tribunal to determine the appeal with
       a fresh oral hearing by way of remittal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
       Due to the nature of the error of law, the Tribunal will be  required
       to hear the oral evidence of the Appellant and for findings  of  fact
       to be made on all the issues  of  credibility  raised  including  the
       documentary evidence.  In that  context,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
       appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted as set out  above
       and for there to be an assessment of the evidence.  There  have  been
       reasons given as to why this course should  be  adopted,  and  having
       given particular regard to the overriding objective of the  efficient
       disposal of appeals and taking into account that there are issues  of
       fact that are central to this appeal that required  determination,  I
       have reached the conclusion that the appeal should be remitted to the
       First-tier Tribunal.

   13. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall be set aside,
       none of the findings shall stand and the case is to  be  remitted  to
       the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  in  accordance  with  Section
       12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Court and Enforcement  Act  and  paragraph
       7.2 of the Practice Statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).


Signed   Date: 29/10/2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

