

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/02888/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Laganside Courts Centre, Belfast     |Determination Sent           |
|On 13 January 2014                            |On 24 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President


                                   Between

                                 LOYD NCUBE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brennan (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.     This appeal has its origins in a decision made on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department (hereinafter "the Secretary
      of State") dated 11th March 2013,  whereby  the  application  of  Loyd
      Ncube ("the Appellant")  for  refugee  status  was  refused.   In  the
      ensuing appeal,  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  ("the  FTT")  upheld  this
      decision and dismissed the Appellant's other claims under  Article  15
      of the Qualification Directive and Articles  2  and  3  of  the  Human
      Rights Convention. The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe.

   2.     Duly analysed, the refusal decision of the Secretary of State  had
      the following central elements:

        a) The Appellant's story  was  considered  unworthy  of  belief  in
           several material respects, rehearsed in paragraphs 25  -  35  of
           the decision.


        b) It was considered that the Appellant, having the  status  of  an
           unsuccessful  applicant for asylum, would  not  be  at  risk  of
           persecution in the event of returning to Zimbabwe: paragraphs 38
           - 41.


        c) Based  on  the  same  assessment,  his  claim  for  humanitarian
           protection and his claims under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR failed.


        d) Furthermore, he had no sustainable claim under Article 8 ECHR.


        e) He would not be granted discretionary leave  to  remain  in  the
           United Kingdom.

   3.     The grant of permission to appeal  to  this  Tribunal  focuses  on
      paragraphs 19 and 20 of the determination of the FTT.  These  passages
      are preceded by two clearly articulated findings, in paragraphs 16 and
      18, which were that the Appellant was not seized by  army  members  on
      20th January 2013 and (one might add ipso  facto),  he  did  not  then
      desert. In making these  findings,  the  Judge,  in  common  with  the
      Secretary of State, found the Appellant's  account  of  escaping  from
      army custody and returning to his home, remaining there for a  period,
      unworthy of belief.

   4.     The Judge then turned to consider the Appellant's account  of  his
      escape from Zimbabwe to South Africa, in paragraphs 19  and  20.   She
      highlighted, in particular, his assertions that there had been a queue
      at the border causing a delay of around 30 minutes, during  which  the
      driver of his vehicle entered an office. This  occurred  at  a  bridge
      border crossing at Beitbridge and he saw no sign of flooding.  In  his
      asylum interview (per the Judge) he claimed that this occurred on 21st
      January 2013, while in his written  statement  he  claimed  that  this
      occurred on 22nd January 2013.


      The decision also referred to a newspaper report dated 7th January
      2013, which stated:

           "The  South  African  Government's  Immigration  Department  has
           received criticism for its handling of immigration processing at
           the Beitbridge border which is causing  people  to  take  up  to
           three days to go through either from or to Zimbabwe."

     It is appropriate to observe at this juncture that the media report  of
      7 January 2013 did not feature in the Judge's decision.

   5.     In her determination, the Judge recorded  that  the  Secretary  of
      State "submitted evidence" about the flooding at  Beitbridge  and  the
      closure of the bridge on 20th/21st January  2013.   The  parties  were
      agreed that this evidence consisted  of  a  single  newspaper  report,
      published on 21 January 2013.  The details of this report are of  some
      significance:

        a)    21 January 2013 was a Monday.

        b)    The report states  that  the  relevant  border  crossing  was
           closed "yesterday" because the bridge  "was  flooded  on  Sunday
           night" i.e. the previous evening (Sunday).

        c)    Continuing, the report states "the border was  only  open  to
           travellers after 3.00am  when  the  waters  subsided":  a  clear
           reference to 3.00am on Monday 21 January 2013.


        d)    In a later  passage,  the  report  repeats  "the  bridge  was
           temporarily closed for 3 hours at midnight on  Sunday.   It  was
           only re-opened at around 3.00am when the water had subsided".


        e)    It is further stated that the heavy rains  were  confined  to
           "Saturday and Sunday" i.e. 19 and 20 January 2013.

      Referring specifically to the evidence about  flooding  and  temporary
      closure of the Beitbridge crossing, the Judge stated:


         "This undermines the Appellant's overall account."

     At this juncture, the relevant passages  from  the  Appellant's  asylum
interviews are    pertinent.  In the screening interview, he stated:

     "Left Zimbabwe on  21/01/13 (Monday)  by  motor  vehicle.   Got  to  S.
           Africa on 22/01/1 (Tuesday)".

     [Words in bold inserted]

     In the substance of interview, he stated that  he  travelled  from  his
      home place during the "early morning" of 21 January 2013 to Gwandu,  a
      distance of some 120kms.  He then reiterated that he left Zimbabwe  on
      21 January 2013.  He described a second car journey, with  a  distance
      of some 280 kms, from Gwandu to Beitsbridge.  In  another  answer,  he
      suggested that this journey was "overnight".


   6.     The Appellant made a written statement  for  the  purpose  of  the
      hearing at first  instance.   This  contains  the  following  material
      passages:

           "The following day, Monday 21 January 2013, in the  morning,  me
           and my family left Filabusi by car.  We drove to  Gwanda,  which
           is approximately 120kms from Filabusi.  We went there because my
           mother knew a man who could keep me safe .....


           That same day we left Gwanda by car ....


           We went to Beitbridge, on the border between Zimbabwe and  South
           Africa, which was 280kms from Gwanda and  travelled  over  night
           into South Africa".


      In total, the Appellant has  given  three  accounts:   in  his  asylum
      screening interview, in his substantive asylum interview  and  in  his
      witness statement.  Duly analysed, each is consistent with  the  other
      as regards the issue  of  his  movements  and  journey  following  the
      alleged escape from custody and the weather conditions  prevailing  at
      the relevant border crossing.  Careful analysis demonstrates that  the
      Judge's rehearsal of certain evidence, in tandem with  the  assessment
      thereof, any findings made, explicit or implicit, and  the  conclusion
      that the Appellant's credibility  was  undermined,  all  contained  in
      paragraph 119 of the Determination, cannot be sustained.


   7.     I now turn to  consider  the  second  main  issue.   In  the  next
      paragraph of the Determination paragraph [20],  the  Judge  considered
      the Appellant's statement in interview that he did not claim asylum in
      South Africa because the "CIO" could easily find him there.  The Judge
      continued, in paragraph 20:

           "However, they failed to guard the camp or to try to find him in
           the days after he claimed to have escaped.  I do not accept that
           the CIO had any interest in the Appellant.  His failure to claim
           asylum in South Africa further undermines his credibility."

     In this context, it is necessary to rehearse what  the  Appellant  said
      about the "CIO" when interviewed.

   8.     The relevant passages in the asylum screening interview begin with
      question number 113.  The Appellant recounted that he had been  seized
      and brought to an army camp on a Sunday, affecting his escape  on  the
      evening of the same day by jumping over  an  unguarded  fence  with  a
      height of 1 - 2 metres.  He  could  not  explain  why  the  fence  was
      unguarded and was not of greater  dimensions.   This  occurred  on  20
      January 2013 (Sunday).  He then stated that he left Zimbabwe  on  21st
      January, driving directly, with his escort/agent,  to  the  Beitbridge
      border crossing, an "overnight" journey entailing a distance  of  some
      280 kilometres.  Having then described the border crossing and  onward
      travel, he was asked [question 184] why  he  did  not  stay  in  South
      Africa, replying:

           "The reason being - it is very close to Zimbabwe and  the  CIO's
           can easily find me."


    At this juncture, it is appropriate to recall some pertinent  questions
    and answers belonging to an earlier stage of the interview:


           "[21]  Who are looking for you?  People from the army ....


            [24]  Who or what do you fear in Zimbabwe?  I fear CIOs because
                 when I left I ran away from a camp which I was  put  in  to
                 join the army ....


           [25]    CIO  -  who  or  what  are  they?   They   are   Central
                 Intelligence Organisation working for the Government."


   9.     In his written statement, the Appellant claimed that following his
      departure from Zimbabwe his mother informed him that the CIOs had come
      looking for him.  He further stated:

           "I fear the Central Intelligence Organisation (CIO).  I did  not
           stay in South Africa because it is very close  to  Zimbabwe  and
           borders it.  It would be very easy for  the  CIOs  to  track  me
           down".

     There are two particular features of the Judge's assessment, which  was
      critical of the Appellant's credibility, in paragraph 20.   The  first
      is the statement that the CIOs failed  to  guard  the  camp  where  he
      claims to have been forcibly detained.  This invites  the  observation
      that, considering all relevant aspects of the evidence,  there  is  no
      apparent basis for believing that the CIOs would be expected to  guard
      the relevant camp.  Secondly, the Judge adverted to "the days after he
      claimed to have  escaped".   This  does  not  accurately  reflect  the
      Appellant's story, which was that he had  succeeded  in  crossing  the
      Zimbabwe/South Africa border less than one and a half  days  following
      his escape from the military camp.  Continuing, the Judge  found  that
      the CIO had no interest in the Appellant and made  a  related  finding
      that his failure to claim asylum in South Africa was  adverse  to  his
      credibility.

  10.     Duly analysed, the Judge's assessment of and finding  relating  to
      the "CIOs issue" are  unsustainable.   They  cannot  be  justified  by
      reference to the evidence.

  11.     The problematic nature of the Judge's findings  on  the  two  main
      issues, analysed and outlined above, must be considered in a  somewhat
      fuller context.  The credibility findings  adverse  to  the  Appellant
      were  clearly  cumulative  in  nature,  having   regard   to   certain
      surrounding passages in the Determination, specifically those relating
      to  (i) the voluntariness or otherwise of the  Appellant's  submission
      to the soldiers and (ii) the onward travel from  England  to  Northern
      Ireland and the failure to claim asylum in the former location.   Thus
      the findings made by the Judge which I consider unsustainable  do  not
      have some remote, isolated existence:   rather,  they  are  intimately
      linked  to  the  overall  negative  credibility  assessment   of   the
      Appellant.

12. Mrs O'Brien,  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  realistically
    acknowledged that, when juxtaposed with the  underlying  evidence,  the
    Judge's  assessments  and  findings  in  two  key  paragraphs  of   the
    Determination, 119 and 120, are unsustainable.  Following, and  in  the
    light   of,   certain   exchanges   which   I   initiated   with   both
    representatives, the analysis of the FtT decision set  out  above  was,
    properly, not contested on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
    conclusion that the Determination of the FtT must be set aside  follows
    inexorably.

DECISION

  13. I decide as follows:

   a) The decision of the FtT is hereby set aside.


      b) Having considered the parties submissions on this  discrete  issue,
         on which they were ad idem,  I  order  remittal  to  a  differently
         constituted FtT for the purpose of making a fresh decision.



                                                 [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Dated:  21 January 2014

















