

                                [pic]

 Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/02478/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


 Heard at Field House
 Decision & Reasons Promulgated
 On 12 February 2016                                                      On
 22 February 2016



                                   Before


                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



             Appellant
                                     And





                                     SLA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


 Representation:


 For the Appellant:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
 For the Respondent:   Mr D Coleman, counsel instructed by Lawland
 Solicitors




                         DECISION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ LK Gibbs, promulgated  on
     9 December
             2015.

  2.  Permission to appeal was granted on 4 January 2016 by FTTJ Andrew.


     Background


  3. The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom  during  June  2010  with
     leave to enter as a Tier 4 migrant. He was granted  further  leave  to
     remain until February 2015. That leave was curtailed with no right  of
     appeal on 7  May  2013  as  the  Tier  4  sponsor  had  withdrawn  its
     sponsorship owing to the respondent's lack of attendance.  He  applied
     for asylum during July 2014.

  4. The basis of the respondent's asylum claim is that he is of  Sinhalese
     ethnicity and that his problems in Sri Lanka  began  as  a  result  of
     hosting a Tamil friend, MS, in his home. The respondent met MS  on  an
     IT course in 2007. The respondent subsequently helped him find  a  job
     in Colombo and MS stayed with the respondent's parents until  December
     2010.  MS was arrested  in  November  2012.  The  respondent  did  not
     believe MS to be a member or supporter of the  LTTE.  The  Sri  Lankan
     authorities were said to believe that the respondent had been  helping
     the LTTE because of the assistance he had given MS in  finding  a  job
     and a place to stay. Consequently, they had been to  the  respondent's
     family home to look for him.

  5. The Secretary of State did not accept that, at the height of the civil
     war, a person of Sinhalese origin would befriend  a  person  of  Tamil
     origin and be able to house him and find him a job  with  a  Sinhalese
     man without problems. Reference was also  made  to  the  vagueness  of
     important aspects of the account as well as the respondent's delay  in
     seeking asylum.

  6. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the  respondent  sought
     an adjournment in order to have further time  to  obtain  evidence  to
     dispute a Document Verification Report (DVR), which indicated that  an
     arrest warrant submitted at an earlier hearing, was  a  forgery.  That
     application was refused.  The FTTJ decided that the respondent had put
     forward a credible claim, that the Secretary of State had  not  proved
     that the arrest warrant was not genuine and that "the fact that  there
     is an arrest warrant in his name means he will be stopped on return to
     Sri Lanka."



      Error of law


    7. Permission to appeal was sought  on  the  basis  that  the  FTTJ  had
       materially misdirected himself as to  the  civil  standard  of  proof
       owing to his references to needing to be  satisfied  to  "the  higher
       end" of the  spectrum  that  the  DVR  was  reliable  evidence.   The
       application acknowledged errors on the DVR but  argued  that  it  was
       "far from clear" that the FTTJ would have rejected the DVR if he  had
       applied the correct standard of proof.

    8. The FTTJ granting permission did so for the reasons set  out  in  the
       grounds, with reference to Re B (Children) (FC) [2008] UKHL 35.





The hearing

    9. Ms Fijiwala promptly advised me that the Secretary of State wished to
       withdraw the appeal, with a view to granting the respondent leave  to
       remain in the United Kingdom.

   10. I accordingly considered the following  provisions  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008;

      17.-(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a party may give notice of the
withdrawal of its case, or any    part of it-
      (a) [ ] by sending or delivering to the Upper Tribunal a written
notice of withdrawal; or
      (b) orally at a hearing.
      (2) Notice of withdrawal will not take effect unless the Upper
Tribunal consents to the     withdrawal except in relation to an
application for permission to appeal.


   11. In view of the fact that the respondent had  been  granted  leave  to
       remain in the United  Kingdom,  I  was  prepared  to  consent  to  Ms
       Fijiwala's oral notice of withdrawal. I therefore had no need to hear
       from Mr Coleman.


Decision

I consent to the Secretary of State's application to withdraw the appeal.

 12. An anonymity direction  was  made  by  the  FTTJ  and  I  consider  it
     appropriate that this be continued and therefore  make  the  following
     anonymity direction:

        "Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. "




 Signed     Date: 14 February 2016


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

