

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02469/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11th November 2014                         |On 11th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     BK
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr I Hussain of Lei Dat & Baig solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1.  The  appellant  appeals  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        dismissing his appeal against a decision to remove him subsequent to
        a refusal by the respondent to grant him international protection.


     2. An application for permission to  appeal  was  filed  out  of  time.
        Although permission was granted, not decision  to  extend  time  was
        made despite such having been requested. The grant of permission  is
        thus provisional. I extend time.


     3. The judge granting permission did so on  the  grounds  that  it  was
        arguable that the interview by the respondent of the  appellant  was
        on the basis that the appellant (an Iranian national) claimed to  be
        a supporter of the KDP (Iraq Party) as oppose to a supporter of  the
        KDPI of Iran. The grounds assert that the original of the  interview
        record was handwritten and difficult to read; that the typed version
        was only received shortly before the hearing and  it  had  thus  not
        been possible to read this back to the appellant despite  it  having
        been requested many months earlier; that the judge  had  erroneously
        concluded that the appellant was confused about the KDP  (Iraq)  and
        the KDP Iran rather than taking account of  the  problems  with  the
        original interview.


     4. It is notable that the emblem described  by  the  appellant  is  the
        emblem of the KDPI and yet he is erroneously criticised for  failing
        to describe the emblem of the KDP. The references to the KDP and the
        KDPI are recorded throughout the interview record with what  appears
        to be interchangeable use. It is difficult to fail  to  accept  that
        the appellant would  have  been  confused  as  to  which  party  the
        interviewer was asking him questions. His answers as to  the  leader
        of the KDPI and the description of its emblem were  clearly  correct
        and yet these have been held against him  as  incorrect  answers  as
        regards the KDP.  The  interview  was  not  recorded  -  although  I
        understand from Mr Hussain that a request for the  interview  to  be
        recorded had been made. Certainly on the face of it the  interviewer
        used the use of the initials KDP and KDPI interchangeably.


     5. The First-tier Tribunal judge in dealing with  this  appeal  on  the
        basis that it was the appellant that was confused as to which  party
        he supported or belonged  has  erred  in  failing  to  consider  the
        interview record and the obvious confusion engendered by the  manner
        of questions asked.


     6. There is a clear error in law by the judge in failing to engage with
        or even acknowledge the evidence of the appellant and the  confusion
        by the interviewer.


     7. I set aside the First-tier Tribunal determination and  remit  it  to
        the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.






Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision and remit the hearing of the appeal to  the  First-
tier Tribunal to be heard afresh. Not to be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
judge Mulvenna




Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).




Upper Tribunal Judge Coker Date 11th November 2014

