

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02648/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8th December 2017                      |On 11th December 2017          |
|                                          |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     GP
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jegarajah instructed by Greater London
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  respondent
   in this determination  identified  as  GP.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings


   1. The SSHD sought and was granted permission to appeal  on  the  grounds
      that it was arguable the First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in law in
      failing to give adequate reasons as to the risk category GP fell into;
      where GP was when he was arrested; the account  as  regards  Malaysia;
      GP's detention in 2009; that his  claim  to  remain  of  interest  was
      inconsistent with his return trips to Sri Lanka during the  height  of
      the civil war; the lack of detail of the claimed family harassment and
      that had the judge considered this evidence then it was  arguable  the
      outcome would have been different.


   2. Ms Jegarajah, in very  helpful  submissions,  drew  attention  to  the
      evidence relied upon by GP as correlated  with  the  findings  of  the
      judge in relation to that evidence. Those findings, namely that GP has
      scars on his body consistent with the claimed cause and that there  is
      an outstanding arrest warrant, are not challenged by the SSHD  in  her
      grounds of appeal.


   3. The grounds of appeal refer to elements of  the  reasons  for  refusal
      letter but, as said by Mr Bramble, the  core  findings  of  the  judge
      which are directly relevant to risk on return have not been challenged
      in the grounds of  appeal.  Mr  Bramble  acknowledged  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge had made adverse findings and considered  the  evidence
      overall, and that the  judge  had  grappled  with  Tanveer  Ahmed.  Mr
      Bramble acknowledged that the country guidance case was  in  play.  He
      did not, in his submissions, assert that the findings as  regards  the
      outstanding arrest warrant and the medical evidence were such that, in
      the light of the country guidance case could have  led  to  any  other
      decision than that taken by the First-tier Tribunal judge.


   4. I am satisfied that the findings and the conclusion drawn by the First-
      tier Tribunal judge are not infected by material errors of law.


   5. The appeal of the SSHD is dismissed.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal stands.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



                                    Date 8th December 2017
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
