
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02828/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 31 October 2013                              |On 4 February 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                           Haitham Nabil El Rifai
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs C Brewer, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Haitham Nabil El Rifai, was born on 29 January 1988 is a
    Palestinian from the Occupied Territories.  By a decision dated 10 June
    2013, I found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and  I  set
    aside its determination.  I set out below my reasons for doing so:


    REASONS FOR FINDING THAT TRIBUNAL MADE AN ERROR OF LAW, SUCH THAT ITS
    DECISION FALLS TO BE SET ASIDE


 1. The appellant, Haitham Nabil El Rifai, was born  on  29  January  1988.
    His family is from Palestine (the Occupied Territories) but he was born
    as a refugee in Lebanon.  He came to the United Kingdom in  March  2010
    as a student and claimed  asylum  on  24  January  2012.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent dated 29 February 2012  to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Reed) in a
    determination dated 17 April 2012, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Reed's determination is a thorough and careful  analysis  of  the
    evidence which he had before him.  For reasons which I will explain,  I
    have decided that the determination did contain an  error  of  law  and
    that the risk to this appellant, as an  openly  gay  man  returning  to
    Lebanon, should be further considered by the Upper Tribunal.   However,
    in doing so I acknowledge that Judge Reed did not have  the  same  time
    and resources available to him in the First-tier Tribunal such  as  may
    now be employed in the Upper Tribunal in order to remake  the  decision
    in this appeal and, if appropriate, give country guidance.

 3. The first ground asserts that Judge Reed failed to take account of  the
    previous findings of fact made by  Immigration  Judge  Osborne  in  the
    appellant's previous appeal.  Judge Osborne had considered  (without  a
    hearing) an appeal made by the appellant in 2011 concerning the refusal
    by the respondent to give him further  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tie  4
    (General) Student Migrant.  Judge Reed noted at [30 (8-9)]:

          If the appellant were to be  believed,  he  found  out  about  his
          father's reaction to his gay relationship in the middle  of  2010.
          He did not however claim asylum until 24  January  2012.  By  this
          time not only had the best part of  18  months  elapsed,  but  the
          appellant had applied for an extension of his visa  as  a  student
          and had presented an appeal to the Tribunal albeit that  this  was
          dealt with on the papers. He explained the delay by saying that he
          did not know about  claiming  asylum,  but  I  do  not  find  this
          plausible as  the  appellant  is  someone  who  has  already  been
          recognised as a refugee, he is reasonably well educated,  and  was
          clearly sufficiently aware of  immigration  matters  to  pursue  a
          further application as a points-based system migrant and an appeal
          against the refusal of that decision. I also  bear  in  mind  that
          according  to  the  determination  of  that   appeal   which   was
          promulgated on 4 May 2011 the appellant relied  in  part  upon  an
          Arab Bank savings passbook which he claimed was in the name of his
          father  Nabil  Ali  Al-Rifai.  The  book  had  not  actually  been
          translated.  However  what  the  appellant  said  about  being  in
          possession  of  his  father's  passbook  runs  contrary   to   the
          suggestion the appellant makes about them having  fallen  out  and
          the father threatening to kill him in the summer of  2010.  Having
          carefully considered all of the evidence in the round,  I  do  not
          accept what the appellant says  about  the  threats  made  by  his
          father.

          The appellant's father may or may not know about his  relationship
          with Mohamad, but I do  not  accept  that  he  can  be  completely
          unaware of the appellant's sexuality. I say this because  of  what
          the appellant says about dressing like a girl when he was  younger
          and having been beaten by his father because  of  this.  This  all
          indicates that the appellant's father must  have  known  for  some
          time about the appellant being gay. Such knowledge has not however
          prevented  the  appellant  from  succeeding  with  his  education,
          submitting an application for a visa to the UK. I also  take  into
          account that the appellant relied on what he said was his father's
          savings book in support of his recent points-based  appeal,  which
          strongly suggest that he still has his father's support.




 4. The grounds note that Judge Osborne had  not  been  satisfied  "to  the
    standard that has to be applied in  these  appeals  that  the  [savings
    passbook related] to the account of the appellant's father." [12].   It
    is submitted that the case of Devaseelan [2004] UKIAT 00282 was binding
    on Judge Reed and that he should not, therefore,  have  found,  in  the
    light of Judge Osborne's finding, at [30] the appellant had enjoyed his
    father's support because his father had been prepared  to  support  the
    appellant financially in his studies.

 5. The appellant seeks, in effect, to rely upon a finding  by  a  previous
    Immigration Judge that the appellant had submitted false or  unreliable
    evidence in support of his application for a student visa.  However, it
    would appear that the author of the grounds of  appeal  has  failed  to
    read Judge Reed's comment regarding the savings  book  with  sufficient
    care.  That Judge  Reed  should  have  taken  "into  account  that  the
    appellant relied on what he said  was  his  father's  savings  book  in
    support of a recent  points-based  appeal"  was  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence and did not contradict the findings of the previous  Tribunal.
    Whether or not the savings book did actually belong to the  appellant's
    father, the fact remains that the appellant had sought to rely upon  it
    in the visa appeal.  The point being made by Judge Reed  was  that  the
    fact that the appellant sought to rely on what he  claimed  to  be  the
    savings book  of  his  father  indicated  that  the  appellant  himself
    believed at that time that he continued to enjoy his father's  support.
    It is a finding which is not at odds with Judge Osborne's  findings  of
    fact.

 6. The second ground of appeal  relates  to  Article  1D  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  At [33-40] Judge Reed set out the position as follows:

      It was submitted by Ms Khan that the  appellant  is  entitled  to  the
      benefit of Article1D of the Convention and that because of this he  is
      entitled to recognition as a refugee. Article 1D provides as follows:
          "D This Convention shall not apply to persons who are  at  present
          receiving from organs or agencies of the United Nations other than
          the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees  protection  or
          assistance.
          When such protection or assistance  has  ceased  for  any  reason,
          without the position of such persons being definitively settled in
          accordance with the relevant resolutions adopted  by  the  General
          Assembly of the United Nations, these persons shall ipso facto  be
          entitled to the benefits of this Convention."

      Three questions relevant to this appeal arise out of  Article  1D:  Is
      the appellant someone who is  "at  present"  receiving  protection  or
      assistance from organs or agency of the UN other than the  UNHCR?  Has
      that protection ceased? Does the use of the words ipso facto mean that
      someone who has lost UN protection is automatically to  be  recognised
      as a refugee or must there be some consideration as to the reasons why
      such protection has ceased?

      In El-Ali [2002] EWCA Civ 1103, the Court of Appeal held that  Article
      1D only applied to those Palestinians  who  were  in  receipt  of  the
      protection of UNRWA at  the  date  of  the  convention  in  1951.  The
      authority of the domestic courts means therefore that Article 1D could
      not apply to this appellant who although in receipt of the  protection
      of UNRWA was not even born in 1951. Miss Khan however referred  me  to
      the decision of the European Court of Justice in Bolbol, which came to
      the opposite conclusion, indicating that it could  not  be  maintained
      that only those Palestinians who became refugees as a  result  of  the
      1948 conflict and who were receiving  protection  or  assistance  from
      UNRWA at the time of the original version of the Geneva Convention  in
      1951 are covered by Article 1D. It was submitted  by  Miss  Khan  that
      this precedent of the ECJ rather than the decision  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal is binding upon the Tribunal.

      Even if I were to accept that I had to follow the decision  in  Bolbol
      as to the extent of those covered by Article 1D, I still  do  not  see
      that this would be of any benefit to the appellant. I say this because
      those who are covered by Article 1D are  ordinarily  unable  to  avail
      themselves  of  the  other  protections  of  the  Refugee  Convention.
      Although I was urged to follow the  guidance  given  by  the  Advocate
      General, the Grand Chamber itself  essentially  decided  the  case  of
      Bolbol on a narrow issue only relating to whether or  not  Article  1D
      was restricted to those who already had UNRWA protection in  1951.  In
      El-Ali, the Court of Appeal considered all the questions about Article
      1D to which I have referred and clearly explained why  the  protection
      of UNRWA has not ceased. The second  sentence  in  Article  1D  would,
      according to the speech of Laws LJ only:

      "bite on the happening of a particular overall event:  the  cessation
          of UNRWA assistance. They did  not  contemplate  that  Article  1D
          would apply piecemeal and haphazardly, its  scope  marked  off  by
          reference to the persons who at any given moment were or were  not
          within the UNRWA's territories receiving  assistance,  whether  or
          not in any given case an individual might have had a  good  reason
          (a "protection related reason") for leaving the territory where he
          is registered".

      The  opinion  of  the  Advocate  General  may  well  differ  from  the
      conclusions of the Court of  Appeal  on  this  issue,  but  the  Grand
      Chamber did not make any specific ruling on this point. I am therefore
      clearly bound by the decision of the Court of Appeal as to the meaning
      of the second sentence in Article 1D.

      Therefore, even if, according to the European Court  of  Justice,  the
      Court of Appeal were wrong in relation  to  the  fixed  definition  of
      those who are covered by Article  1D,  the  appellant  cannot,  as  an
      individual, say that he is not receiving UNRWA protection  in  Lebanon
      and is therefore entitled to seek protection as a refugee elsewhere. I
      say this because UNRWA is still  functioning  and  its  protection  is
      still available in Lebanon. This appellant  has  indeed  produced  his
      UNRWA  certificate  to  the  respondent.  The  appellant's  appeal  by
      reference to Article 1D must therefore be dismissed.

      Indeed, if I were to follow the  decision  of  the  Grand  Chamber  in
      Bolbol, then in my view this would mean that the appellant  could  not
      avail himself of the other Articles of the Refugee Convention  because
      he would be a person covered by Article 1D, and yet the protection  of
      UNRWA has not ceased.

      If I were to follow the reasoning of the Court of  Appeal,  that  only
      those afforded the protection of UNRWA in 1951 are covered by  Article
      1D, then the protection of the other Articles of the Convention  would
      still be open to the appellant. I have therefore continued to consider
      the appeal on this basis under Article 1A of the Convention.




    I cannot identify any error in the judge's reasoning.  I consider  that
    he has analysed the position in respect of Article  1D  accurately  and
    would concur with the reasons given.

 7. The third ground of appeal asserts that Judge Reed "erred in law in his
    assessment of the country condition in Lebanon  for  homosexuals."   At
    [42-44] Judge Reed, applying the test set out by the Supreme  Court  in
    HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, wrote:

      I refer to my previous findings of fact. The appellant is gay. I  have
      however considered what the situation would be for him  on  return  to
      Lebanon and have borne in mind that he is a Palestinian as well  as  a
      gay man. I have also taken into account the way the  appellant  openly
      conducts himself and bear in  mind  that  he  cannot  be  expected  to
      conceal aspects of his sexual  orientation.  I  have  however  already
      given my reasons for finding that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to
      conduct his lifestyle as he would wish  to  upon  return  to  what  is
      clearly one of the more liberal countries of the Middle East.  He  may
      well not be able to do everything that he can in the UK  but  that  is
      clearly not the test. I find that he would  nevertheless  be  able  to
      live an openly gay lifestyle without  having  to  conceal  his  sexual
      orientation.

      I have stated why I considered that the  appellant  led  a  relatively
      successful life  as  a  gay  man  of  Palestinian  origin  in  Lebanon
      previously. He was able to pursue an education at tertiary  level  and
      thereafter was able to work. He had a relationship with a gay  partner
      and visited  gay  sauna  clubs.  Indeed,  if  anything,  the  evidence
      suggests that the liberal process in Lebanon has  continued  since  he
      came  to  the  UK  with  Lebanon  now  being  referred  to  as  a  gay
      destination.

      In all the circumstances I find that the appellant  does  not  have  a
      well founded fear of persecution  on  account  of  his  sexuality  and
      membership of a particular social group or on account of his  race  or
      ethnic background as a Palestinian. His appeal under Article  1A  must
      therefore fail and I dismiss his appeal under the Refugee Convention.






 8. Earlier in the determination, at [31] the judge had stated:

      I have carefully considered all of the  country  background  evidence,
      and what the appellant has said  about  his  sexuality  and  how  this
      manifests itself. I find that Lebanon is clearly a  more  diverse  and
      progressive society than many  other  Middle  Eastern  countries.  The
      appellant has had a gay relationship in Lebanon, a country  which  has
      gained a reputation as a "gay destination" and the gay "party  capital
      of the Middle East". Helem  has  been  able  to  hold  conferences  in
      Lebanon with the protection of the police for delegates. The  evidence
      before me all points to there being an  increasing  tolerance  towards
      and acceptance of gays by both the police and by society as  a  whole.
      This has even encompassed at least one member of the judiciary  making
      a favourable interpretation of what might  otherwise  be  regarded  as
      anti-gay criminal legislation.

      Whilst the freedoms in Lebanon may not have  developed  quite  to  the
      same extent as they have in the West, I find that attitudes in Lebanon
      would not prevent the appellant from living the lifestyle as a gay man
      that he would wish to.




 9. The grounds at [14] assert:

         "...Judge Reed was further referred to  country  evidence  in  this
         case on the position of homosexuals in Lebanon, in particular Judge
         Reed  was  referred  to  the  respondent's  bundle  at  page   F20;
         appellant's bundle pages 154-155, page 160 (paras 15-17), pages 164-
         164, page 165 (where parents employ the use of Article 534  against
         their own children), pages 163-169 and page 180.

10. Miss Khan referred me to a significant volume  of  background  material
    which appears to  indicate  that  gay  men  who  openly  express  their
    sexuality would be at real  risk  in  Lebanon.   Judge  Reed  has  (for
    example at [27]) made reference to the  generally  liberal  environment
    for gay men in  Lebanon  vis-�-vis  other  areas  of  the  Middle  East
    although he notes at [32]  that  "freedoms  in  Lebanon  may  not  have
    developed quite to the same extent as they have in the  West".   Having
    made that observation, it could be said that  Judge  Reed  should  have
    hesitated before going on to find that "attitudes in Lebanon would  not
    prevent the appellant from leading the lifestyle as a gay man  that  he
    would wish to".  Judge Reed should have addressed in greater detail and
    made appropriate findings regarding the "lifestyle as a gay  man"  that
    he found that this particular  appellant  would  wish  to  pursue.   He
    should then  have  considered,  by  reference  to  all  the  background
    material relating to gay men in Lebanon, including those  which  record
    negative attitudes towards homosexuality, whether the  appellant  would
    be able to enjoy such a lifestyle without exposing himself  to  a  real
    risk of harm or whether  he  would  be  required  to  make  significant
    adjustments to his  gay  lifestyle  in  order  to  avoid  the  risk  of
    suffering such  harm.  His  failure  to  do  so  renders  his  analysis
    incomplete.

11. As a consequence, the First-tier Tribunal determination should,  in  my
    judgment, be set aside accordingly and the decision remade in the Upper
    Tribunal. Judge Reed's findings of fact (other than in relation to risk
    on return) shall stand. The Upper Tribunal may require to hear  further
    oral evidence from the appellant in the light of the comments  made  at
    [10] supra.

    DECISION

12. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its determination  falls
    to be set aside.  The Upper Tribunal will re-make the decision  at,  or
    following a resumed hearing in Bradford, on a date to be fixed.








 2. At the resumed hearing on 31 October 2013, the appellant  attended  and
    gave evidence in Arabic with the assistance of an interpreter.  I  also
    heard from his witness, Haiyer Jaleel  Sozag  (Mr  Sozog)  who  is  the
    appellant's boyfriend.  The burden of proof in the appeal rests on  the
    appellant and the standard of proof  is  whether  the  appellant  would
    face, respectively, persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article  3
    ECHR if he were to return to Lebanon.

 3. Having cross-examined the appellant and the witness,  Mrs  Brewer,  for
    the respondent, sought to cast doubt on some of the statements made  by
    the appellant.  The appellant and Mr Haiyer had  both  said  that  they
    intended to marry.  Mrs Brewer submitted that neither the appellant nor
    the witness "knew much about it".  She submitted that  the  failure  of
    the appellant and Mr Haiyer actively and seriously to  investigate  the
    practicalities of civil partnership or marriage  cast  doubt  on  their
    credibility.  She also asked me to reject the  appellant's  claim  that
    cross-dressing (referred to in the appellant's most  recent  statement)
    was not a fundamental aspect  of  the  appellant's  sexuality  but  was
    rather an element of the appellant's behaviour which he had  sought  to
    exaggerate for the purposes of the appeal.  Mrs Brewer referred to  the
    manner in which the appellant had attended the  hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  It is fair to say that  the  appellant  (who,  although  not
    dressed as a woman, was wearing heavy make-up) had dressed in a  manner
    which was striking even by the standards of urban life  in  the  United
    Kingdom today.  Mrs  Brewer  submitted  that  the  flamboyance  of  the
    appellant's dress was simply an attempt by him to "test the waters"  of
    his sexuality and was not a fundamental aspect of that sexuality.

 4. I reject Mrs Brewer's  submissions.   Judge  Reed,  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, had accepted  what  the  appellant  had  said  regarding  his
    sexuality and those findings have not been disturbed.  Whether  or  not
    the appellant may be "testing the waters" I find  that  the  manner  in
    which he dressed at the hearing in the Upper Tribunal  is  an  accurate
    reflection of the way in which he wishes to express his gay  sexuality.
    I accept that he generally dresses in that same manner (which,  it  was
    pleasing to learn from his oral evidence,  appears  to  attract  little
    adverse comment in Rotherham).  I  certainly  did  not  find  that  the
    appellant was putting on a show or exaggerating his  dress  or  conduct
    for the purposes of this appeal.  Likewise, I find that  the  appellant
    and Mr Haiyer have discussed marriage as they have explained  and  that
    their  failure  hitherto  to  investigate  the  possibility  of   civil
    partnership does not detract from their credibility as witnesses.

 5. It would be fair to  say  that  the  background  evidence  relating  to
    Lebanon appears to indicate two distinct strands  in  the  attitude  of
    those in authority and the community generally to gay  men  and  women.
    On the one hand, there is certainly evidence that there is a lively gay
    scene in  Beirut.   There  has,  however,  also  been  something  of  a
    conservative reaction to relaxed standards.  For example,  I  note  the
    contents of an HJT Research news report online dated 30 April  2013  in
    which the two elements of gay life in modern Beirut (the existence of a
    gay nightclub and the repressive and  at  times  violent  responses  of
    those in authorities) are brought together:

         "Gay Star News quoted the mayor [of Beirut]  was  telling  Lebanese
         TV:

             'I saw 25 men outside what looked like boys and men.   I  went
             inside... I saw people kissing, touching each other and a  man
             wearing a skirt.  These homosexual acts that are  happening...
             are scandalous sexual acts.  Of course we made them  take  off
             their clothes.  We saw a scandalous situation and  we  had  to
             know what these people were.  Is it a  woman  or  a  man?   It
             turned out to be a noss rejel (half-man).   I  do  not  accept
             this in Dekwaneh.'

         The raid on the Ghost Night club led to the beating and humiliation
         and arrest of  a  number  of  individuals  arrested  there  by  the
         authorities."

 6. The appellant has adduced a report from Dr Alan George dated 15 October
    2013 which seeks to draw together the background evidence  relating  to
    gay men in Lebanon.  Dr George concluded that the appellant, because he
    is Palestinian rather  than  Lebanese,  starts  at  a  disadvantage  in
    Lebanese society and he  concluded  that  the  appellant's  openly  gay
    appearance and conduct would expose him to a real risk in all parts  of
    Lebanon.  Having considered the  report  carefully  together  with  the
    background evidence which it cites, I have concluded that  Dr  George's
    conclusions are reliable.  There is tolerance of what may be  described
    as low level and discreet gay behaviour in Beirut  but  tensions  which
    continue to exist regarding gay sexuality in Lebanese society are prone
    to erupt (as in the incident described above) and gay men and women may
    suffer as a consequence.  There are two factors in the appellant's case
    which I find would exacerbate that risk.  First, he is Palestinian  and
    is likely to be regarded with  suspicion  outside  the  refugee  camps.
    Secondly, if he dressed and conducted himself in the way  in  which  he
    does in Rotherham (and at the Upper Tribunal hearing), then there is  a
    real possibility that he would suffer violence both at the hands of the
    police and others opposed to the liberalisation  of  sexual  attitudes.
    In essence, I find that this appellant would encounter  real  risks  of
    ill-treatment in any part of the Lebanon if he dresses and  behaves  as
    he did before the Upper Tribunal.

 7. The remaining question is how the appellant will respond to those risks
    upon return to Lebanon.  The proper approach to be adopted is that  set
    out in the judgment of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) [82]:
    When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground  of  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  tribunal  must  first  ask
    itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is gay, or  that
    he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in his  country  of
    nationality.
      If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it  is  satisfied  on
      the available evidence that gay  people  who  lived  openly  would  be
      liable to persecution in the applicant's country of nationality.
      If so, the tribunal  must  go  on  to  consider  what  the  individual
      applicant would do if he were returned to that country.
      If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby be exposed to a
      real  risk  of  persecution,  then  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution - even if he could avoid the risk by living "discreetly".
      If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that the applicant would
      in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask
      itself why he would do so.
      If the tribunal concludes that the  applicant  would  choose  to  live
      discreetly simply because that was how he himself would wish to  live,
      or because of social pressures, e  g,  not  wanting  to  distress  his
      parents or embarrass his  friends,  then  his  application  should  be
      rejected. Social pressures of that kind do not amount  to  persecution
      and the Convention does not offer  protection  against  them.  Such  a
      person has no well-founded fear of persecution  because,  for  reasons
      that have nothing to do with  any  fear  of  persecution,  he  himself
      chooses to adopt a way of life which means that  he  is  not  in  fact
      liable to be persecuted because he is gay.
      If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that a  material  reason
      for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a  fear  of
      the persecution which would follow if he were to live openly as a  gay
      man, then,  other  things  being  equal,  his  application  should  be
      accepted. Such a person has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution.  To
      reject  his  application  on  the  ground  that  he  could  avoid  the
      persecution by living discreetly would be to  defeat  the  very  right
      which the Convention exists to protect - his right to live freely  and
      openly as a gay man without fear of persecution. By admitting  him  to
      asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly as a gay man without
      fear of persecution, the receiving state gives effect to that right by
      affording  the  applicant  a  surrogate  for   the   protection   from
      persecution which his country of nationality should have afforded him.




 8. I am satisfied, for the reasons which I have  given  above,  that  "gay
    people who lived openly" would be liable to  persecution  in  Lebanon."
    If the appellant lives openly as he does in the United Kingdom, I  find
    that he will have a well-founded fear of persecution or  ill-treatment.
    I find that the appellant may well seek to dress  and  live  discreetly
    thereby avoid persecution  or  ill-treatment;  indeed,  the  background
    evidence  suggests  that  he  might   safely   if   discreetly   pursue
    relationships with other men and attend gay bars in Beirut.  However, I
    am satisfied that the way in which the appellant now behaves is the way
    that he would "wish to live" and represents an accurate  reflection  of
    his sexual  identity.   I  find  that  he  would  not  choose  to  live
    discreetly for any reason of social pressure but  solely  in  order  to
    avoid persecution or ill-treatment.  This may not, of course,  be  true
    of all gay men returning to live in Lebanon but I find that it is  true
    of this particular appellant.   Following  the  principles  of  HJ,  it
    follows that the appellant is  a  refugee  and  his  appeal  should  be
    allowed accordingly.

DECISION

 9. This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

10. This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3 ECHR).






Signed                              Date 21 November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

