

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: AA/02046/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Sent        |
|On 9 October 2014                      |On 10 October 2014        |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


                                     SS
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel
      (instructed by OK Law Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS







      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
           Judge Coker on 30 July 2014 against the decision  of  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Elson MBE made in a determination promulgated  on
           16 May 2014  dismissing  the  Appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian
           protection and human rights appeals.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka,  born  on  10  October
           1986.  She had appealed against  her  removal  from  the  United
           Kingdom, a decision taken by the Respondent on  19  March  2014.
           The Appellant had  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
           (General) Student Migrant on 8 August 2011, which visa was valid
           until 21 January 2013.   The  Appellant  ceased  to  attend  her
           classes in December 2013.  She claimed  asylum  on  21  February
           2013, having in the meantime applied to extend her student visa.
            She stated  that  she  feared  for  her  life  because  of  her
           perceived family links to the LTTE.


      3.    When granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker
           considered that it was arguable that Judge Elson  had  erred  in
           her assessment of the risk on return, based on  the  Sri  Lankan
           authorities'  possible  perception  of  the  Appellant,   having
           accepted that the Appellant's account was credible.


      4.    The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  indicating  that  the
           appeal was  opposed.   Standard  directions  were  made  by  the
           tribunal and the appeal was listed for adjudication  of  whether
           or not there was a material error of law.




      Submissions


      5.    Ms Anzani for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal earlier submitted, together with her  skeleton  argument.
           Counsel submitted that the judge had erred in her assessment  of
           the risk of  persecution  in  her  application  of  the  country
           guidance caselaw.  GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri
           Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) had been upheld in MP & NT (Sri
           Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ  829.   The  Appellant  had  had  tenuous
           involvement  with  the  LTTE  through  relatives  and  had  been
           questioned in February 2011.  Her mother had been visited by the
           authorities.  The judge had failed to assess those  elements  of
           the  Appellant's  case  adequately.   It  was  the  authorities'
           perception which counted.  Leaving Sri Lanka without  difficulty
           was  not  probative  of  lack  of  interest  on   return.    The
           determination should be  set  aside  (save  for  preserving  the
           positive credibility findings), redetermined and the Appellant's
           appeal allowed.


      6.    Mr Bramble for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's rule 24
           notice.  He submitted that the determination disclosed no  error
           of law and wished to add nothing further.




      No material error of law


      7.    The tribunal accepts  Mr  Bramble's  submissions.   Indeed,  the
           tribunal  considers  that  the  grounds  of  onwards  appeal  as
           submitted and urged in argument were meretricious and  that  the
           grant of permission to appeal was a generous one.  At  most  the
           onwards grounds were simply  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
           ultimate findings of fact, which in  themselves  might  well  be
           thought distinctly favourable to the Appellant.  Those  findings
           were not capable of challenge by the Respondent  as  the  appeal
           was dismissed. The findings obviously stand unchanged.


      8.    As always, the determination needs to be  read  as  whole.   The
           judge set out the Appellant's case and  her  evidence  in  great
           detail, and took similar care in her  approach  to  the  country
           background and objective evidence.  At [87] the judge  correctly
           cited GJ and Others (post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
           [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  and  specifically  referred  to  risk
           category (a) of the headnote, persons perceived to be  a  threat
           to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state, which  was  the
           centrepiece of the Appellant's claim.  The conclusions which the
           judge set out at [91] plainly draw all of those elements of  her
           discussion of the appeal together.  The judge's  conclusions  as
           to the authorities' perception of the  Appellant  were  securely
           focussed on that question.   The  judge  mentioned  all  of  the
           salient potential factors of future real risk in  summary  form,
           having set them out in greater detail earlier, as  noted  above.
           The judge  weighed  the  facts  found  against  the  Appellant's
           claimed fears on return.   Although  the  judge  had  found  the
           Appellant credible, the judge also found that  no  part  of  the
           findings of fact gave rise to a real risk on return.


      9.    The determination was a comprehensive reflection on  the  issues
           raised in the appeal, demonstrating abundant  anxious  scrutiny.
           The assessment of real risk on return  was  reached  taking  the
           Appellant's case at its highest, which is often a valuable cross-
           check in asylum appeals even when  an  Appellant  has  not  been
           found credible, which of course was not the situation here.  The
           findings which the judge reached as to real risk on return  were
           properly based on the guidance provided in GJ Sri Lanka ((above)
           and are sustainable.


      10.   There was no material error of law in the determination.   There
           is no basis for interfering with the judge's decision to dismiss
           the Appellant's appeal, which dismissal must stand.


      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
original    decision, which stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     9 October 2014




