

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aA/02037/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Date sent                    |
|On 8th August 2013                            |On 9th August 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                     MR ABDALLAH BENABDESELAM OUELD-DADA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Kullar (Sultan Lloyd, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Mrs K Heath (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant comes from the area of Africa known  as  Western  Sahara,
    an area partly in Mauritania, partly in Morocco and partly in  Algeria.
    He came to the UK in November 2010 and claimed asylum in December 2010.
    That application was refused on 4th February 2011.
2.   The Appellant appealed  and  his  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Cox) at Stoke-on-Trent on 5th May 2011.  She  dismissed
    the appeal on all grounds.

3.   The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal and the matter then came before me on  6th  October  2011.  My
    task on that occasion was to decide whether the First-tier Tribunal had
    made an error of  law  and  if  so  whether  and  to  what  extent  the
    determination should be set aside.

4.   On 6th October 2011 I found as follows:-

        a.  "Before  me  the  Appellant's  representative  challenged   the
           Immigration Judge's adverse  credibility  findings.   Mrs  Aboni
           sought to defend the determination.


        b. The  grounds  assert  firstly  that  at  paragraph   35  of  the
           determination the Immigration Judge  misunderstood the  evidence
           and found, perversely, that the Appellant  claimed  that  living
           amongst his group, namely the people  with  whom  he  lived  and
           travelled with, were members of Polisario whereas that  had  not
           been the Appellant's evidence.  The  grounds  suggest  that  the
           evidence was that some members of  the  Appellant's  tribe  were
           working for Polisario in the north and that one  member  of  his
           camp worked at the Polisario camp where the Appellant  had  been
           detained.  The  Immigration  Judge  did  not  misunderstand  the
           evidence. It is quite clear from looking  at  the  determination
           and the Appellant's witness statement that he claimed to live in
           a group of fifteen persons. The Polisario would  regularly  come
           to recruit. Some would  go  voluntarily,  others  by  force.  He
           managed to escape the attention of the Polisario by  going  into
           the desert until they had left. The Immigration Judge found that
           if people from  his  own  group  were  working  voluntarily  for
           Polisario which is what he had said, then  it  is  inconceivable
           that they would not have noticed  his  absence  from  the  camp.
           There is no error in the judge's finding.


        c. The grounds then assert that paragraph 36 of  the  determination
           is unintelligible. I agree  that  the  determination  is  poorly
           proofread. However, I do not find any significant error.  It  is
           quite clear that the Immigration Judge  found  that  if  various
           members of the tribe worked  for  the  Polisario  and  one  such
           assisted the Appellant, this did not sit  with  the  Appellant's
           claims that they acted in a violent fashion. That is  a  finding
           open to the Immigration Judge  on  the  evidence.  Further,  the
           grounds  assert  generally  that  the   judge's   findings   are
           unintelligible  and  unreasoned.  The  grounds   make   numerous
           allegations  of  perversity  or   unintelligibility.   That   is
           inappropriate; the test for perversity is a high one.


        d. Reading the determination as a whole it is quite clear that  the
           Appellant in this case claimed to have lived in a  group  of  15
           nomadic herdsmen in Western Sahara. The Polisario regularly came
           to recruit. The Appellant says he was taken by them and detained
           and ill-treated but because he refused to  work  for  them  they
           simply let him go.  As the Immigration Judge found, there is  no
           evidence that the Appellant's life was or will be at  risk  from
           the Polisario.  They released him because he  was  unwilling  to
           join with them.  That does not indicate they wanted to kill him.


        e. Further, as the Immigration Judge pointed out, the expert report
           does not support the Appellant's claims.  There is  no  evidence
           of the Polisario forcibly  recruiting.   The  Immigration  Judge
           noted that the expert  said  that  just  because  there  was  no
           evidence of the Polisario behaving in the way claimed that  does
           not  mean  that  it  did  not  happen  to  the  Appellant.   The
           Immigration  Judge,  whose  task  it  was   to   determine   the
           Appellant's credibility, taking all the  evidence  into  account
           found him without credibility.


        f. The Immigration Judge also found that even were the Appellant at
           risk in his home area he could relocate.   That  was  a  finding
           open to her.


        g. I do not disturb the Immigration Judge's findings of fact.


        h.   However   the   determination   cannot   stand.    What    the
           representatives, the Immigration Judge  and  Senior  Immigration
           Judge have failed to appreciate is that the Appellant's case  is
           that he is a national of Western Sahara and that he was targeted
           there by the Polisario and will be at risk on return.


        i. In the Letter of Refusal  the Secretary of State does not accept
           the Appellant's claimed nationality or claimed  persecution  and
           asserts that he will be safe if retuned to Western Sahara.


        j. However Article 1A provides that a  refugee  is  a  person  who,
           owing to a well founded fear of being persecuted for reasons  of
           race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular  social
           group or  political  opinion  is  outside  the  country  of  his
           nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear is unwilling to
           avail himself of the protection of  that  country;  or  who  not
           having a nationality and being outside the country of his former
           habitual residence as a result of such  events,  is  unable  or,
           owing to such fear unwilling to return to it.


        k. The significance is the word "country". Western  Sahara  is  not
           recognised as a country by the United Nations or by the  British
           government.  Western Sahara is a vast area of West  Africa  that
           is partly in Morocco and partly in Mauretania.  Arguably  it  is
           also in part in Algeria.  In order to succeed the Appellant must
           show that he is a national of a "country" or habitually resident
           in one and at risk in that "country". So much was made clear  by
           the starred decision of Dag (Nationality - Country  of  Habitual
           Residence - TRNC) Cyprus* Country Guidance [2001] IAT 00002.


        l. Accordingly the Immigration Judge was in  error  in  considering
           and  treating  Western  Sahara  as  a  country  and  I  set  the
           determination  aside.   I  preserve  the  findings  however   in
           relation to credibility.


        m. I will rehear the case on the basis that the Appellant needs  to
           show which country  he  is  a  national  of  or  was  habitually
           resident in and that he will be at risk on return there".

5.   Intervening events then occurred to change the nature and direction  of
    this appeal. The matter came before me for the resumed hearing on  29th
    March 2012 when an adjournment application was made on the  Appellant's
    behalf. The application was  to  await  an  expert's  report  but  more
    significantly care proceedings had been commenced in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's young son, born on 8th March 2012. The  Appellant  and  the
    child's mother did not live together and at that stage all we knew  was
    that there had been initial plans to place the child with the Appellant
    but in fact the  child  was  with  its  maternal  grandmother.  It  was
    therefore agreed that the matter should  be  listed  for  a  directions
    hearing on 11th May and on that date I wrote  to  the  Social  Services
    Department of Stoke-on-Trent City Council. I had  been  told  that  the
    Appellant had been given leave for papers to be disclosed to the  Upper
    Tribunal  and  the  Home  Office  in  relation  to  the  ongoing   care
    proceedings. I indicated that on the basis that the Appellant was being
    assessed by Social Services as to his suitability to care for  his  son
    the Upper Tribunal appeal had been adjourned to 16th  August  to  allow
    that assessment to be completed. With the authority of the Home  Office
    I also informed Social Services that if the assessment  concluded  that
    the best  interests  of  the  child  indicated  a  placement  with  the
    Appellant, his presence in the United Kingdom was secure.
6.   On 16th August I was informed that at a hearing in the Family Court  on
    7th August it was  agreed  by  the  Local  Authority  and  the  child's
    guardian  that  because  of  the  mother's  medical  condition  it  was
    important that there be a two-week observation of  the  Appellant  with
    the child at a father and baby unit. That had started on 9th August and
    ended the day  of  the  hearing.  I  was  told  there  was  an  "Issues
    Resolution Hearing" listed for 24th September and that  it  was  agreed
    that, subject to the outcome of the observation, there  was  no  reason
    why the child could not be placed in the sole care of the Appellant.  I
    therefore directed the Upper Tribunal hearing be heard on  8th  October
    and that if the care proceedings should not proceed as anticipated  the
    representatives must notify the Upper Tribunal.

7.   It is from that point that matters went awry. It was concluded  by  the
    Family Court that the child should be placed with the Appellant and  on
    that basis the Secretary of State granted him discretionary leave until
    2015 and wrote to the Upper Tribunal seeking to withdraw  the  decision
    of 4th February 2011. The case was then taken  from  the  list  and  an
    Upper Tribunal Judge issued a notice on 7th  December  2012  indicating
    that the appeal had been abandoned under the provisions of section  104
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. That was  in  fact
    incorrect and in order to  finally  resolve  matters  the  appeal  came
    before Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek on 8th March 2013.

8.   He said, issuing further directions, this:-

              i. It is to be noted that at  the  hearing  before  me  on  26
                 February 2013, the respondent conceded that  the  Appellant
                 has a right of appeal against the  decision  to  refuse  to
                 grant asylum notwithstanding that the  Appellant  has  been
                 granted leave to remain until 1 May 2015. The appellant has
                 given appropriate notice pursuant to section  104  (4B)  of
                 the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  the
                 decision in Win (section 83-order of  events)  [2012]  UKUT
                 00365 (IAC) applies.


             ii. The Notice of abandonment dated 7 December  2012  by  Upper
                 Tribunal Judge  McGeachy, is to be treated as  having  been
                 provisional only pending the  application  of  section  104
                 (4B) of the 2002 Act.


            iii. It is also to be noted that at the hearing on  26  February
                 2013 the parties agreed that the letter from the respondent
                 dates 3 October 2012 purporting to  withdraw  the  decision
                 under appeal (a decision to remove the  appellant  dated  4
                 February  2011)  operates  only  as  a  withdrawal  of  the
                 respondent's case that the appellant is to be removed  from
                 the UK but not  as  a  withdrawal  of  its  case  that  the
                 appellant is not entitled to asylum.


             iv. It was conceded on behalf of the appellant at  the  hearing
                 on 26 February 2013 that in the remaking  of  the  decision
                 before the Upper Tribunal, the credibility findings made by
                 the First-tier Tribunal  are to stand (previously indicated
                 in the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge   Martin  dated  10
                 October 2011).

              v. At the hearing on  26  February  2013  the  respondent  was
                 directed, no later than 14 days from that  date,  to  issue
                 clarification of the residence  documentation  provided  to
                 the appellant which appears  to  state  that  he  has  been
                 granted refugee status, rather  than  discretionary  leave.
                 That direction must be complied with.


             vi. No later  than  14  days  from  the  date  on  which  these
                 directions are sent out, the appellant must file and  serve
                 any  further  evidence  relied  on,  including  any  expert
                 evidence.


9.   The matter thus once more comes before me.

10.  In preparation for the hearing I noticed  that  the  direction  to  the
    Secretary of State had not been complied with in relation to the nature
    of the Appellant's leave. After making enquiries of the Home  Office  a
    letter was then produced to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  Appellant's
    representatives. That was a letter addressed  to  the  Appellant  dated
    22nd March 2013 informing him that due to an  administrative  error  in
    producing his immigration status document it stated refugee leave  when
    it was supposed to  state  discretionary  leave  and  that  the  status
    document is incorrect. He was asked to return that document in order to
    be issued with the correct paperwork.

11.  The Appellant's representative was unaware of this  until  the  day  of
    the hearing.

12.  Mrs Heath's  instructions,  notwithstanding  the  administrative  error
    were that the Appellant had not been granted  refugee  status  and  the
    Secretary of State wished to defend the asylum appeal.

13.  On  the  Appellant's  behalf  an  additional  expert  report  had  been
    provided. I indicated that insofar  as  it  sought  to  go  behind  the
    credibility findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  with  regard  to  the
    Appellant's risk on return it was of no assistance. The  issues  before
    me were somewhat limited by intervening events. When I originally heard
    the case and identified the difficulties with regard to the Appellant's
    nationality, he then had no leave and therefore  it  was  important  to
    establish whether he was entitled to asylum, humanitarian protection or
    should succeed on human rights grounds. All that is now left however is
    asylum and humanitarian protection. He has been found to not be at risk
    in his home area. The only ground left him  therefore  is  that  he  is
    stateless. The expert indicated that the area from which the  Appellant
    came was one under the control of the Polisario. However, the Polisario
    is not a recognised government and Western  Sahara  is  an  area  which
    falls partly in three countries namely Algeria, Morocco and Mauritania.
    In order to be stateless the Appellant must  show  that  he  is  not  a
    national of any of those. The nearest town to where the Appellant lived
    is Tindouf.  Tindouf is in Algeria. The Appellant's evidence as to  the
    language spoken and currency used in his home area would  also  suggest
    he came from Algeria. However, the Appellant's case is he does not know
    what country he is from.  However, he cannot, without more, succeed  in
    his claim to be stateless. The burden of proof rests with him and it is
    well established by case law that before a person can  be  regarded  as
    stateless, they must have made an application for nationality to  those
    countries with which they have the closest connection. In PA and others
    (Kuwait) CG [2004] UKIAT 00256 the Tribunal said  that  the  burden  of
    proof rests on a claimant to  prove  nationality  or  lack  of  it  and
    persons who failed to avail  themselves  of  opportunities  to  acquire
    nationality of the country would not normally be prevented  from  being
    considered  as  nationals  of  that  country  for  Refugee   Convention
    purposes.
14.  It is acknowledged on the Appellant's behalf that he has not  made  any
    efforts to obtain nationality of any  of  the  relevant  countries  and
    therefore I am unable to find that he is stateless.

15.  However, even if the Appellant were stateless that would not allow  him
    to succeed in his asylum appeal. Statelessness and refugee  status  are
    not the same thing. A fear of persecution is  a  pre-requisite  to  the
    grant of refugee status and a stateless person who is unable to  return
    to the country of his former habitual residence is not,  by  reason  of
    that  fact  alone,  a  refugee  within  the  meaning  of  the   Refugee
    Convention. In KA  (statelessness:  meaning  and  relevance)  stateless
    [2008] UKAIT 00042 the Tribunal held that (i) statelessness does not of
    itself constitute persecution, although the circumstances  in  which  a
    person has  been  deprived  of  citizenship  may  be  a  guide  to  the
    circumstances likely to attend his life as a noncitizen  and  (ii)  the
    Refugee Convention uses nationality as one  of  the  criteria  for  the
    identification  of  refugees:  there   is  no  relevant  criterion   of
    "effective" nationality for this purpose.

16.  The Appellant has not  been  deprived  of  nationality.  He  has  never
    sought to have it confirmed.

17.  Similarly as the Appellant has not shown what country he is a  national
    of or identified his country of habitual residence  he  has  not  shown
    that he can succeed under the Refugee Convention.

18.  Accordingly, the Appellant's asylum claim must fail and the  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal must be dismissed.



Signed                 Dated 8th August 2013



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
