

                                    [pic]


|Upper Tribunal                                |Appeal number: AA/02541/2012 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              |                             |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 October 2013                             |On 10 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     T A
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL

      (The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, rule 17, and
    The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, rule 17)

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
the appellant has been granted anonymity throughout  these  proceedings  and
after their conclusion, absent any  order  to  the  contrary  by  the  Upper
Tribunal or any other Court seised of relevant  proceedings.  No  report  of
these proceedings, in  whatever  form,  either  during  the  proceedings  or
thereafter, shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant. Failure  to
comply with this order could lead to a contempt of court.

1. The appellant, a Palestinian who formerly resided in Lebanon in  the  Ain
   Ehilwa camp, and who has never lived in Palestine, appealed  against  the
   First-tier Tribunal  determination  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
   Secretary of State refusal to  grant  him  refugee  status,  humanitarian
   protection or leave to remain on human rights grounds, and to subject him
   to administrative removal pursuant to s.10 of the Immigration and  Asylum
   Act 1999.

2. The grounds of appeal, and the argument, in all three hearings  to  date,
   all deal with the risk on return to Lebanon,  with  the  appellant  being
   described by the respondent  as  a  national  of  'Palestinian  Authority
   (Refugee in Lebanon)' in the letter of refusal,  'Palestinian  Authority'
   in  the  removal  directions,  and  as  a  'citizen  of  the  Palestinian
   Authority' or  a  'citizen  of  Palestine'  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   determinations.

3. The appellant cannot be a citizen of  Palestine  or  of  the  Palestinian
   Authority, since neither is presently a  recognised  State.   It  appears
   that his parents have refugee status in Lebanon and  that  the  appellant
   lived there, albeit in a different camp from his  parents,  with  refugee
   status documents, before coming to the United Kingdom as a student  on  a
   Tier 4 (General) student  visa  in  November  2010.   That  visa  expired
   without being renewed on 12 August 2011 and  the  appellant  applied  for
   asylum on 13 October 2011.

4. The Secretary of State's refusal letter giving reasons why the  appellant
   could  properly  be  removed  to  Lebanon  dated  23  February  2012  was
   accompanied by removal directions to the 'Palestinian Authority' dated 27
   February 2012.  Ms Ong accepted that the respondent had  never  purported
   to set removal directions under s.10 or any other provision in which  the
   appellant would be returned to the Lebanon.

5. The removal directions were the subject of an appeal  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.  The first immigration judge's determination  was  successfully
   appealed.  It was set aside, and the appeal was heard afresh in the First-
   tier Tribunal  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andonian.   That  is  the
   decision against which the present appeal lies.

6. At the hearing, when her attention was drawn to  the  difference  between
   the removal directions and the refusal letter, Ms Ong asked for  a  short
   adjournment to enable her to take instructions, and then  indicated  that
   the Secretary of State would withdraw the removal directions.

7. That decision operates as a withdrawal of the Secretary of  State's  case
   before the Upper Tribunal and the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant to  rules
   17 of  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,
   respectively.

8. On behalf of the Upper Tribunal, and in my capacity as  a  judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal, I consent to those withdrawals.  There is  therefore
   no longer an outstanding appeal before either Tribunal.

Date:                           Signed
                                            Judith Gleeson
                                            Judge of the Upper Tribunal
