

                                    [pic]
S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02933/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 14 October 2015                   |On 21 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                     K B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Grigg, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, now aged 17. I  have  made
       an anonymity direction to protect his identity as  a  minor.  He  has
       appealed with the permission of the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
       decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal C. Chapman,  promulgated
       on 18 May 2015, dismissing his  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
       respondent to refuse him asylum status.  The  appellant  was  granted
       discretionary leave and this is an appeal brought under section 83 of
       the 2002 Act.

    2. The appellant arrived in the UK clandestinely on  20  September  2013
       and claimed asylum the following day. He had travelled through  Iran,
       Turkey and Bulgaria, where he was fingerprinted, for making  his  way
       the UK. He gave an account of  coming  from  Maidan  Wardak  province
       where he lived with his  parents  and  siblings.  His  father  was  a
       mechanic. Three years previously his father was seriously injured  in
       a car accident. The appellant  went  to  work  for  a  person  called
       Mustapha as a mechanic  in  his  shop.  Four  months  later  Mustapha
       received a letter from the Taliban instructing him to stop  repairing
       police vehicles. Mustapha ignored the letter and carried on  working.
       A second warning was sent. Mustapha closed his shop  but  helped  the
       appellant to open his own shop. Two months after the appellant opened
       his own shop he was asked by two people to fix a  generator.  He  was
       taken to a house in the  village  of  Malakhail,  where  the  Taliban
       resided. He fixed the generator but was not paid. Two days later  the
       same two men returned and asked him  to  repair  a  motorcycle.  They
       continued to come to his shop every two or three days asking  him  to
       repair things but they never paid him.  The  appellant  informed  the
       police and the two men were captured. Another escaped. The  appellant
       returned home and told his mother who took him to his maternal aunt's
       house, where he remained for a week. During  that  time  the  Taliban
       came to his house. The appellant's maternal uncle  arranged  for  the
       appellant and the family to move to Kabul. The appellant worked in  a
       hotel kitchen. One day he heard someone  shouting  his  name  and  he
       recognised the man as the one who had escaped from  the  police.  The
       appellant escaped from the back door of the hotel and  ran  home.  He
       informed his mother about the incident  and  moved  to  his  mother's
       friend's house. A week later his mother and maternal  uncle  arranged
       for him to leave Afghanistan. He believes that, were he to return  to
       Afghanistan, the Taliban would kill him because he reported them  and
       two of their members were captured.

    3. The respondent  accepted  the  appellant  was  Afghan.  However,  his
       account was disbelieved and his claim to be at risk from the  Taliban
       was rejected as a fabrication. The  appellant  appealed,  maintaining
       that his account was true and he was entitled to refugee status.

    4. The appeal was heard by Judge Chapman on 7 May 2015 in Birmingham. He
       heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  took  into  account
       background evidence, including an  expert  report  prepared  for  the
       appeal by Mr Tim  Foxley  MBE,  dated  10  April  2015.  The  judge's
       findings begin at [45]. He found there were a number  of  significant
       inconsistencies in the accounts given by the appellant which led  him
       to the conclusion that his evidence was not credible. He went  on  to
       give examples of these in the ensuing paragraphs. He also set out the
       matters he did not find credible. He found the appellant has a family
       to assist and support him on return and did not find he was  at  risk
       of persecution either from the Taliban or  on  account  of  being  an
       unaccompanied minor. He found it more likely than not that, given the
       difficult  circumstances  in  which  his  family   found   themselves
       following his father's accident and consequent disability, that  they
       had invested in the appellant coming to the UK for economic reasons.

    5. Grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal  were  prepared  by  Mr  Mark
       Bradshaw of counsel, who had represented the appellant at the hearing
       in the First-tier Tribunal. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal. The respondent filed a rule 24 response  arguing
       was no error in the decision.

    6. I heard submissions on whether the judge made  a  material  error  of
       law. Mr Grigg raised a possible difficulty at the  beginning  of  the
       hearing. One of the grounds prepared  by  Mr  Bradshaw  concerned  an
       allegation that the judge had failed to  record  and  therefore  take
       note of aspects of the appellant's oral  evidence.  Mr  Bradshaw  had
       provided copies of some notes which he took  during  the  hearing  to
       support this contention. Mr Grigg was  concerned  that  it  might  be
       necessary for Mr Bradshaw to give oral evidence on the  point  or  at
       the very least to prepare a witness statement. However, he did not go
       so far as to request an adjournment and Mr Tarlow did not  raise  any
       objection to me having regard to Mr Bradshaw's written notes. In  any
       event, there had been sufficient time  for  Mr  Bradshaw  to  make  a
       statement if it was intended he should do so and it was apparent from
       the written application to adjourn the hearing so  that  Mr  Bradshaw
       could represent the appellant in  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing  that
       there had never been any intention for  him  to  give  evidence.  The
       hearing proceeded.

    7. Mr Grigg's submissions closely  followed  the  10  points  raised  in
       paragraph 2 of the grounds, numbered (a) to (j).  I  shall  therefore
       deal with each one in turn. However, before I do so, I remind  myself
       that, when analysing a decision which  contains  adverse  credibility
       findings which are the subject  of  challenge,  it  is  important  to
       remember that the judge saw and heard evidence  from  the  appellant,
       which I have not, and the judge is only required to  give  sufficient
       reasons properly to explain his decision, which in this case  was  to
       find that the appellant not credible. Whilst the judge's reasons have
       to demonstrate  a  correct  understanding  and  appreciation  of  the
       totality of the evidence[1],  it  is  not  necessary  for  judges  to
       "record, analyse, rehearse  and  repeat  entire  interstices  of  the
       evidence"[2] in order to give adequate reasons. As will be  seen,  my
       overall conclusion in this case is that, despite Mr Grigg's  eloquent
       and measured submissions to the contrary, whilst some of the  judge's
       reasons are stronger than others,  having  heard  the  appellant  and
       looked at the evidence in the round, which he  plainly  did,  he  was
       entitled  to  come  to  the  conclusion  he  reached  regarding   the
       appellant's credibility.

    8. I should also  say  by  way  of  preamble  that  Mr  Grigg  correctly
       identified the young age and vulnerability of the appellant  when  he
       arrived and was interviewed (aged 14) and at the hearing  (aged  17).
       This point arises in relation to some of  the  numbered  grounds.  In
       some cases involving minors great caution has to be exercised  before
       drawing inferences from omissions or  discrepancies  in  the  SEF  or
       interview[3]. However, the judge in this case was evidently aware  of
       the appellant's age at the time of the hearing as this appears in his
       first paragraph. That the appellant arrived as an unaccompanied minor
       is mentioned in his second paragraph. Moreover,  at  [41]  the  judge
       stated he had taken into account that the appellant was  14  when  he
       arrived here and he stated he had made due allowance for his  age  at
       the time of the events in question.

    9. Finally, Mr Grigg argued the judge's finding at [47] that the  reason
       for the appellant being given his date of birth in English  was  that
       it was the intention of his family from the outset for him  to  claim
       asylum in the UK, was not based on any evidence. I was not shown  any
       place in the appellant's accounts that he stated in  terms  that  his
       mother gave him his date of birth in the English  language.  However,
       the appellant did say at [5] of his witness statement of  3  December
       2013, that his mother wrote  his  date  of  birth  converted  to  the
       Gregorian calendar on a separate piece of paper. She  told  him  this
       was what his date of birth was and he should show  it  to  people  if
       they asked. In my judgment, it is  safe  to  conclude  that  that  is
       plainly what the judge had in mind when  referring  to  the  date  of
       birth "in English" and he was entitled to take the view of it that he
       did.

   10. I now turn to the numbered submissions:

           (a)    The first point is  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  a
           holistic approach to  the  evidence  and,  specifically,  having
           rightly distinguished plausibility from credibility,  failed  to
           take the expert's opinions into account. It is important to note
           that the judge set  out  the  key  opinions  of  the  expert  in
           considerable detail at [18-21]. He then stated at [42]  that  he
           had taken into account the expert report and  that  he  regarded
           him as a reliable source of evidence on Afghanistan. At [43]  he
           noted Mr Foxley's view that the account given by  the  appellant
           was plausible but rightly reminded himself that the question  of
           credibility was for him to  decide  to  the  lower  standard  of
           proof. It is correct to say that there is no further mention  of
           the expert's opinions in  the  judge's  analysis  and  findings,
           apart from when used against  the  appellant  (see  (h)  below).
           However, I do not accept this means the judge "simply sidelined"
           the expert's opinion. By setting out the various aspects of  the
           account  which  Mr  Foxley,  drawing   on   his   knowledge   of
           Afghanistan, confirmed were plausible, the judge showed that  he
           had not made the error of judging matters out of context and  by
           reference to a "Westernised" viewpoint. He was required to  give
           a valid reason for not giving  weight  to  the  opinions  of  Mr
           Foxley[4] but that is what he  did  by  explaining  the  limited
           evidential value of an  opinion  on  plausibility.  He  was  not
           required to refer to it in respect of each and every finding  he
           made. I do  not  accept  the  judge's  approach  to  the  expert
           evidence showed he had failed to weigh up all  the  evidence  in
           the round.

           (b)    At [45] the judge gives as a reason for disbelieving  the
           appellant's account his  perception  that  there  was  a  marked
           variation between the ability of the appellant to give  detailed
           evidence  concerning  his  contact  with  the  Taliban  and  his
           problems in Afghanistan and his ability to describe such matters
           as his family, childhood, schooling and his  father's  accident.
           The judge gives two specific examples: the appellant was  unable
           to recall where he went to  fix  the  generator,  yet  otherwise
           demonstrated a good knowledge of local geography, and  he  could
           not recall where his uncle's restaurant was  located  in  Kabul,
           although he was travelling there by bus/taxi every day.

           Mr Grigg argued the first example was based on a mistake by  the
           judge because the appellant had said the place where he went  to
           fix the generator was Malakhail. It is this reference which  was
           omitted  from  the  judge's  notes  of  evidence.  However,   Mr
           Bradshaw's verbatim note has the appellant saying,  "every  time
           it was Malakhail or somewhere near", which could  reasonably  be
           adjudged to be vague. Mr Grigg said the appellant's age  was  an
           important consideration in this context but this applies equally
           to  all  the  appellant's  evidence.  There  is  no  reason  the
           appellant's young age should render parts of his  evidence  more
           vague than others, which was the disparity noted by the judge. I
           reiterate what I said above: the judge heard the appellant  give
           evidence and I would be slow to intervene on  the  basis  of  an
           analysis of the language used by him in giving reasons  for  his
           impressions.

           (c)    On the point about the location of the  hotel,  Mr  Grigg
           argued it was not reasonable to use this as a credibility  point
           against the appellant given his young age at the  time  and  the
           judge also failed to note the appellant's explanation  given  in
           his witness  statement  dated  27  April  2015  at  [15].   This
           statement responded to the reasons for refusal, where  the  same
           point had been  made  regarding  the  appellant's  account.  The
           appellant said he was new to Kabul and did not know the names of
           the roads. Firstly, I would say  that  there  is  no  basis  for
           suggesting the judge was unaware of the contents  of  either  of
           the appellant's witness statements. The  judge  noted  that  the
           appellant adopted them in evidence-in-chief  at  [25].  He  also
           gave a broad assurance that he had taken all the  evidence  into
           account at [39]. Secondly, regarding whether it was a legitimate
           point to take against a 14-year old boy new to Kabul that he did
           not know precisely where  the  hotel  in  which  he  worked  was
           located, I note the appellant said he took a taxi to work and  I
           struggle to understand how he would be able  to  do  so  without
           being able to tell the driver where he needed to go. In [46] the
           judge noted further difficulties with the appellant's account of
           the hotel. I do not accept the judge fell into error.

           (d)    Mr Grigg likened the judge's finding in [46] that it  was
           not credible the whole family moved very quickly to Kabul  to  a
           mistake and Mr Bradshaw's grounds describe it  as  "irrational".
           Mr Grigg made the reasonable point that, if the  move  had  been
           caused by fear, it was likely to have been made rapidly even  if
           the appellant's father were in a wheelchair.  The  grounds  make
           the equally reasonable point that the appellant's  evidence  was
           that it was accomplished in three to four days, which is not  an
           unreasonable timeframe. I agree this is not a strong  point  for
           the judge to have taken as it does not appear  to  be  evidence-
           based and might easily be deemed to  be  a  case  of  the  judge
           applying a yardstick as to  what  is  inherently  credible,  the
           dangers of which are well-known[5]. However, that is not a  fair
           assessment of the paragraph as a whole and  the  error  on  this
           single point does not necessarily bring down the entire  edifice
           of his reasoning. The judge identified a material  inconsistency
           in the appellant's accounts as to whether the entire family left
           together or the appellant had been sent alone to Kabul to  work.
           He also noted a less important inconsistency  regarding  whether
           the hotel was 20 minutes' walk or taxi-ride from  where  he  was
           living in Kabul.

           (e)    This ground argues it was unreasonable for the  judge  to
           give weight to the appellant not knowing the name of  the  hotel
           at which he said he worked. Mr Grigg did not say much about this
           ground other than to point out the appellant had never said  the
           words "unknown  establishment".  I  agree  it  would  have  been
           surprising if he had but the judge's use of the phrase  in  [46]
           was clearly not intended as a record of what the  appellant  had
           said. The judge  was  simply  contrasting  this  aspect  of  the
           appellant's account with the more forthcoming account  given  at
           his age assessment.  He was entitled to draw an  inference  from
           this. Again, it has not been shown the judge did not have regard
           to the appellant's explanations in [15] of  the  second  witness
           statement. In [47] the judge sheds more light  on  his  thinking
           because he came to the conclusion the appellant was reluctant to
           disclose details of his uncle's hotel because it was not in  his
           interests for the family tracing exercise to succeed.

           (f)    This ground challenges the judge's finding in  [47]  that
           the appellant had the means of contacting his family if  he  had
           wanted to as irrational and finds fault with the judge's  record
           of the evidence. Mr Grigg's submissions were more  measured  and
           pointed out that the appellant's comment that the agent may have
           had the means of contacting his family was simply a  possibility
           and not an admission  that  there  had  been  contact.  He  also
           suggested the judge had overlooked the  witness  statements  and
           oral evidence regarding the absence of contact.  He  highlighted
           the use by the judge of the phrase "invested in his  relocation"
           as inappropriate. Again, this ground fails  to  stand  back  and
           take an overall view of what the judge is  saying  in  [47].  He
           links the slight discrepancy in the appellant's accounts  as  to
           the possibility  of  making  contact  with  his  family  to  the
           vagueness regarding the name and location of his  uncle's  hotel
           in Kabul and the matter of the appellant  knowing  his  date  of
           birth in the Gregorian calendar. He did not treat these  matters
           in  isolation.  He  concluded  there  had  been  a   degree   of
           contrivance in the appellant's denials  regarding  contact  with
           his family because it was the intention of  his  family  and  of
           himself to achieve status in the UK. That was not an  assessment
           which all Tribunals would have made on the evidence but that  is
           not to say it was outside the range of permissible  conclusions.
           It plainly was not.

           (g)    Still on [47], this ground  argues  the  judge  erred  in
           placing weight on the appellant's statement in cross-examination
           that his uncle and aunt remained in the village as showing  that
           family members could be  contacted  because  it  overlooked  the
           appellant's answer in re-examination that  his  family  did  not
           have much to do with this aunt and uncle. Mr Grigg did not  take
           this any further and he was right not to do so. It was  open  to
           the judge to draw the inference that the  uncle  and  aunt  were
           contactable notwithstanding the clarification given.

           (h)    This is the point  about  the  judge  at  [50]  using  Mr
           Foxley's evidence (and other  sources  of  background  evidence)
           about the Taliban's thirst  for  retribution  as  a  ground  for
           disbelieving the appellant's account of the Taliban's apparently
           lax approach towards finding him and his family after the police
           had arrested two of their members following information received
           from the appellant. The judge's  statement  that  "there  is  no
           evidence" of the Taliban pursuing them  is  unfortunate  because
           the absence of evidence is not  evidence  of  anything,  as  the
           grounds and Mr Grigg correctly pointed  out.  However,  this  is
           another example of misconstruing by  reference  to  one  or  two
           sentences the overall clear meaning of  the  judge.   The  point
           being made by the judge was not that the appellant had failed to
           support his account of the Taliban  not  widening  their  search
           with evidence but that the fact they  did  not  appear  to  have
           detained the appellant when they could have done so quite easily
           was inconsistent with what is generally known of  the  Taliban's
           methods.

           (i)    This ground argues the judge ignored  important  evidence
           in [51] in taking the  point  against  the  appellant  that  the
           Taliban's failure to capture him when they had opportunities  to
           do so in Kabul lacked credibility.  Mr Grigg drew  my  attention
           to [19] in the appellant's first witness statement in which  the
           appellant had explained he was able to escape from the encounter
           at the hotel by running out the back door. However, he  did  not
           add to the submission. I refer to what I have said already about
           the judge being taken to have read all the evidence. The general
           level of detail provided in the decision as a whole  makes  this
           clear and there is nothing to  be  achieved  by  highlighting  a
           failure to refer to one small part of it.

           (j)    The final ground is also a challenge that  the  judge  at
           [51] failed to take into account a material consideration and it
           is founded  on  the  judge  not  referring  to  the  appellant's
           explanation in [20] of his first witness statement regarding the
           Taliban coming to the  house  in  Kabul.  The  ground  fails  to
           recognize that the judge was making a broader  point  about  the
           Taliban not making much effort to pursue the appellant, who  had
           informed on them and who might therefore have been  expected  to
           become their target for retribution. Whether or  not  the  judge
           had in the forefront of his mind the precise chronology  as  set
           out in [20] of the witness statement, his overall  point  was  a
           matter he was entitled to give weight to.

   11. The judge made clear, reasoned findings.  Some  of  his  reasons  are
       stronger than others. Disregarding the weaker ones does  not  fatally
       undermine the decision as a whole. It is a  decision  the  judge  was
       entitled to come to on the  evidence,  even  though  other  Tribunals
       might legitimately have come to a different conclusion.  The  judge's
       decision was not irrational  or  perverse.  It  is  not  vitiated  by
       material error of law.

   12. I dismiss the appeal and uphold the First-tier Tribunal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

       The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error of
       law and his decision dismissing the appeal on asylum and humanitarian
       protection grounds shall stand.

       Anonymity

       The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005. However, I have made an order.

       Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

       Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant
       is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall  directly
       or indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
       direction applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
       Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
       proceedings.




                               Signed   Date 15 October 2015


                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
-----------------------
[1] Pill LJ in Malaba v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 820.
[2] VHR (unmeritorious grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367 (IAC).
[3] GM (risk - failed asylum seekers) Democratic Republic of Congo [2002]
UKIAT 06741.
[4] Brooke LJ in Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] All ER 449, at p.472.
[5] Chadwick LJ in HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.

