
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02265/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 November 2015                  |On 16 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME   |Appellant        |
|DEPARTMENT                            |                 |

                                     and

                                     MC
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    None.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Whilst the Secretary of State is the appellant in these proceedings  in
    the Upper Tribunal, I  retain  the  descriptions  of  the  parties,  as
    appellant and respondent, as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction and I maintain this
    given  my  references  to   the   appellant's   health   and   personal
    circumstances.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe. She appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the respondent to  refuse  her  asylum
    and human rights claims. Her appeal against  the  decision  in  January
    2015 to refuse  her  asylum  claim  was  dismissed  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and is not the subject of this appeal before me.

 4. The respondent averred that the First-tier Tribunal Judge T E Richards-
    Clarke ("the FTTJ") made a material error of law in allowing the appeal
    "on the basis that the  decision  under  appeal  is  not  otherwise  in
    accordance with the law and is  remitted  to  the  Respondent  to  make
    lawful decisions in relation to the Article 8 and  discretionary  leave
    applications made by the Appellant in 2009/2010".

 5. The respondent's representative submitted that the FTTJ had  failed  to
    take into account (admittedly for lack of evidence) that the respondent
    had made a decision on  the  appellant's  substantive  application  and
    requests for reconsideration  of  her  claim  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules. The respondent's representative also noted that there  had  been
    no application for discretionary leave by the appellant. Thus there had
    been no outstanding application in that regard.

 6. However,  at  the  error  of  law  hearing  on  13  October  2015,  the
    respondent's representative conceded that the FTTJ had erred materially
    in law in failing to identify that the respondent  had  considered  the
    application  in  the  light  of  the  former   version   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi). This error was  irrespective  of  the  FTTJ's  erroneous
    decision to allow the appeal on the ground that there  was  an  earlier
    outstanding application. For this reason I found there was  a  material
    error of law in the FTTJ's decision. I  set  it  aside  preserving  the
    findings of fact of the FTTJ for a fresh  decision  to  be  made  under
    paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).   Because  the   appellant   had   no   legal
    representation at the hearing before me on  13  October  2015,  further
    evidence would be required on the issue and because the  appellant  was
    suffering, at the hearing before me, from an eye condition which  might
    impact on her ability to give evidence  fully  and  comprehensively,  I
    directed that the matter should be decided at a resumed hearing.   Thus
    it comes before me now.

Submissions

 7. Mr Nath, for the respondent,  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  not
    demonstrated that she fulfilled the criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)
    of the Immigration Rules insofar as her  private  life  was  concerned.
    There were no obstacles to her return.

 8. I summarised the appellant's case and she confirmed it was an  accurate
    summary. She also told me she would be unable to subsist in Zimbabwe on
    return; she had no familiarity as an adult with the Zimbabwean  way  of
    life and would miss her family in the UK, namely her aunt and uncle.

The preserved facts and my findings

 9. Insofar as the human rights claim is concerned, the FTTJ's findings are
    as follows. The appellant's immigration history is set out in paragraph
    2 of the decision (and the appellant confirmed to me that this  was  an
    accurate record save that she had been granted further leave to  remain
    as a student in 2010 until 27 September 2010, the date of expiry of her
    last leave to remain):

         "On 26 December 2001 the Appellant left Zimbabwe and arrived in the
         UK with a visit visa valid for 6 months. The appellant was  granted
         further leave to remain on 15 April 2002 as a visitor until 15 July
         2002. She was granted a variation of lave  [sic]  on  16  September
         2002 as a student until 30 March 2003. She was  granted  subsequent
         leave as a visitor from 9 April 2003 and then again  from  26  July
         2003 to 31 November 2005 [sic].  She was then granted  a  variation
         of leave on 29 November 025 [sic] and subsequent  extensions  as  a
         student until 31 August 2009".

10. According to the record of asylum interview, the appellant applied  for
    discretionary leave to remain in August 2010 but this was refused.  The
    appellant claimed asylum on 5 March 2014 at the suggestion of the  Home
    Office (again, according to her interview record). Her asylum claim was
    refused and her appeal against the refusal was unsuccessful and is  not
    challenged before me.

11. The FTTJ notes an earlier finding in the determination  of  Immigration
    Judge Phull promulgated in December 2009 to the effect that  "Appellant
    had entered the United Kingdom in 2001 and lived with her maternal Aunt
    and Uncle. To all extent and purposes they are her legal guardians  and
    responsible for her welfare. Judge Phull  also  found  the  Appellant's
    Uncle "to be a credible witness giving his evidence  in  a  candid  and
    frank manner"."

12. There is no challenge to the credibility of  the  appellant's  evidence
    and I find it reliable.

13. The appellant is now 31 years old. She arrived in the UK as  a  visitor
    when she was 17 years old and has therefore lived here  for  14  years.
    She lived then and continues to live with her aunt and uncle, whom  she
    has always called "mum and dad". They were her guardians whilst she was
    a minor in this country. As the appellant says, she started  her  adult
    life in the UK.  Having initially entered  the  UK  as  a  visitor  she
    eventually studied here, obtaining various higher  qualifications.  She
    has also worked here and  has  had  personal  relationships  here.  She
    speaks English at home.

14. The appellant says she is unable to hold a full conversation  in  Shona
    and that, as a result, she  has  been  ridiculed  by  some  Zimbabweans
    resident in the UK because she is not able to converse with them.   She
    has not been back to Zimbabwe since here arrival here but considers her
    lack of Shona language skills would hamper her on return.

15. Sofar as her background in Zimbabwe is  concerned,  the  appellant  was
    raised by her grandparents from the age of five.  She attended  primary
    school whilst in their care and she had a happy childhood. They are now
    both deceased. They were the biggest influence  on  her  when  she  was
    growing up.  The  appellant's  aunt  and  uncle  used  to  support  her
    grandparents in Zimbabwe and they supported the  appellant  also.   The
    appellant's bond with her aunt and uncle has always been  strong.   The
    appellant was sent to boarding school when she was 13 for  four  years.
    She spent school holidays at her  grandfather's  home.   The  appellant
    does not know why her biological parents did not look after her.

16.  The  appellant  is  a  qualified  dental  nurse,  a  qualified  dental
    radiographer and qualified oral health educator, with nearly ten  years
    experience working for the NHS.  She was  a  head  nurse.  Due  to  her
    immigration status she has been unable to work but has kept up to  date
    on current UK dental regulations by attending dental shows and  reading
    articles online.

17. The appellant has no criminal convictions.  She is a valuable member of
    her local community and volunteers for her local church  and  with  the
    British Red Cross refugee services. She is trained  in  first  aid  and
    emergency response.

18. The appellant told me that her biological parents live in Zimbabwe  but
    she has no contact with them. She also has a sister and brother  living
    there but, again, has no contact with them  either.  She  has  a  step-
    sister living in South Africa.  Her  aunt  had  had  contact  with  her
    biological parents over the telephone and that  her  own  last  contact
    with them was about 5 or 6 years previously.  It had been several years
    since she had had telephone contact with anyone in Zimbabwe.  She  told
    me she had extended family in Zimbabwe but has no contact with them  or
    with anyone there.

19. The appellant's evidence is that she would find it difficult to  obtain
    work in Zimbabwe, even as a qualified dental  nurse  and  radiographer.
    She told me she had looked into the possibility of employment but  that
    "dentistry in Zimbabwe is not a big thing": people do  not  go  to  the
    dentist regularly as they do in this country. She said she  had  looked
    for jobs online and not found any. She was asked if she could  get  any
    work in Zimbabwe and said that the unemployment rate was very high  and
    that she did not know what other jobs were  available.  She  considered
    she would be a vulnerable person on return as a single woman without  a
    support network and unable to support herself.

Discussion

20. The burden of proof is on the appellant to demonstrate she fulfils  the
    criteria in the Immigration Rules insofar as her human rights claim  is
    concerned. The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities.

21. There is no suggestion that  the  appellant  fulfils  the  criteria  in
    Appendix FM as a result of her relationship with her aunt and uncle and
    I find that she does not, given her age and circumstances. She has been
    financially independent of her aunt and uncle in  the  past,  for  many
    years, whilst working for the NHS.

22. Paragraph 276ADE(1) provides the requirements to be met by an applicant
    for leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK. The  sub-
    paragraph of relevance to the  appellant  is  (vi)  which  provides  as
    follows:

         "(vi) ... is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in  the
         UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)
         but there would be very significant obstacles  to  the  applicant's
         integration into with the country to which he would have to  go  if
         required to leave the UK."

23. The appellant left Zimbabwe at the age of 17 to come to  the  UK  as  a
    visitor. She remained here as such and later was granted leave to study
    here. She has obtained various qualifications as a result.

24. The appellant has shown herself to be diligent  and  hard-working.  She
    has achieved much during her time in the UK and this is to her  credit.
    She is a useful member of her community. She has  had  a  career  as  a
    dental  nurse  in  this  country  and  has   worked   as   such.    Her
    resourcefulness suggests that she would be able to  live  independently
    on return to Zimbabwe albeit she would find  the  transition  difficult
    initially due to her absence from that country.  She is currently being
    supported by her aunt and uncle in their home and there is no  evidence
    to suggest they could not  provide  her  with  some  initial  financial
    support to enable  her  to  set  herself  up  on  return.  I  note  the
    appellant's aunt has not been well and is now retired and her uncle  is
    about to retire. However, given that the appellant is  currently  being
    supported by her aunt and uncle, these matters would not  preclude  the
    continuation of such support for a short period after  the  appellant's
    return to Zimbabwe.

25. The appellant undoubtedly has a close relationship with  her  aunt  and
    uncle and their children and I take this into  account.   However,  she
    has been financially independent of her aunt and uncle for a number  of
    years, whilst working for the NHS, and could be so again albeit in  her
    country of origin.

26. I also take into account the appellant would be returning as  a  single
    lone woman. However, she has several professional qualifications and  I
    find that she would in due course be able to  find  some  work  and  to
    support herself on return. I appreciate that work as a dental nurse may
    not be readily available in Zimbabwe but she could take lesser work  in
    the  interim  until  she  found  work   which   was   more   fulfilling
    professionally. I have no doubt that her qualifications and  experience
    in the UK would stand her in good stead in  the  Zimbabwean  employment
    market notwithstanding the high levels of unemployment in that country.
     Such employment, in either capacity, would enable her  to  accommodate
    and maintain herself.

27. The appellant is a Zimbabwean citizen and spent her formative years  in
    Zimbabwe where she was  educated.   She  is  familiar  with  Zimbabwean
    customs and society, albeit her linguistic ability has  waned  somewhat
    since she left.  Given her evident intellectual  ability  and  personal
    drive, I find that she would be able  to  recover  her  Shona  language
    ability in due course. I do not  see  her  inability  to  hold  a  full
    conversation in Shona as a significant obstacle  to  her  reintegration
    into Zimbabwean society. Furthermore, the fact that  the  appellant  is
    involved in the Zimbabwean diaspora in the UK  suggests  that  she  has
    retained her links with Zimbabwean culture and society whilst  in  this
    country and that this would assist her with integrating on return.

28. The appellant claims that women are at risk of  violence  in  Zimbabwe.
    She relies on the current Country of Information Report.  However,  the
    law criminalises violence against women in Zimbabwe and  protection  is
    therefore  available  for  her  in  that  regard.  In  any  event,  her
    protection claim has been dismissed on appeal.

29. For these  reasons,  I  am  unable  to  find  that  the  appellant  has
    demonstrated that she fulfils the criteria in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    insofar as her private life is concerned.

30. I have also considered whether an Article  8  assessment  is  required,
    outside the Rules.  I bear in mind the principles in SS (Congo) and Ors
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Sunassee [2015] EWHC 1604. I consider that  the
    evidence has been considered adequately  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    insofar as the appellant's personal circumstances  are  concerned:  her
    circumstances are not compelling  such  as  to  justify  an  assessment
    outside the Rules.

31. The decision of the FTTJ having been set aside, I remake it  dismissing
    the appeal on the  ground  that  the  appellant  does  not  fulfil  the
    criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules  or  on  human
    rights grounds.

Decision

32. The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on human rights
    grounds.


Signed   Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

