
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02106/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 23 January 2015                            |On 5 March 2015               |
|Prepared 23 January 2015                      |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                    A M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Solicitor, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Zimbabwe, date of birth 22  October  1988,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision to make  removal  directions
    under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.   The  appeal
    against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Archer (the
    judge)  who,  on  19  May,  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and Articles 2 and 3 of the  ECHR  but  allowed  the  appeal
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   The Appellant appealed against the refusal with reference  to  Articles
    2 and 3 of  the  ECHR  and  the  Refugee  Convention.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 19 September  2014  I  found  that  the  judge  had,  in
    considering the Refugee Convention claim and Article 3 claim, failed to
    address the claim of risk of the Appellant  as  part  of  a  particular
    social group namely lone young woman who had resided  outside  Zimbabwe
    for a significant period of time.

3.   In the same decision I incorrectly  suggested  that  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 ECHR grounds had been dismissed: This was an error on my part
    and, as I have indicated, the effect of  the  Article  8  decision  not
    being the subject of an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  so  that
    decision stands. I have read the Appellant's  bundles  with  particular
    care  on  the  protection  (case  law  and   background   evidence   AB
    consolidated pp363-521- 888) and health issues (AB consolidated pp 204-
    362).

4.   The appeal was  therefore  relisted  to  remake  the  decision  on  the
    Refugee Convention and Article 3 of the ECHR  grounds  and  the  matter
    came for hearing on 23 January 2015 on those discrete issues.

5.   The Secretary of State has previously concluded and published,  in  the
    country information and guidance on Zimbabwe, dated  14  October  2014,
    the view that women in Zimbabwe constitute a  particular  social  group
    (PSG) within the meaning of the 1951 UN Refugee Convention because they
    share a common characteristic that cannot be changed - their  gender  -
    and based on an assessment of the  country  information,  they  have  a
    distinct identity in Zimbabwe which is perceived as being different  by
    the surrounding society.  (Paragraph 1.3.2)  The COIS report  continued
    at paragraph 1.3.3

         "Although women in Zimbabwe form a PSG, this  does  not  mean  that
         establishing such membership will be sufficient to make out a  case
         to be recognised as a refugee.  The question  to  be  addressed  in
         each case will be whether the particular person will  face  a  real
         risk of persecution on  account  of  their  membership  of  such  a
         group."

6.   In  relation  to  the  issue  of  effective  protection,  the  COIS  at
    paragraph 1.3.7 states

         "Despite the  existence  of  the  legal  framework  for  addressing
         violence against women, the poor understanding  and  implementation
         of  legal   provisions,   scarcity   of   police   resources,   the
         unwillingness of the police to act on reports of rape and  domestic
         violence, the seriousness lack of shelter for victims  of  domestic
         violence and the lack of legal aid, together with the  government's
         very limited efforts to tackle trafficking and harmful  traditional
         practices, suggest that many women fearing gender based persecution
         will not be able to obtain effective state protection."

7.   In respect of internal relocation  as  a  consideration,  the  COIS  at
    paragraph 1.3.9 states:

         "A  person  may  be  able  to  escape  persecution  by  potentially
         relocating elsewhere in Zimbabwe where the risk is  not  present  -
         for example from a rural to an urban area.   Decision  makers  must
         however note that women, especially single women  with  no  support
         network, are likely to  be  vulnerable  and  may  be  subjected  to
         destitution.


         The relevance and reasonableness of  internal  relocation  must  be
         assessed on a case  by  case  basis  taking  full  account  of  the
         individual circumstances  of  the  particular  claimant,  including
         their  age,  gander,   health,   ethnicity,   religion,   financial
         circumstances and support networks, as well as the security,  human
         rights and socio  economic  conditions  in  the  proposed  area  of
         relocation, including their ability to sustain themselves."


8.   In Mr Howard's supplementary skeleton argument he identified the  risks
    that are faced by a lone woman and he agreed with my references to  the
    Appellant's bundle in terms of articles relating  to  violence  against
    women and domestic protection.

9.   I do not need to set those  out  because  they  are  at  one  with  the
    Country of Origin Information Report (July 2012 which with the relevant
    Operational Guidance Note (2013),  Home  Office  guidance  (14  October
    2014) and US DoS 2013 Country Report is the most up-to-date material.

10.  The additional skeleton argument identified  various  persons  who  had
    made statements which are contained within the Appellant's consolidated
    bundle  and they essentially speak well of the  Appellant  but  do  not
    particularly bear on the issue of risk associated with being part of  a
    PSG.

11.  The Appellant was referred to by Mr Howard as a lone  young  woman.   I
    express no settled view on the description 'young' but I note that  the
    Appellant is currently some 26 years of age.

12.  Matters relied upon as sustaining the vulnerability  of  the  Appellant
    are: first, she was only 12( possibly 13) years of age when she came to
    the United Kingdom; Secondly, she has lived about half her life in  the
    United Kingdom: Thirdly, she was school educated here and has  been  to
    university here; Fourthly, she has a lack of knowledge of matters  from
    Zimbabwe; Fifthly, she does not have anywhere to stay or with anyone on
    a return to Zimbabwe;  Sixthly,  and  that  her  health  is  not  good,
    suffering from various medical conditions (particularly ovarian  cysts,
    polycystic ovaries and some Kidney problems). I note the Appellant does
    not rely upon any intended political activities she wishes to pursue or
    would but for the regime in Zimbabwe.

13.  It is not, I note, stated that she could not obtain  medical  treatment
    in Zimbabwe and the argument is not being advanced  with  reference  to
    her health circumstances being such as to engage Article 3  (or  8)  of
    the ECHR. I have no up to date  medical  report  or  prognosis  of  the
    impact of return on her health

14.  The Appellant has experience of life in Harare. Her home  area  was  at
    one time apparently Norton, a settlement some twenty miles from  Harare
    and there are other family connections with Belvedere which is a suburb
    of Harare.

15.  This is not a case of the Appellant having to leave Harare and to  move
    to some rural location.

16.  Similarly, as a fact the Appellant is educated, intelligent,  has  work
    abilities currently in the hotel/restaurant trade in management and has
    in the course of her life had a  significant  period  of  time  in  the
    United Kingdom.

17.  I have carefully considered the arguments as to who poses a  real  risk
    to the Appellant on her return.  It is  not  said  that  the  Appellant
    could not communicate with people in Zimbabwe on a return.   Rather  it
    is said that the Appellant has no one to return to.

18.  The Appellant says that she has her  paternal  grandmother  and  father
    but her paternal  grandmother  is  terminally  ill  with  cancer.   The
    Appellant therefore says that she cannot rely upon them  as  they  need
    financial help from her parents.  As to her maternal grandparents,  she
    says they are terminally ill being HIV positive. There are  no  medical
    reports to support the claims of ill-health.

19.  To what extent they are terminal is difficult to tell on  the  evidence
    for. The Appellant said that they need financial help  to  be  able  to
    afford the medication and all such finance comes from the family in the
    United Kingdom because her maternal grandparents  are  elderly  and  no
    longer able to work.

20.  It is unclear  why  with  the  help  of  her  parents  family  and  her
    grandparents the Appellant could not at least  at  the  outset  of  the
    return to Zimbabwe be able to find a foothold and the evidence does not
    really address the likelihood of destitution for the Appellant.

21.  At its highest an additional factor which might pose some risk  to  her
    is that her parents may have attended political meetings but  the  lack
    of particulars about those matters really leaves me in doubt about  the
    likelihood of their  activities  giving  rise  to  real  risk  of  ill-
    treatment of the Appellant on return. However the  determination  of  a
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Astle,  dated  3rd  February  2012   makes
    trenchant criticism of the credibility of the Appellant's mother, H  T,
    and father's, M M, claims of political activism in Zimbabwe and the UK.
    Their claims were rejected, found to  be  largely  fabricated  and  the
    claimed sur place activities would  not  be  of  any  interest  to  the
    Zimbabwean authorities and  were  found  to  be  for  the  purposes  of
    bolstering a weak claim.  The  same  judge  also  noted  that  in  2011
    Immigration  judge  Bowen,  in  another   appeal  had  rejected   their
    credibility and claim for protection as fabricated and found  they  had
    come to the UK for economic betterment. I do not  know  why  they  were
    able to obtain DLR in  December  2012  until  December  2014  or  their
    current status in the UK. In these circumstances  I  have  no  reliable
    evidence to show their activities in Zimbabwe or in  the  UK  pose  any
    risk to the Appellant on return.

22.  Accordingly, on the evidence before me I do not find the  Appellant  is
    in a position where she knows nothing of the history of her country  or
    the language or cultural ties.  I do not accept on  the  evidence  that
    the Appellant has grown  up  in  a  western  European  context  without
    knowledge of her home, her relatives, their lives and her family  being
    wider than simply  her  parents  and  other  relatives  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  I  have  considered  the  case  of  CM(EM  country  guidance;
    disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 59 because  the  Appellant  has  no
    political profile, she is not returning to a rural area but  to  Harare
    or Norton or Belvedere, , there is no evidence that she would  need  to
    be in a high density area or that these areas are of  such  other  than
    her say so, she has no well founded fear of persecution based  on  past
    events, she is not in an occupation  with  enhanced  risk  factors  nor
    would she be returning to a social-economic milieu  in  which  problems
    with ZANU-PF are likely to arise

23.  In the circumstances, therefore, I find  that  the  evidence  does  not
    show to that low standard of proof identified  in  Ravichandran  [1996]
    ImmAR 97, Sivakumaran [1998]  ImmAR  147  and  applied  in  Karanakaran
    [2000] EWCA Civ 11 that the Appellant faces  the  real  risk  of  being
    persecuted because of her PSG or actual or imputed political activities
    or opinions.

24.  There is nothing identifiable about this Appellant that gives  rise  to
    the real risk of her attracting adverse attention or giving rise to the
    real risk of destitution, poverty and ill-treatment associated with her
    being exploited as a single woman in her home area or  Harare  She  has
    work  skills   which  are  of  general  application  and  is  evidently
    intelligent .

25.  The case has been  presented  as  if  there  are  simply  no  realistic
    connections left with Zimbabwe but I do not find that that  is  a  fair
    representation of the position.  It seems to me  highly  unlikely  that
    her parents would simply not provide or through  other  family  members
    the necessary support for the Appellant on return.

26.  On the evidence, I do not find the Appellant has discharged the  burden
    of proof to that low standards that she faces the real risk of  torture
    or treatment contrary to the Refugee Convention from  state  agents  or
    non state agents, nor do I find there is the real risk of Article 3 ill-
    treatment.  Similarly I  do  not  find  internal  relocation  would  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh. I accept  there  may  not  be  sufficient
    protection from domestic violence but I do  not  accept  there  is  not
    sufficient protection from general criminality.

27.  The appeal  on  Refugee  Convention  and  Article  3  ECHR  grounds  is
    dismissed.

28.  In the circumstances of the case the anonymity  order  which  was  made
    should be continued.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Deputy           Upper            Tribunal            Judge            Davey
    Dated 2 March 2015



