
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02950/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House   Determination Promulgated
On 11 November 2014    On 19 November 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                         Anton Rajeevkumar Sebamalai
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms.  V.  Laughton  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Tamil
                  Welfare Association.
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                     DECISION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Handley promulgated on 3 July 2014 dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal
      against the decision of the Respondent dated 17 April 2014 (served  on
      23 April 2014) to remove him from the UK following the refusal of  his
      application for asylum.

   2. I am grateful for the helpful and  realistic  approach  taken  by  the
      representatives before me - and in particular  Mr  Duffy  who  readily
      acknowledged that there were difficulties in the written  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal such that he could not reasonably  resist  the
      challenge mounted by the Appellant. In such  circumstances  I  do  not
      propose to  rehearse  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim  or  the
      procedural history of the appeal - all of which are a matter of record
      on file and are known to the parties.

   3. The salient matters are these:

(i) The Appellant was supported in  his  appeal  by  the  testimony  of  his
      brother, Anton Rajkumar Sebamalai, who provided both a written witness
      statement and oral evidence  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge.

(ii) A key aspect of the Appellant's brother's testimony  was  that  he  had
      visited the family home in Sri Lanka  in  early  2014,  and  had  been
      detained overnight in April 2014 by the CID and questioned  concerning
      the whereabouts of the Appellant.

(iii) The First-tier Tribunal Judge recorded the fact of  this  evidence  at
      paragraph 29 of the Determination.

(iv) However, the Judge made no further reference to this evidence,  and  in
      particular made no finding on it.

(v) Notwithstanding that the Judge went on to identify  that  the  Appellant
      did not fit into any of the  risk  categories  identified  in  GJ  and
      Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319,  it
      is to  be  noted  that  this  provides  guidance  only  and  does  not
      inevitably exclude from protection any particular asylum applicant who
      does not fall into any such category if there  are  specific  features
      revealed in the evidence supporting his/her application  that  suggest
      risk - perhaps, as is the Appellant's case here, evidenced  by  recent
      enquiry as to whereabouts.

   4. Mr Duffy accepted that the failure to make any finding in  respect  of
      the witness's evidence was a material omission amounting to  an  error
      of law.

   5. Mr Duffy also indicated that he accepted that there was  substance  to
      the challenge in respect of paragraph 39  of  the  Determination.  The
      Judge's analysis  that  the  Appellant  would  not  likely  have  been
      released from detention on payment of a bribe if he was of significant
      interest to the authorities, ran contrary to the analysis in GJ  -  in
      particular at paragraph 275.

   6. I accept the concessions made by Mr Duffy. In all such circumstances I
      find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  materially  erred  and  I
      conclude that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  must  be  set
      aside.

   7. Both  representatives  acknowledged  that  in  the  circumstances  the
      Appellant had in effect been deprived of a full and fair hearing,  and
      it would be necessary for his appeal to be  reheard  afresh  with  all
      issues at large, with the most appropriate forum being the  First-tier
      Tribunal. I accept this joint position.

   8. Notwithstanding Mr Duffy's concessions, Ms Laughton sought to draw  my
      attention to  the  challenge  to  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
      Appellant's  scars,  and  the  issue  of  self-infliction  (or   self-
      infliction by proxy). The Appellant sought to complain  on  the  basis
      that this matter had never been expressly raised as  an  issue  before
      the  First-tier  Tribunal  (and  to  this  end  a  supporting  witness
      statement was provided from Counsel who had appeared before the First-
      tier Tribunal). In the event - because I am setting aside the decision
      - it is unnecessary for me to engage further with this aspect  of  the
      challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision. Suffice to  say  that
      when the matter comes before the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  it
      will be necessary for the Tribunal and the  parties  to  approach  any
      such issue - if it is indeed a 'live' issue - in a manner that  is  in
      accordance with the law both  procedurally  and  substantively.  That,
      however, is a matter for the Judge rehearing the appeal.

   9. Neither representative considered that any  specific  Directions  were
      required in relisting the appeal, beyond the standard Directions.

Notice of Decision

  10. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  material
      errors of law and is set aside.

  11. The decision in the appeal is to  be  re-made  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, before  any  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Handley.






Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     18 November 2014
