
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02598/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between
                                  NI NI WIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Singh counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C Twydell promulgated on 21 July  2015  which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to remove
    the Appellant  from  the  UK  following  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's claim for asylum.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 5 March 1968 and is a national of Myanmar.

 4. On 6 February 2014 the Appellant came to the UK with  her  father  Than
    Win and her mother Molly Shwe as visitors. On 21 February 2014 the  App
    applied for asylum. The Appellant claimed in essence that  she  was  at
    risk because as a Muslim she was receiving threats from members  of  an
    extremist Buddhist organisation who she claimed networked  actively  in
    Myanmar and were trying to kill her.

 5. On 10 February 2015 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) There was an inconsistency between the Appellant's account  of  her
         employment in Myanmar as the  owner  of  her  own  pre  school  and
         primary teaching centre  in  Yangon  where  the  teaching  included
         Islamic Studies and her father's account in his interview that  she
         was a teaching assistant in an all girl's private school.

      b) There was discrepancy between this and the Appellant's claim in her
         visa application that she was self employed  as  the  owner  of  an
         automobile commission and automobile dealing service and  that  she
         had no additional jobs.

      c) In relation to her claim that her problems began in Meiktila on  20
         March 2013 when she went to help  a  friend  teach  summer  classes
         there  were  inconsistencies  in  that  account  as  given  by  the
         Appellant and her father in his asylum interview.

      d) There are inconsistencies between the Appellant's account  of  what
         happened when she returned to Yangon and that given by her father.

      e)  The  Appellant's  delay  in   claiming   asylum   undermined   her
         credibility.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Twydell  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge :

      a) Set out the Appellant's account  based  on  her  witness  statement
         which included her explanations  of  the  apparent  inconsistencies
         between her account and that of her father.

      b) Recorded the oral evidence of the Appellant at the hearing and that
         of her brother and sister who had both provided witness statements.



      c) Noted at paragraph 37 that the Appellant's  Representative  applied
         to have her father's appeal bundle adduced in evidence  in  support
         of her appeal at 3.00 pm at the end of her closing submissions. The
         Respondent objected having had no prior warning of the  application
         although both representatives had been in the building all day. The
         Judge adjourned in order  for  the  parties  to  attempt  to  agree
         'common ground' and the Respondent agreed that the App's father had
         ill health and accepted production of his GP  report  of  24.4.2014
         and part of his medical records. The Judge rules that the remaining
         documentation in the appeal bundle would not be admitted.

      d) The Judge found that the Appellant  was  a  teaching  assistant  in
         Myanmar who taught Islamic studies. She found that she was a Muslim
         albeit not a Rohingyan Muslim. She did not attach great  weight  to
         the inconsistency between the Appellant's claim to have  owned  the
         school or worked in a school.

      e) In relation to the incident described by the Appellant on 20  March
         2013 she  found  that  the  Appellant's  own  account  between  her
         interview and her oral evidence was inconsistent and  as  a  result
         she did not accept the Appellant's account that she saw her friends
         killed but rather found that she heard about the  incident  from  a
         neighbour.

      f) The Judge found that her father's account  of  when  and  how  this
         incident occurred was  inconsistent  with  that  of  the  Appellant
         (paragraph 50-51).

      g) The Judge found that the Appellant's account of what happened after
         this  incident  on  her  return  to  Yangon  was  inconsistent  was
         inconsistent with that of her father(paragraph 52)  including  that
         she stated their family home was ransacked and destroyed which  was
         not mentioned by her father at all which the Judge found  to  be  a
         significant discrepancy.

      h)  The  Judge  considered  the  medical  report  in  respect  of  the
         Appellant's father that he had heart disease and had had a by pass.
         She noted that he did not attend the hearing nor did he  provide  a
         witness statement. She noted the discrepancy in relation to whether
         their home had been ransacked or destroyed.

      i) The Judge found that her failure to state in the  visa  application
         that she was a teaching assistant undermined her credibility

      j) The Judge found that there was no good reason given as to  why  the
         Appellant did not claim asylum on arrival in the UK.

      k) The Judge found that her case was that she had no problems  between
         1992 and 2013 although the extremist and the authorities would have
         been aware that she was a teacher of Islamic Studies and this was a
         good indicator for the future.

      l) The Judge found that the Appellant  could  return  to  Myanmar  and
         teach and not be at risk from extremists.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged which argued:

      a) The Judge failed to assess the evidence in accordance with the law.

      b) The Judge failed to take into account the explanations given by the
         Appellant's for the alleged inconsistencies, her  father's  witness
         statement which was submitted as part of the  father's  bundle  and
         her father's ill health in assessing the inconsistencies.

      c) The Judge failed to properly assess the Appellant's explanation for
         her failure to state that she was a teaching assistant in her  visa
         application.

      d) The Judge applied the wrong test as to whether the Appellant was at
         risk of persecution describing it as 'an enhanced risk'.

      e) The Judge has  failed  to  properly  assess  by  reference  to  the
         objective evidence whether being a teacher of Islamic studies would
         put the App at risk on return.

      f) The Judge's assessment under Article 8 was  flawed  as  she  had  a
         number of family members in the UK.

 8. An application for permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused.  The
    application was renewed and on 7 September 2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kopieczek gave permission to appeal stating:

         "I consider it arguable that there was procedural unfairness in the
         First-tier judge having refused to allow evidence  to  be  admitted
         where  that  evidence  is  said  to   be   relevant   to   apparent
         inconsistencies  in  the   evidence.   However,   the   appellant's
         representatives will have to establish the existence  of  any  such
         witness statement, explain the late application to  admit  it,  and
         explain how its admission could have affected the  outcome  of  the
         appeal."

 9. There was a Rule 24 response by the Respondent  in  which  they  argued
    that it was a matter for the Appellant to adduce the evidence on  which
    they intended to rely prior to the date of hearing.  The  statement  of
    the Appellant's  father  would  have  been  unchallengeable  given  his
    inability to attend court and thus they would have been of no value.

Submissions

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Singh  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant after reminding him that he should ensure  to  address  those
    issues raised by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek  in  the  grant  of
    permission. Mr Singh's submissions can be summarised as follows:

      a) He had an undated  statement  from  Ms  Angeli  the  Solicitor  who
         appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

      b) He conceded that the father's witness statement  was  not  in  this
         Appellant's appeal bundle.

      c) He asserted that the father's witness statement had been  submitted
         as part of the father's appeal but accepted that the two cases  had
         not been linked.

      d) He accepted that the application to admit the father's evidence was
         made after Ms Angeli had made her final  submissions.  He  accepted
         that he had no good reason to offer as to why  she  only  made  the
         application at the end of the hearing.

      e) He submitted that nevertheless should the Judge have  admitted  the
         statement as it was relevant to the  facts  in  issue  and  offered
         explanations for the inconsistencies in that the father  stated  he
         may have been confused and his memory let him down. The father  had
         not been physically present at the incident in March  2013  he  was
         merely recalling what he thought his daughter  had  told  him.  The
         daughter gave the same explanation in her  witness  statement  that
         her father was old, ill  and  not  physically  present  when  these
         events occurred.

      f)  The  Respondent  in  the  Rule  24  response  had  relied  on  the
         inconsistencies between the Appellant and her father while  stating
         that the father's ill health made his evidence unchallengeable.

      g) The Judge should have admitted the father's statement as there  was
         every chance that the tribunal would have found  that  because  the
         father was old and frail that no weight should  be  placed  on  the
         inconsistencies which may have led to a  different  outcome  as  to
         credibility.

11. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Angeli submitted that :

      a) He relied on the Rule 24 notice.

      b) The legal  Representatives  were  aware  that  the  refusal  letter
         alleged inconsistencies between the account of  the  Appellant  and
         her father.

      c) The Judge rejected the Appellant's account of the incident of March
         2013 and gave reasons for doing so.

      d) The Appellant's father now said that he may have misstated what the
         Appellant told him but such a claim could not be challenged  as  he
         was unfit to attend court.

12. In reply Mr Singh on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

      a) The Solicitors did know the basis of the Respondents challenges but
         the duty of the court was  not  to  penalise  the  representatives.
         There would have been no prejudice in admitting the statement.

      b) The core of the Respondents case was  the  inconsistencies  between
         the account given by the Appellant and that given be her father.

The Law

13.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If  a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration. In  Mibanga  v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging
    such findings:

         "Where, as in this case, complaint is made of the reasoning  of  an
         adjudicator in respect of a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
         credibility), particular care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
         criticism is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and
         does not merely reflect a feeling on  the  part  of  the  appellate
         tribunal that it might itself have taken a different  view  of  the
         matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."

Finding on Material Error

15. Having heard those submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

16. Although the grounds raise other issues the permission granted by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kopieczek relates only to procedural unfairness. I  have
    considered whether the refusal to allow the Appellant's  representative
    to adduce a witness statement from her father at the point of her final
    submissions at 3pm on the appeal hearing  day  amounted  to  procedural
    unfairness and I am satisfied that it did not. The refusal  letter  was
    explicit in challenging the Appellant's credibility and while it gave a
    number  of  reasons  for  doing  so   the   principal   one   was   the
    inconsistencies between the account of the Appellant and her father  as
    to key events. It was these inconsistencies that the witness  statement
    addressed.

17. The hearing in this case was 19 June 2015 but well in  advance  of  the
    hearing on 17 February  2015  the  parties  including  the  Appellant's
    representatives  Duncan  Lewis  were  sent  the   standard   directions
    requiring them to provide witness statements on which they intended  to
    rely 5 days prior to the hearing.

18. Mr Singh conceded that no witness statement by the father was  included
    in the Appellant's appeal bundle produced  by  the  representatives  in
    support of her appeal hearing as required by  the  directions.  At  the
    hearing it is argued that the Appellants representative  Ms  Angeli  in
    her closing submissions sought  to  admit  the  appeal  bundle  of  the
    Appellants father which she asserts in her  undated  witness  statement
    included a witness statement from the Appellant's father. There is  now
    on file a copy of the father's statement dated 8 May 2015 it  is  under
    cover of a fax sent by the solicitors dated 29 September  2015  and  is
    headed with the reference numbers for his own and his wife's appeal  so
    it is clear that  he  never  provided  a  witness  statement  for  this
    Appellant's appeal as the Judge asserts at [53].

19. Given that the inconsistencies formed a large part of the basis of  the
    adverse credibility findings the Appellant and her representatives were
    therefore on notice of the issues in the case and  if  they  wished  to
    adduce a statement from the Appellant's father in her appeal  they  had
    clearly been given the opportunity to do so. Mr Singh conceded that  he
    had no explanation as to  why  it  was  only  at  the  point  of  final
    submissions that such an application was made. I am satisfied that they
    were not unfairly deprived of the reasonable opportunity to  call  what
    evidence they chose but simply failed to do so in good time before  the
    hearing or indeed on the date of the hearing.

20. I have  considered  the  arguments  as  to  what  material  impact  the
    statement would have made even if admitted and I am satisfied  that  it
    would have made no material difference to the outcome of  the  case.  I
    note of course that the Appellant's father's evidence would  have  been
    untested as he was unfit to travel to court. The Appellant in  her  own
    witness statement and  oral  evidence  suggested,  as  he  did  in  his
    statement, that her father's account differed from hers because of  his
    old age and poor health and because she did  not  tell  him  everything
    that happened and this was referred to by the Judge at [17], [18]  [37]
    and [53] of the decision.

21. The father himself is equivocal in  his  witness  statement  saying  in
    paragraph [2] 'She described to me what happened to her but bearing  in
    mind may old age and my poor health it is possible  that  she  has  not
    told me about all the horrors what she has seen  and  gone  through  in
    order to spare me and not to put me under stress as  I  have  ischaemic
    heart disease and every little stress can affect my health  condition.'
    I note that while the  medical  evidence  the  Judge  agreed  to  admit
    confirms that the father suffered from heart disease there  is  nothing
    to suggest that he suffered from memory problems as he asserts  because
    of the medication he was taking or  because  of  old  age  which  would
    account either for any alleged problems in  his  own  interview  or  in
    relation to his recall of what his daughter had told him.

22. I am also satisfied  that  these  inconsistencies  were  not  the  only
    matters that the Judge found undermined  the  Appellant's  credibility:
    the Judge found the Appellant's won evidence about what happened on  20
    March 2013 was inconsistent as between her  asylum  interview  and  her
    oral evidence [50] ; she found that the Appellant's own evidence as  to
    the consequences of the incident of 20 March 2013 [52]; she found  that
    there was an inconsistency n her visa application as to her  occupation
    [52] ; finally she found that there was no reasonable  explanation  for
    the delay in the Appellant making a claim for asylum.

23. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning and that the decision to refuse to  admit
    the Appellant's father's witness statement was not procedurally  unfair
    as they had been given a fair opportunity to present all  the  evidence
    on which they intended to rely but even had it been admitted  it  would
    have made no material difference to the outcome of the decsion. .

CONCLUSION

24. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 4.1.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

