

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02855/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On : 22 October 2015                 |On:26 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             reeta mary frances
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, instructed by DV Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Sri  Lanka  born  on  6  November  1982.  She
entered the United Kingdom in September  2010  and  was  granted  successive
periods of leave to remain as a Tier 4 student  until  28  April  2014.  Her
last period of leave  was  curtailed  to  3  February  2014  and  a  further
application for leave to remain as a  Tier  4  student  was  refused  on  17
September 2014. The appellant applied  for  asylum  in  December  2014.  Her
claim was refused on 6 February 2015 and a removal  decision  was  made  the
same day.

The appellant appealed against that decision. Her appeal came before  First-
tier Tribunal Gibbs on 23 June 2015. Mr Paramjorthy appeared at  the  appeal
hearing on behalf of the appellant  and  requested  an  adjournment  of  the
proceedings on the basis that the appellant was too  unwell  to  attend  and
was attending St George's Hospital Accident and Emergency (A&E). He did  not
have any evidence to support  that  and  said  that  he  could  not  produce
evidence that day as the A&E was  so  busy.  He  explained  that  no  appeal
bundle had been submitted because the appellant's representatives  had  been
unable to take instructions from her. The adjournment  request  was  opposed
by the respondent's representative.

Judge Gibbs considered that if it was indeed the  case  that  the  appellant
was genuinely unable to attend due to illness,  it  would  not  be  fair  to
proceed in her absence. However she was concerned by  the  fact  that  there
was no medical evidence before her and that  two  adjournment  requests  had
previously  been  made,  prior  to   the   hearing,   by   the   appellant's
representatives  to  enable  them  to  obtain  further  documents  and  both
requests had been refused. She therefore advised the parties that she  would
give the appellant an opportunity to present evidence to her  that  she  was
unfit to attend the hearing by 11am  on  26  June  2015  and  that  if  such
evidence was produced she would adjourn the hearing.  Otherwise,  she  would
decide the appeal in the appellant's absence.

In a decision  promulgated  on  3  July  2015,  Judge  Gibbs  dismissed  the
appellant's appeal  on  all  grounds.  She  confirmed  that  no  documentary
evidence  had  been  produced  to  the  Tribunal  and  she   was   therefore
considering the appeal in the absence of the appellant under Rule 28 of  The
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules  2014.  She  went  on  to  make  findings  on  the  appellant's  case,
concluding that the claim was not a credible  one  and  that  the  appellant
would not be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

Permission was sought on behalf of the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal, on grounds of  procedural  unfairness.  It  was  asserted  in  the
grounds that the appellant had submitted medical evidence  to  the  Tribunal
before 11am on 26 June 2015 substantiating her claim to have been  unfit  to
attend the hearing on 23 June 2015. Such evidence  had  been  faxed  to  the
Tribunal at 9.55am on 26 June 2015.

Permission to appeal was granted on 29 July 2015 on the grounds raised.

Appeal hearing in the Upper Tribunal

At the hearing I had before me a fax from  the  appellant's  representatives
stamped as sent at 9.55 am on 26 June 2015 enclosing a letter dated 25  June
2015 from the appellant's GP together with the appellant's medical  records.


Mr Paramjorthy appeared before me and  agreed  that  the  evidence  did  not
specifically address the issue of the appellant's unfitness  to  attend  the
hearing on 23 June 2015, but he asked me to accept  that  it  confirmed  the
appellant's history of medical problems.  His  instructions  were  that  the
appellant had seen her GP on 22 June 2015 and  had  undergone  blood  tests.
She had attended at Kingston A&E on the morning of  23  June  2015  and  was
advised by the triage nurse that she would have to have further blood  tests
done and was to go back to her GP. Her GP  told  her  that  the  blood  test
results would be available on 25 June 2015. Mr Paramjorthy advised  me  that
the appellant was not admitted to the hospital.  The  hospital  in  question
was Kingston hospital and  not  St  George's,  as  he  had  previously  been
informed. He asked me to conclude, on the  basis  of  the  medical  records,
that it was reasonably likely that the appellant was unwell on the  date  of
the hearing and to therefore set aside the judge's decision.

Ms Savage opposed the request on the basis that there was no  evidence  that
the appellant had attended at A&E and that the GP's letter did  not  explain
why she had been unable to attend the hearing on 2 June 2015.

Mr Paramjorthy did not seek to respond.

I advised the parties that I did not find any error of law  in  the  judge's
decision.

Consideration and findings.

It is plain  that  the  documentary  evidence  produced  was  faxed  to  the
Tribunal prior to the deadline given by the judge. However  clearly  it  had
not made its way to her file by the time she determined the  appeal.  It  is
relevant to note that it was sent only an  hour  before  the  deadline.  The
judge cannot therefore be criticised for going on to  determine  the  appeal
as she did.  Nevertheless,  had  the  documents  confirmed  the  appellant's
attendance at A&E and explained her inability to attend the appeal  hearing,
the grounds raising procedural unfairness would have merit.

However, the documentary evidence produced on behalf of the  appellant  does
not in any way provide an explanation for  her  absence  on  23  June  2015.
There is nothing to confirm that she attended at A&E. The  letter  from  her
GP, dated 25 June 2015, confirms simply that  she  had  recently  been  seen
with a three month history of dizziness and that blood tests undertaken  had
shown no obvious cause. The letter states that the appellant  had  not  been
followed up since then  and  that  she  was  not  currently  prescribed  any
medications from the surgery. The letter also refers to  the  medical  notes
enclosed. There is nothing in the GP's letter or the medical notes  to  show
that the appellant was unfit or unwell  on  the  date  of  the  hearing.  It
cannot be said that the appellant has not been given a full  opportunity  to
provide such evidence. She has had a further  four  months  to  produce  the
evidence to support her appeal to the Upper Tribunal, but has failed  to  do
so. I cannot accept that the medical  evidence  provided  is  sufficient  to
lead to any reasonable assumption that she was not  well  enough  to  attend
the hearing.

Accordingly, in the absence of any proper explanation  for  the  appellant's
absence, and  given  the  concerns  about  the  adjournment  request  having
followed two previous unsuccessful requests, the judge properly went  on  to
determine the appeal in the appellant's absence and there was no  procedural
unfairness in her having done so.

The judge's findings on the merits of the appellant's claim  have  not  been
challenged.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  judge  gave   full   and   proper
consideration to all relevant matters and was entitled to make  the  adverse
findings that she did and to reach the conclusion that she did in regard  to
risk on return.

For all those reasons I find no errors of law in the judge's decision.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.




                               Signed   Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
