
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02112/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24th November 2015                |On 4th December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KG
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Toal, Counsel instructed by Theva Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Sri Lanka born 17th December  1986.  On
    the 1st July 2015 Judge Munonyedi of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed
    his appeal against a decision to refuse to vary his leave to remain  by
    granting him asylum.  The Secretary of  State  now  has  permission  to
    appeal against that positive determination, granted by Judge Heynes  of
    the First-tier Tribunal on the 21st July 2015.

 2. The matter in issue between the parties is whether Judge Munonyedi  was
    entitled to believe the Respondent's evidence,  and  whether  she  gave
    adequate reasons for so doing.

    The Claim

 3. The Respondent  claimed  to  have  a  currently  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for reasons of his political opinion. In 2010 he  had  come
    to study in the United Kingdom. He states that prior  to  this  he  had
    been a member of the  LTTE,  and  had  worked  for  their  intelligence
    division in Colombo.  In 2013 he had completed his studies and returned
    home on a one-way ticket. He claims that shortly after his  arrival  he
    was identified by his LTTE nom  de  guerre  at  a  checkpoint.  He  was
    arrested, detained for 22 days and badly tortured  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    security services. He was accused  of  being  a  member  of  the  LTTE,
    involved in political activity and fundraising from London.  He  claims
    to have escaped upon payment of a bribe and made his way  back  to  the
    United Kingdom with the assistance of an agent.  He claims  that  while
    in the United Kingdom  he  has  attended  pro-Tamil  demonstrations  in
    London.

 4. In support of his protection claim the Respondent submitted photographs
    depicting his injuries shortly after his escape from detention.

    The Refusal

 5. The Secretary of State had  disbelieved  the  entire  account.  In  her
    letter dated 21st January 2015 she gives reasons why, under the heading
    'detailed reasons for refusal'.  Chief  among  these  was  the  alleged
    inconsistency between the evidence that the Respondent  had  only  been
    known to one LTTE 'handler' a long time ago and yet somehow someone  at
    a checkpoint had managed  to  identify  him.   It  is  noted  that  the
    Respondent had failed to give an  explanation  as  to  how  this  could
    happen. Secondly it was not accepted that a man who had escaped and was
    wanted would be able to pass through security at the airport using  his
    own passport. No weight was attached to the photographs on the  grounds
    that the injuries shown could have been caused in a number of ways.

    The Appeal and Determination

 6. The First-tier Tribunal heard oral evidence from the Respondent and had
    an opportunity to see him cross-examined.  The Respondent relied  on  a
    statement in which he set out his rebuttal of the Secretary of  State's
    case.  He relied on the photographs and two medico-legal reports.  One,
    prepared by Dr Andres Martin, stated  that  the  Respondent  bears  two
    oblique scars on his back, each approximately  9-10cm  in  length.  The
    scars accord with the injuries shown in  the  photographs.   Dr  Martin
    notes the Respondent's explanation that these injuries  were  sustained
    when he  was  beaten  with  a  long  wooden  stick.  He  considers  the
    possibility that such scars could  have  been  caused  in  other  ways,
    whether they were 'self inflicted by proxy' and whether  their  claimed
    age accords with their appearance.  Having done so Dr Martin  expresses
    his opinion that these scars are "typical" of the events described.  Mr
    Toal notes that this terminology is derived from the Istanbul Protocol,
    being second only to "diagnostic of"  in  the  criteria  of  evidential
    weight set out therein[1]. The second report was prepared by Consultant
    Psychiatrist Dr Z Al-Salihy who took a detailed history direct from the
    Respondent  and  assessed  his  mental  state  with  reference  to  the
    diagnostic  criteria  set  out  in  ICD  10.   He  concludes  that  the
    Respondent is suffering from  Post-Traumatic  Stress  Syndrome  with  a
    secondary diagnosis of depressive  disorder  and  adjustment  disorder.
    Finally the Respondent relied on a letter, said to be from  his  father
    NG, in which he expresses pride at how well his son  has  done  in  his
    education, and describes the 2013 events from his  point  of  view.  He
    writes that he spoke to his son after he landed in Colombo  but  became
    concerned when he did not arrive home. Enquiries with a relative  there
    and with the bus company led him to the checkpoint at Omanthai where he
    was told that his son had  been  arrested.  He  engaged  a  lawyer  and
    eventually managed to secure his release by payment of a  bribe  of  25
    lakhs.

 7. The determination records that the Tribunal had regard to all  of  this
    evidence, as well as the material produced in the Secretary of  State's
    bundle.

 8.  Under  the  heading  'assessment  of  the  appellant's  evidence'  the
    determination reads:

         "I find the appellant's evidence to date to  have  been  consistent
         throughout.

         Every matter raised in the Refusal letter has been answered by  the
         appellant in a manner I find convincing and reasonable"

 9. The determination goes on  to  note  that  in  his  oral  evidence  the
    Respondent was able to expand  upon  his  evidence,  providing  greater
    detail, such as how his interrogators mocked him for his stammer.   The
    Tribunal found the Respondent's consistent evidence to be supported  by
    the medico-legal reports, both described as  "detailed,  comprehensive,
    helpful and persuasive". The letter from NG is set out in  detail.   At
    paragraph 33 the Tribunal sets out its conclusions:

         "Having weighed all the evidence before me,  the  totality  of  the
         appellant's account,  the  evidence  of  his  father,  Dr  Martin's
         findings that the amount and positioning of the  appellant's  scars
         are consistent with having been caused by torture,  Dr  Al-Salihy's
         evidence that the appellant is suffering from Post-Traumatic Stress
         Disorder and depression as a result of his traumatic experiences in
         detention and applying the lower standard of proof, I am  satisfied
         that  the  appellant  is  a  truthful  witness  and  I  accept  his
         evidence".

10. The Tribunal then sets out a summary of the country  guidance  provided
    in GJ and Ors (Post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319 (IAC) and applying that guidance to its own findings, allows  the
    appeal.

    The Grounds of Appeal

11. The Secretary of State's written grounds were helpfully distilled by Mr
    Melvin  in his oral submissions.  The central  complaint  is  that  the
    determination nowhere addresses the detailed reasons for  refusal.  The
    Secretary of State gave at least two reasons why this account should be
    rejected for want of credibility, and the Tribunal does not  deal  with
    them at all.  Mr Melvin submitted that the account of identification at
    the checkpoint was so inherently improbable  that  the  determination's
    acceptance  of  it  bordered  on  perversity.   The  evidence  of   the
    Respondent's father was self-serving and no reasons were  given  as  to
    why it was accepted.  Secondary to this ground  is  an  attack  on  the
    approach taken to the country guidance.   The  Judge  appears  to  have
    weighed into her  risk  assessment  her  finding  that  the  Respondent
    attended demonstrations in London; the Secretary of State considers her
    comment that it is "possible" that he could have been identified by the
    Sri Lankan authorities at such protests as speculative.

    The Response

12. Mr Toal opposed the appeal on all grounds.  He  pointed  out  that  the
    determination does give reasons why the evidence is  accepted:  it  was
    consistent, corroborated by the medical evidence,  consonant  with  the
    country background material and had the "ring  of  truth".   There  was
    good supporting evidence  which  the  Tribunal  had  been  entitled  to
    accept.

    My Findings

13. In his submissions Mr Melvin relied on the decision of the President in
    MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT  00641  (IAC)  and  its
    rehearsal of the established principles of public law in respect of the
    duty to give reasons. Therein the President  cites  with  approval  the
    dicta of Henry LJ in Flannery v Halifax Estate Agencies [2000] 1 All ER
    373:

          "The duty [to give reasons] is  a  function  of  due  process  and
         therefore of justice. Its rationale has two principle aspects.  The
         first is that fairness surely requires that the parties -especially
         the losing party - should be left in no doubt why they have won  or
         lost. This is especially so since without reasons the  losing  part
         will not know...whether the Court as misdirected  itself  and  thus
         whether he may have an available appeal on  the  substance  of  the
         case.  The  second  is  that  the  requirement  to   give   reasons
         concentrates the mind; if it is fulfilled, the  resulting  decision
         is much more likely to be soundly based on evidence that if  it  is
         not".

14. I have analysed the determination in  light  of  that  clear  guidance.
    Having done so I am satisfied that  in  this  case  reasons  have  been
    given, and that they are adequate and  sufficient  to  explain  to  the
    Secretary of State why she lost, as  well  as  demonstrating  that  the
    Tribunal had addressed its mind to all of the relevant evidence.

15. The first reason given is that the account given, over  the  course  of
    two interviews, a detailed written statement, the medico-legal  reports
    and cross-examination remained consistent. Second, the  Respondent  was
    able to expand on his account  and  give  greater  detail  when  asked.
    Third, such details gave the account the 'ring of truth'. Fourth, there
    was corroboration. The account was supported by medical evidence  which
    showed the Respondent to bear scars "typical"  of  having  been  beaten
    with a  blunt  linear  object  and  to  be  suffering  from  clinically
    diagnosed  PTSD.  These  were  all  perfectly  legitimate  reasons  for
    accepting the account.

16. Mr Melvin submitted that the broad findings at paragraph  16  were  not
    good enough given the "detailed nature" of the forensic attack  in  the
    refusal letter.  In fact the refusal letter is fairly generic. It makes
    the  vague  assertion  "overall   it   has   been   noted   that   your
    account...contains  a  number  of   inconsistencies".    The   Tribunal
    concludes to the contrary at paragraph 16, finding the  account  to  be
    consistent. This has not been shown to be a mistake of  fact.     I  am
    satisfied that there can have been no obligation on the Tribunal to try
    and work out what the Secretary of State thought these  inconsistencies
    might have been and then to  address  them.   The  Secretary  of  State
    believed the account to be inherently improbable and the evidence self-
    serving; it is evident from her findings that Judge Munonyedi did  not.
    The fact that it was consistent, detailed and  corroborated  was  found
    sufficient to discharge the burden of proof. As for the criticism  that
    the Tribunal should have directly engaged with the  submission  that  a
    wanted man would not have been able to leave Sri Lanka  in  the  manner
    claimed, it is correct to say that this feature of the  refusal  letter
    is not expressly addressed. I find that any  omission  in  that  regard
    cannot be said to be material in light of the accepted evidence  in  GJ
    that it is possible to bribe  one's  way  out  of  Sri  Lanka  via  the
    airport, even if suspected of LTTE activity: see paragraphs 28 and 275.

17. The grounds of appeal further challenge the overall risk assessment  on
    the grounds that the findings were  "speculative",  in  particular  the
    finding at paragraph 47 that it was  "possible"  the  Respondent  could
    have been identified on a demonstration in London. It is quite  evident
    from the relevant part of the determination that the risk assessment is
    not based on this finding at all. The following paragraphs, 48  through
    to 50, make perfectly clear that the risk assessment is made  in  light
    of the accepted evidence that the Respondent was arrested, detained and
    tortured, has been accused of being a still active member of the  LTTE,
    and his father is still required to sign  at  a  police  station  every
    month by the officers who are investigating his son.

    Decisions

18. The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  a
    material error of law and it is upheld.

19. The  direction  for  anonymity  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    maintained.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          28th November 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] The hierarchy set out in the Istanbul Protocol on the Effective
Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment ("the Istanbul Protocol") has been
approved in, for instance, RT (medical reports - causation of scarring) Sri
Lanka [2008] UKAIT 00009. This requires that the clinician must evaluate
the scar as one of the following:
         . Not consistent: the lesion could not have been caused by the
           trauma described;
         . Consistent with: the lesion could have been caused by the trauma
           described, but it is non-specific and there are many other
           possible causes;
         . Highly consistent: the lesion could have been caused by the
           trauma described, and there are few other possible causes;
         . Typical of: this is an appearance that is usually found with
           this type of trauma, but there are other possible causes;
         . Diagnostic of: this appearance could not have been caused in any
           way other than that described.

