
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02467/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21st August, 2013                          |On 30th September 2013       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                     P E

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Miriam Rasoul, Counsel, instructed by Iris
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Hilary Rackstraw


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  who  was  born  on  13th  April,
    1976.  The appellant applied for a visa to the  UK  on  22nd  December,
    2006, in order to study.  The visa was issued to him on  7th  November,
    2007, valid until 31st July, 2009.  The appellant married his  wife  on
    17th November,  2007,  before  travelling  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    December, 2007.

2.   The appellant's wife applied for a visa  to  join  him  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 26th November, 2008, and that was issued  on  5th  December,
    2008.  The appellant's wife travelled to the  United  Kingdom  on  19th
    December, 2008 and the appellant and his wife remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom and applied for a continuation of their  visas  on  28th  July,
    2009.  The visas were renewed until 30th January, 2011.

3.   The appellant's wife gave birth to a daughter,  P  in  September  2009.
    The appellant applied for a renewal of his leave on 27th January, 2011,
    which was issued until 25th February, 2013.  The appellant's wife  gave
    birth to a son, Pa in June 2011.  The appellant claimed asylum  on  5th
    February, 2013, and his visa expired on 25th February.

Basis of the claim to asylum

4.   The basis of the appellant's claim is his fear that  his  daughter,  P,
    would be subject to female genital mutilation on return to Nigeria.

Appeal to the First Tier Tribunal

5.   The respondent considered the appellant's claim and concluded  that  he
    did not qualify for recognition as a refugee.  On 6th March, 2013,  the
    respondent made a decision to refuse to vary leave  and  the  appellant
    appealed this to a judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   On  14th  May,
    2013,  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Crawford's   determination   was
    promulgated in which the judge dismissed  the  appellant's  appeals  on
    asylum, on humanitarian protection grounds and on human rights  grounds
    under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European Convention for the Protection
    of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

6.   The Immigration Judge records at  paragraph  19  of  the  determination
    that an expert report from Professor Mario  Aguilar  was  submitted  in
    support of the appeal.  Unfortunately, the  judge  failed  to  consider
    this expert report when making  his  findings.   At  paragraph  35  and
    paragraph 40 of the determination, the judge relies  on  a  Country  of
    Origin Information Report, but makes no mention at all of the  expert's
    report placed before him and nor does he give any reason for preferring
    the Country of Origin Information Report rather than the expert report.



The hearing before me

7.   Ms Rasoul, appearing on behalf of the appellant, also pointed out  that
    the judge had failed to consider the appellant's wife's statement which
    had been included within the appellant's bundle.

8.   I pointed out to  Counsel  that  neither  the  expert  report  nor  the
    appellant's  wife's  statement  had  been  signed.   I  asked  in   the
    circumstances what, if any reliance could be placed on either document?
      She  then  sought  to  introduce  fresh  evidence  relating  to   the
    appellant's wife.

9.   For the respondent, Ms Rackstraw submitted  that  the  expert's  report
    was "woefully inadequate" and referred me to AX (China) CG [2012]  UKUT
    00097, where the Upper Tribunal had  been  critical  of  this  expert's
    methodology.  She suggested that the judge had good  reason  to  prefer
    the Country of  Origin  Information  Report,  because  the  expert,  at
    paragraph 12 of the report, refers to other documents  which  were  not
    actually before the judge.  She referred me to other criticisms she had
    of the report, including the suggestion that no comment has  been  made
    by the expert on the majority of women in Nigeria  who  have  not  been
    circumcised.

9.    I  indicated  to  the  representatives  that  I   would   reserve   my
    determination.  They both confirmed to me that, were I to find an error
    of law, they would have no objection to the matter  being  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, given the lengthy delay that was likely before
    the appeal would come back for hearing before me again.

10.  I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal judge has  erred  in  law
    by failing to have any  regard  to  the  expert  evidence.   The  judge
    proceeded with the hearing and he erred by making no  findings  on  the
    expert's report.  The report was not signed by the  expert  and,  given
    the nature of the appeal, it would have been appropriate for the  judge
    to have adjourned so that a signed copy could be placed before him.  In
    the absence of the signature, the judge had no way of  knowing  whether
    the report had been read and approved by Professor Aguilar or  not;  it
    may, for example, have been an early draft. In  the  event,  the  judge
    appears to have ignored the report completely.

11.  Paragraph 7 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement  provides  as
    follows:-

         "7.1 Where under section 12(1) of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in
             accordance with relevant Practice Directions) to  re-make  the
             decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii).

         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.


         7.3  Remaking rather than remitting  will  nevertheless  constitute
             the normal approach to determining appeals where an  error  of
             law is found, even if some further fact finding is necessary."

12.  I believe that this is a case which falls squarely within  paragraph  7
    of the Senior President's Practice Statement, given the length of  time
    that the parties would have to wait  for  the  matter  to  be  relisted
    before me in North Shields and that  it  could,  conversely,  be  heard
    relatively speedily  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  view  of  the
    overriding objective in forming the onward conduct of  this  appeal,  I
    have decided that  the  appeal  will  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh before a First-tier Tribunal  judge,  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Crawford.

Directions

13.  I indicated to the appellant's representative that  before  the  matter
    was relisted, the First Tier  Tribunal  would  expect  the  appellant's
    bundle to be re served and  to  include  a  signed  and  dated  witness
    statements and a signed and dated original expert report from Professor
    Aguilar.  I also indicated that since it had been  made  clear  by  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer that the respondent  was  likely  to  be
    highly critical of the expert,  the  appellant  may  wish  to  consider
    calling the expert to give oral evidence, so  that  he  can  be  cross-
    examined.

14.  Any witness statement included in  the  bundle  made  by  anyone  whose
    first language is not English,  should  include  an  endorsement  by  a
    suitably qualified interpreter confirming that they have read aloud the
    contents of the statement to  the  maker  of  it  in  the  maker's  own
    language and that the maker of the statement has confirmed that  he  or
    she is satisfied that it is a true and complete statement and does  not
    require altering, amending or correcting.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

