
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02791/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st April 2016                   |On 25th April 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    [s s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies himself as a citizen of the Gambia, born on  [
    ] 1979.  He has not applied for an anonymity order.

 2. This appeal is against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Debra
    Clapham, promulgated on 15th December 2015, dismissing the  appellant's
    appeal against refusal of recognition as a refugee.  His case was based
    on being a gay man from the Gambia.

 3. The grounds are that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for such
    findings as were reached, and failed to answer the central  and  simple
    question:  "Is the appellant gay?"

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the view that
    the judge did not make a clear finding of fact on the  one  key  issue.
    The judge granting permission observed that the fact that the FtT found
    the appellant's account of his activities in the UK and in  the  Gambia
    lacking in credibility did not necessarily mean that  it  was  implicit
    that he must therefore not be a gay man.

 5. Mr McGinley pointed out that it had been  conceded  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by the Presenting Officer that the case turned on  one  point,
    and that if  the  appellant  established  that  he  is  gay,  his  case
    succeeded.  There had been ample evidence to enable the judge to  reach
    a finding, including direct evidence from a witness  who  attended  the
    hearing, and a number of written items in support, with which the judge
    failed to deal.

 6. Mr Matthews acknowledged that a clear finding is lacking on the central
    issue in the case.  He also accepted that there was some force  in  the
    point that the judge had not explained  what  she  made  of  supporting
    evidence.  He confirmed that the respondent did not  seek  to  withdraw
    the concession that the case turns on whether the appellant establishes
    that he is a gay man from the Gambia.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal errs in law and is  set  aside.
    No findings are to stand.  Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act
    and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and  extent  of  judicial  fact
    finding necessary for the decision to be re-made is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  members
    of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to re-consider the case  are  not  to
    include Judge Clapham.




                           [pic]


                           22 April 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
