
IAC-CH-AP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02911/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th October 2014                         |On 11th December 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                     S J
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Kirk of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Neither party invited me to rescind the order and I continue
    it, pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

 2. This Afghan appellant, born on 01 January 1995, appeals a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Miles) promulgated on 31st  August  2014
    in which  the  judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal, made on 22nd April 2014, to grant asylum.

 3. The Appellant's case  is  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  which  is
    acknowledged in his statement to be a sufficient exposition of  it.  He
    sought protection on the basis that his  father,  a  commander  in  the
    Taliban, had been killed by the Taliban in about 2007 as  a  Government
    spy.  Following  his  father's  murder  his  maternal  uncle  sent  the
    Appellant as a forced recruit to  a  Taleban  Madrassah  where  he  was
    trained to be a suicide bomber. In 2009 he escaped from  the  Madrassah
    and, with the assistance of his mother and Uncle, fled  Afghanistan  to
    Iran where he remained for a significant period  before  travelling  to
    Turkey and then via various unknown countries  arrived  in  the  UK  in
    December 2010 where he claimed asylum.   The claim was refused in March
    2011, and an appeal dismissed. In the Upper Tribunal in August 2012 the
    dismissal of the appeal was found to be erroneous in  law  because  the
    Respondent had failed to make the relevant s.55 enquires,  contrary  to
    the Court of Appeal judgment in KA  (Afghanistan)  and  Others  v  SSHD
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1014.  The Respondent's decision  was  determined  with
    the consent of the Respondent to be "otherwise not in  accordance  with
    the law", so that the Appellant continued to await a lawful decision on
    his asylum claim.  The Respondent made a new  decision  on  22nd  April
    2014. The Appellant appealed.  The  case  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Miles).

 4. Judge Miles refused to adjourn the case on the day, and, following  the
    hearing, dismissed the Appellant's appeal, finding that the Appellant's
    account of  his  father  having  been  killed  by  the  Taliban  lacked
    credibility, but that in any event on his own account he had  not  been
    the subject of adverse attention from the Taliban  on  account  of  his
    father's actions.   The  judge  found  that  no  risk  arose  from  the
    Appellant's claimed fear of being of  interest  to  the  Taliban  as  a
    "deserter" having escaped from a Taliban Madrassah where he had been as
    a forcible recruit for training as a suicide bomber, and in the context
    of which he had been tortured. In summary the judge did  not  find  the
    Appellant credible noting that the Appellant's account of  his  alleged
    mistreatment in the Madrassa was new,  not  having  been  made  at  his
    original interview or in  subsequent  representations,   and  that  his
    account  was  undermined  by   internal  inconsistency  unexplained  by
    vulnerabilities of age  or  PTSD.  The  judge  similarly  rejected  the
    Appellant's account of additionally being at risk from  family  members
    because of an alleged land dispute involving his family.

 5. The grounds of the Appellant's appeal take issue with the  fairness  of
    the judge's failure to adjourn so as to provide the Appellant with  the
    further opportunity to obtain medical  evidence  about  his  PTSD,  and
    asserted errors of law in the assessment of the Appellant's credibility
    for failure to take into account his health problems and age, or to put
    to him key credibility issues,  as  well  as  failing  to  factor  into
    account  the  Respondent's  earlier  failures  to  act  to  trace   the
    Appellant's family.

 6. Permission was granted at the First-tier  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge's adverse credibility findings "may  be  flawed
    in light  of  the  lack  of  detailed  medical  evidence,  and  of  the
    Appellant's age when events occurred and  the  distance  in  time  from
    those events." There was no Rule 24 notice, but Ms Pettersen  confirmed
    that the Respondent opposed the appeal.

 7. Directions had been issued to the parties to  the  point  that  in  the
    event that an error was found the matter would proceed before me with a
    view to remaking the decision on the day of hearing.  In light  of  the
    reliance on potential medical evidence I  clarified  with  Mr  Kirk  if
    there was an application to  adduce  any  further  evidence.   Mr  Kirk
    confirmed to me that there was not. So it was that the matter proceeded
    before me on the basis of submissions only.  I reserved my decision.

 8. I turn to my consideration of the challenge  to  the  decision  arising
    from the judge's decision to proceed on the day. The  point  taken  for
    the Appellant is that it was a material error not  to  adjourn  denying
    the Appellant a fair hearing because  the  case  could  not  be  justly
    disposed of without providing the Appellant a  further  opportunity  to
    obtain medical evidence as so much could hinge on such evidence.

 9. I considered the position before the judge on the day of  hearing.  The
    Appellant had provided to the judge a copy of a letter earlier provided
    to the Respondent, dated 17th January 2013, which was just as he turned
    18, from his then clinician which references an  earlier  diagnosis  of
    PTSD, as revealed by his having a history of long-standing difficulties
    characterised by avoidance, nightmares and  anxiety.  The  letter  says
    that as of January 2013 these are symptoms  which  had  shown  marginal
    improvement  with  Fluoxetine  and  which  had  benefitted   from   CBT
    (cognitive behavioural therapy) in the past. The letter goes on to  say
    that the writer, no longer  the  clinician  because  of  the  Appellant
    attaining  his  majority,  recommends  that  the   Appellant   continue
    treatment as an adult.  No  evidence  of  continuing  treatment  beyond
    January 2013 had been submitted.   The reasons for refusal letter dated
    April  2014  highlights  to  the  Appellant  the  expectation  of   the
    availability of medical evidence beyond the  letter  of  January  2013.
    Before Judge Miles the position was that steps had now  been  taken  to
    seek a referral for assessment. The Appellant was still a young  person
    and so able to  call  on  assistance  to  refer  him.  Nonetheless  the
    representative explained that the position was dogged with delay; there
    was a backlog of people waiting for assessment.  No  actual  assessment
    had occurred. No timeline was available.

10. I considered the course of the proceedings. The  Appellant's  case  had
    been initially listed for June 2014. The Appellant first applied for an
    adjournment for his representatives Sutovic and Hartigan, instructed in
    May 2014, to obtain the file from previous representatives Howe and Co,
    and to take full instructions.  The hearing was adjourned to August.

11. Shortly before the August hearing a second adjournment application  was
    made in order to obtain:  a copy of an earlier  judicial  determination
    dismissing the asylum claim in 2011, and to clarify what if any medical
    evidence had been produced in terms of PTSD  in  that  earlier  appeal,
    because, it was said, PTSD affects memory   and further  that  evidence
    of such a diagnosis was evidence of trauma.

12. The implication of the letter is that the Appellant was  not  currently
    in treatment following on from the letter of January 2013. There was no
    suggestion that any up to date medical evidence was  available  or  had
    been commissioned. This second application was rejected  on  the  basis
    that the earlier determination had been set aside and was of no  effect
    to the point  that  nothing  about  that  earlier  appeal  process  was
    relevant, and further that submissions about the  potential  effect  of
    PTSD on the Appellant's evidence should be made on  the  day.   Further
    delay was not in the Appellant's interest.

13. The day before the hearing there was a third or renewed application for
    an adjournment on the basis that the representatives were still without
    evidence to support the diagnosis of PTSD, and the representatives  had
    not obtained the full file of  papers  from  the  Appellant's  previous
    representatives.

14. The application was received too late to be dealt  with  prior  to  the
    hearing, and so it fell to Judge Miles to decide  it.   The  Respondent
    objected to the request on the  basis  that  the  representatives  were
    unable to clarify what documentation they did not have; the  Respondent
    did not challenge the evidence of the diagnosis and treatment so far as
    it went, but there was no proper explanation as to why,  if  there  was
    current relevant medical evidence, it had not been provided.

15. Judge Miles rejected the application.

16. In deciding if the Appellant was deprived of a fair hearing I note that
    the application was said to be made  because  of  the  representative's
    concern that they did not have the evidence of the diagnosis  of  PTSD.
    Given that the Respondent accepted the diagnosis of PTSD, and  that  it
    was evidenced by the 2013  letter,  and  the  Respondent  had  in  fact
    addressed the issue in the refusal letter on the basis of the Appellant
    needing future treatment  in  Afghanistan,  I  find  no  merit  in  the
    assertion that the hearing should have been adjourned so as  to  obtain
    confirmation of the  historical  diagnosis  and  clarification  of  the
    earlier provided evidence.

17. In the submission before me the argument was developed as follows:  the
    diagnosis of PTSD evidenced in the letter  of  January   2013,  counted
    positively as evidence of the Appellant  having  suffered  a  traumatic
    experience, and because it was well known that PTSD could affect memory
    so as to impact on the assessment of credibility, because discrepancies
    including late additions to an account might  be  explained  by  memory
    difficulties, the judge should in effect have adjourned so as  to  have
    fuller medical information, i.e.  as to whether the appellant continued
    to suffer from  PTSD, the extent and impact of it, treatment needed, so
    as to make a more fully informed consideration as to  what  impact  the
    diagnosis might have had on his evidence historically and currently.

18. I find no merit in that submission. The question  is  not  whether  the
    judge acted reasonably in refusing an adjournment but if it  was  fair,
    in other words if the Appellant was deprived of a fair hearing, or  the
    judge failed to take account a relevant matter because of a failure  to
    adjourn.

19. This was not a case of an appellant  currently  in  treatment  so  that
    there was a gap in the evidence of his circumstances. In terms  of  any
    need for future treatment there  was  country  background  evidence  of
    availability of treatment which the Appellant  had  had  a  significant
    opportunity to rebut and which the judge could hear  submissions  about
    and assess. In the context of issues relating to internal relocation or
    return as a vulnerable young adult the judge was in a position to  take
    into account arguments as to additional vulnerabilities flowing from  a
    PTSD diagnosis.

20. The judge hearing the appeal was in a position to hear  argument  about
    the specific difficulties in the  Appellant's  account  that  might  be
    explained by memory problems in the context of PTSD. Judges are used to
    assessing such arguments and the decision makes clear  that  the  judge
    properly  considered  whether  difficulties  could  be   explained   by
    age/PTSD.   The  reality  is  that  this  was  an  application  for  an
    adjournment  so  as  to  proceed  with  referring  the  Appellant   for
    assessment  for  further  treatment  to  see  if  evidence   would   be
    forthcoming to strengthen his claim.  The  challenge  simply  fails  to
    recognise the speculative nature of the application.

21. I am satisfied that the decision to proceed  was  consistent  with  the
    duty to act fairly and the judge was in a position to justly  determine
    the appeal.  The decision to proceed reveals no  unfairness  so  as  to
    found an error of law.

22. Another point taken for the Appellant  is  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the impact of PTSD and his age when reaching her conclusion on
    the evidence. There is no merit in this  challenge  because  the  judge
    specifically sets out at 10.10 that the Appellant made his claim  as  a
    minor and that post-traumatic stress disorder  can  affect  a  person's
    recollection of crucial events, so that it is clear the judge held this
    in mind.

23. Reading the decision as a whole it is  apparent  that  the  judge  gave
    careful consideration to the Appellant's claim. In the  context  of  an
    Appellant  present in the United Kingdom since 2011,  and who  had  had
    the  benefit  of  representation  from   solicitors   specialising   in
    immigration law, both as a  minor  and  subsequently  including  giving
    instructions to comment in detail on the interview records, and who had
    gone through the appeal process right up to the Upper tier  previously,
    that his claim, made for the first time in 2014, of  being  beaten  and
    ill-treated, and threatened with a gun at the madrassa, it cannot  have
    come as  a surprise when the  judge concluded that  he had made a  late
    gloss on his account designed to bolster his  appeal.    This  was  not
    evidence which was "late remembered", consistent with  the diagnosis of
    PTSD, or vulnerability through age,  but which ran entirely contrary to
    his earlier express statements that he had not been beaten.

24. The judge  also  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  account  of  forced
    recruitment  ran  contrary  to  the  objective  evidence  (10.19),  was
    inconsistent with his ability to spend time at his family home, and was
    undermined by the late added evidence to which I have referred.

25. The point is also taken that the judge failed to put inconsistencies in
    his  account  to  the  Appellant.   The  inconsistencies  between   the
    Appellant's  interview  and  witness  statement  were  apparent.    The
    Appellant  was  cross-examined   and   had   the   benefit   of   legal
    representation.  It is not for a judge to descend  into  the  arena.  A
    full reading of the judge's decision reveals this is not a  case  where
    adverse credibility findings hang on a single inconsistency.

26. The point is  also  taken  that  that  the  judge's  consideration  and
    conclusions failed to take into account the  UNHCR  guidelines  or  the
    case of KA.  This is an Appellant who fled with the benefit  of  family
    support, and he is someone who, as the judge  correctly  identified  on
    the evidence, has, given the credibility  of  the  account  fell  away,
    significant family support available to him on his return.

27. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  reveals  no  error  of  law
    requiring the decision to be set aside and the decision dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal, on all grounds, stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 10th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 10th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
