
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02009/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 10 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                     sgb
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Louise Fenney, Solicitor, of NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant  is  a  young
    asylum seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 16  January  2015  refusing  to  grant  him
    asylum and to remove him to Ethiopia.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia born in 1987. He claims that his
    parents were of Oromo ethnicity and spoke Oromifa. They moved to  Addis
    Ababa shortly after their marriage. Because of persecution, some  Oromo
    have adopted new names and spoken Amharic. The appellant was brought up
    speaking Amharic rather than Oromo.  The  appellant  graduated  with  a
    diploma in computer science and was employed in Ethiopia as a  computer
    expert. His father was an activist in the Oromo cause but  he  died  in
    2006. The appellant joined the Oromo Liberation Front ("OLF")  in  2009
    and became a full member in 2011. He  was  an  active  member  and  was
    arrested in April 2013 and detained for 99 days. He  was  tortured  but
    accepts that his injuries were minor. He was released  after  his  aunt
    paid a bribe. He was bundled into a truck which took him to  Kenya.  He
    was assisted by agents to travel covertly to the  UK,  arriving  on  14
    October 2013 and claiming asylum on arrival. He has attended  three  or
    four demonstrations or meetings organised by OLF  in  the  UK.  Footage
    taken at those events is easily available on the internet.

 4. The appellant has a wife and two children (born in 2012  and  2014)  in
    the UK. He unsuccessfully applied for a visit visa in  July  2012.  The
    respondent  accepted  identity  and  nationality   but   rejected   the
    appellant's claim to be Oromo, membership of the OLF  and  the  claimed
    arrest and detention.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  attended  a
    hearing at Newport on 25 June 2015. The judge found that his claim  not
    to speak Oromo  was  surprising  given  his  linguistic,  cultural  and
    political background. There was nothing to substantiate the appellant's
    claimed political activities or that his father died because of his own
    political beliefs and activities. The appellant was never  charged  and
    imprisoned other than simple detention. If he was beaten  for  99  days
    then  it  is  surprising  that  only  minor  and  superficial  injuries
    resulted,  none  requiring  medical  treatment.  The  judge   did   not
    understand why the appellant had not contacted his aunt. The  appellant
    failed to seek asylum in France. The appellant claimed that his primary
    intention in leaving Ethiopia was not to be reunited with his wife  and
    daughter but to find a safe haven and  to  escape  persecution  by  the
    Ethiopian government. That did not ring true.

 6. The judge found that the letter from Dr Berri dated 24  June  2015  and
    the screen shots of the meeting and demonstrations did not add anything
    to the appeal. The judge accepted that the appellant had  attended  the
    events.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    objective evidence clearly sets out  that  those  living  in  non-Oromo
    areas would identify as Ethiopian to avoid adverse treatment. The judge
    found that it was surprising that the appellant did not speak Oromo but
    did not make findings on the full report  which  was  set  out  in  the
    appellant's bundle. The judge failed to have regard to the  appellant's
    mother's ID which identifies her as Oromo. Given the culture  of  phone
    tapping in Ethiopia it was not realistic to expect documents  from  the
    OLF in Ethiopia. The appellant did produce a letter from the OLF in the
    UK along with proof of attendance at demonstrations. The  finding  that
    the UK evidence added nothing to the appellant's claim was against case
    law and objective evidence. The appellant did suffer  gastric  problems
    resulting  from  starvation  and  anxiety  during  his  detention.  The
    Ethiopian nationality law clearly shows that to obtain nationality, the
    appellant's wife would need to be resident in Ethiopia. The appellant's
    wife and children are refugees in the UK.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  on
    2015 on the basis that it was at least arguable that the judge may have
    erred in placing too much weight on the plausibility of various aspects
    of the appellant's account and in  rejecting  his  credibility  without
    reference to the background evidence  that  supported  the  appellant's
    claim. It was also arguable that the judge may not have given  adequate
    consideration to  the  potential  risk  arising  from  the  appellant's
    activities in the UK.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated 18 September 2015, the respondent sought to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that the judge gave clear  and
    adequate reasons.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

11. Ms Fenney submitted that the issue is whether the judge considered  all
    of the evidence. When living in non-Oromo areas the Oromo do not  speak
    Oromifa. If the appellant's mother is Oromo then the appellant must  be
    Oromo. It was unreasonable  to  expect  documents  from  Ethiopia.  The
    appellant's wife is clearly not an Ethiopian citizen.

12. Mr Richards submitted that the grounds are misconceived and there is no
    material error of  law.  The  judge  found  the  appellant  lacking  in
    credibility having compared his oral evidence to his previous  account.
    It is clear that the judge considered all  of  the  evidence  but  made
    specific  reference  to  examples  only.  The  language  point  is  not
    persuasive. The fact that Oromo identify as Ethiopian does not  explain
    the lack of language as the son  of  parents  who  spoke  Oromifa.  The
    appellant is not someone who was denying his Oromo ethnicity. He should
    be familiar with Oromifa as a result of  his  ethnicity.  There  is  no
    specific reference to the document relating to the  appellant's  mother
    but that is not a material error of law given  the  weight  of  adverse
    credibility findings against  the  appellant.  It  is  not  clear  that
    permission was granted in relation to the Article 8 point.

13. Ms Fenney submitted in reply that the appellant grew up in Addis  Ababa
    and the only language spoken was Amharic. The failure to  consider  the
    documents was a material error of law.

14. I find that  the  judge  has  substantially  based  the  decision  upon
    plausibility issues. It is common ground that there is no reference  in
    the decision to the appellant's mother's identity card. There  is  also
    no reference to the objective material which was before the  judge  and
    supported the appellant's case. I find that the plausibility issues set
    out in paragraphs 17-19 of the decision should have been considered  in
    the context of the objective evidence and the mother's identity card. I
    find that the judge has failed to make findings in relation to relevant
    material evidence, namely  the  objective  evidence  and  the  mother's
    identity card.

15. I have considered R (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982, HK v SSHD [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1037 and Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223. Taking  all  of  those
    matters as a whole I  find  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  properly
    consider and make  findings  upon  relevant  evidence  and  that  is  a
    material error of law.

16. In addition, the  judge  has  not  explained  why  the  appellant's  UK
    political activities "add nothing" to the appellant's claim. That is  a
    failure to give reasons or any adequate reasons on a  material  matter.
    There is also no consideration of risk upon return arising from the sur
    place activities.

17. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand. I have not found it necessary to consider the  Article  8  point
    about the  nationality  of  the  appellant's  wife.  I  agree  with  Mr
    Richard's submission that it is not clear that permission to appeal was
    granted in relation to that matter. It can be argued again  at  the  de
    novo hearing in the light of  up  to  date  information  regarding  the
    immigration status of the appellant's family.

Decision

18. Ms Fenney invited me to order a rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal if
    I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph 7.2 of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statements I consider that  an  appropriate
    course of action. I find that the errors of law infect the decision  as
    a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de novo with all issues to
    be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

19. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]    Date 1 December 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
