
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02611/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25 March 2015                     |On 13 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                       tarisal josephine matambanadzo
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin, Counsel instructed by RBM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision concerns a narrow issue but one of some  complexity.   It
    relates only to an issue of legitimate expectation.

 2. The appellant, who is a citizen of Zimbabwe, was born  on  18  February
    1983.  She arrived in the UK  on  20  December  2003,  seemingly  as  a
    visitor.  Although it is not entirely clear from  the  chronology,  her
    visa expired in 2004 or 2005, according to the refusal letter.

 3. She claimed asylum on 18 March 2010 but that claim  was  refused.   Her
    appeal against the subsequent immigration decision to  remove  her  was
    heard by Immigration Judge Birk on 2  June  2010  and  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 4. Taking  the  further  history  from  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pooler, further representations were made on  behalf  of
    the appellant and were treated by the respondent as a fresh  claim.   A
    further decision was taken refusing  the  application  for  asylum  and
    making a further immigration decision.  An appeal against that decision
    was listed for hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  on  20  February
    2013.  On that date the decision was withdrawn by the respondent and  a
    further decision taken which was the subject of the appeal before Judge
    Pooler at the hearing on 19 August 2014.

 5. One of the grounds of appeal at the hearing  before  Judge  Pooler  was
    that the decision of the respondent was not in accordance with the  law
    on the basis that the appellant had a legitimate expectation  that  she
    would be granted asylum.  That argument was founded  on  the  following
    facts.

 6. On 20 February 2013 at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, when
    the decision then under appeal was  withdrawn,  it  is  said  that  the
    Presenting Officer, Ms D. Houghton, had stated on  that  occasion  that
    asylum would be granted.  Contrary to that  statement,  the  respondent
    had refused the appellant's asylum claim.

 7. Judge Pooler concluded that on the evidence before him Ms Houghton  did
    say that the appellant would be granted asylum at that  hearing  on  20
    February 2013.  Judge Pooler decided that that  ground  of  appeal  was
    able to be disposed of on the basis  that  Ms  Houghton  did  not  have
    authority to bind the respondent to grant asylum and that what she said
    at that hearing did not amount to a promise by a public authority.

 8. He then went on to consider the substantive aspects of the  appellant's
    claim in terms of the asserted fear of return to Zimbabwe for political
    reasons.  Applying the decision in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702  with
    reference to the earlier dismissal of her asylum  claim,  he  dismissed
    the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

 9. The grounds of appeal before the Upper Tribunal,  in  essence,  contend
    that Judge Pooler erred in concluding that Ms  Houghton  did  not  have
    authority to bind the respondent in terms of a grant of refugee  status
    to her.  Reference is made in the grounds to  directions  requiring  Ms
    Houghton to have filed a witness statement, which was not done.  It  is
    argued that the respondent had failed to give an explanation as to what
    had been said by Ms Houghton despite having  been  given  a  reasonable
    opportunity to do so.  It is also  said  in  the  grounds  that  if  Ms
    Houghton could be said to have been acting without authority  in  terms
    of the statement that  the  appellant  would  be  granted  asylum,  the
    withdrawal of the  earlier  decision  must  also  therefore  have  been
    without  authority.   It  is  contended  that  it  is  unfair  for  the
    respondent to be able to "cherry pick" that which suits her in terms of
    the actions of the Presenting Officer.

    The hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 25 March 2015

10. At the hearing before me Mr  Smart  produced  a  number  of  documents.
    These included two letters dated 2 October 2014  and  15  October  2014
    constituting the respondent's 'Rule 24'  response  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  I was informed that these had been sent to the Upper Tribunal,
    albeit that they had not found  their  way  to  the  Tribunal's  files.
    There was also a witness statement from a  Mr  Kelvin  Hibbs  dated  24
    March 2015, he being the senior caseworker to whom Ms Houghton spoke on
    the day of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  on  20  February
    2013.  Copies of various emails were included in the documents produced
    by Mr Smart, as well as a blank pro forma in relation to withdrawal  of
    decisions.

11. Mr Martin did not object to the production of those  documents,  albeit
    that they were not served in advance of the hearing.  Similarly, having
    canvassed the matter with Mr Martin, he did not seek  any  adjournment,
    for example for Mr Hibbs or Ms Houghton to be called as  witnesses,  or
    for any further information to be provided by  the  respondent  in  the
    light of the information contained in the documents provided on the day
    of the hearing.

12. Similarly, it was not suggested on behalf of  the  appellant  that  the
    documentary evidence provided by the  respondent  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing before me could not be taken  into  account  on  the  issue  of
    whether there was an error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by reason of that not being evidence that was before the First-
    tier Tribunal, for example with  reference  to  the  decision  in  E  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49.

13. I summarise the submissions of the parties.  Mr Martin  submitted  that
    it was encumbent on the Secretary of State to have explained the  basis
    on which Ms Houghton indicated that  the  appellant  would  be  granted
    asylum.  Neither Ms Houghton nor Mr Hibbs state that  Ms  Houghton  did
    not in fact say that the appellant would be granted asylum, but  merely
    state what their normal practice is.  He relied on  the  fact  that  Ms
    Houghton had not provided a statement, despite directions to the effect
    that she should do so.

14. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler had purported to look into the mind of
    Ms Houghton and investigate the  Home  Office's  position  without  the
    necessary evidence.  On the day of the hearing before Judge Pooler  the
    pro forma was disclosed but, without more, he should not have concluded
    that the Presenting Officer did not have authority to indicate that the
    appellant would be granted  asylum.   The  respondent  had  been  given
    plenty of opportunity to explain  matters.   For  example,  there  were
    letters from the  appellant's  solicitors  asking  for  refugee  status
    documents on the basis that the question of her refugee status had been
    decided or resolved by the respondent, but there was no  response  from
    the Secretary of State.  It is since February 2013 that  the  appellant
    has been under the expectation that she would be granted asylum.   That
    situation prevailed even up until the date of the  hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, or at least in  part.   Alternatively,  that  situation
    prevailed until August 2014 when the pro  forma  was  produced  on  the
    first day of the hearing before Judge Pooler.

15. I was referred to various authorities on  the  question  of  legitimate
    expectation and the factors to be considered.  So far as  concerns  the
    question of correction of any alleged error, it was submitted  that  it
    is relevant to consider whether there was any attempt  to  rectify  any
    apparent mistake and whether that was done expeditiously.

16. A factor to be taken into account is whether the promise  made  was  in
    any way qualified, and in this case it was not.

17. Even if it could be said that Ms Houghton had  no  authority  to  state
    that the appellant would be granted asylum, the want  of  authority  is
    not necessarily determinative.  In any  event,  Judge  Pooler  was  not
    entitled to find on the information before him that she  did  not  have
    authority.

18. On a minimum basis, I  was  invited  to  conclude  that  the  issue  of
    legitimate expectation was not adequately dealt with  by  Judge  Pooler
    and that the matter should be remitted to the respondent to  reconsider
    the question of asylum, and if asylum is not granted,  to  explain  why
    not with reference to the 'promise' made by Ms Houghton.

19. The primary contention however, was to the effect that  I  should  find
    that the appellant did have a legitimate expectation that she would  be
    granted asylum and that I should direct that some form of limited leave
    be granted to her.

20. Mr Smart submitted that Judge Pooler  was  entitled  to  find  that  Ms
    Houghton did not have authority to make any promise about  asylum,  and
    there was and is  no  legitimate  expectation  in  this  case.   I  was
    referred to the witness statement of Kelvin Hibbs to the effect that it
    is outside his "business area" to  be  able  to  give  authority  to  a
    caseworker to indicate that asylum would be  granted.   Although  Judge
    Pooler made his decision without all the information now put before the
    Tribunal, his conclusion that she had no authority to make any  promise
    about asylum is a conclusion that he was entitled to come to.

21. The letters from the appellant's solicitors in the bundle  to  which  I
    was referred, indicated that it was not understood by the appellant and
    her representatives that asylum was to be granted.   Thus,  the  letter
    dated 2 May 2013, at page 44 of the 128 page bundle, states  that  they
    had not heard from the respondent confirming the decision, and so it is
    clear that in their minds the decision did have to be confirmed.

22. On the basis of the documentary evidence now produced, it could be said
    that it is not entirely clear what in fact was  said.   However,  given
    Judge Pooler's finding that Ms Houghton had told the appellant that she
    would be granted asylum, it is accepted that that is not a matter  that
    can now be challenged by the respondent.

23. However, as to the question of any lack of authority on the part of  Ms
    Houghton, her email and the statement of Kelvin  Hibbs  to  the  effect
    that it would not be their practice to confirm  that  asylum  would  be
    granted, indicates that Judge Pooler was right to say that she  had  no
    authority on this issue.

24. Furthermore, it is important to bear in mind that Judge Pooler went  on
    to deal substantively with the asylum ground of  appeal  and  dismissed
    it.  His decision  in  that  respect  is  not  challenged.   Thus,  the
    appellant is not entitled to asylum and the Secretary  of  State  could
    not be in a position to promise  to  grant  asylum  when  she  was  not
    entitled to it.  In this regard I was referred to the  decision  in  EU
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 32.  I was also referred to the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    Mehmood (legitimate expectation) [2014] UKUT 00469 (IAC).

25. In  reply,  Mr  Martin  submitted  that  the  question  of  'ostensible
    authority' is relevant in terms  of  what  would  a  reasonable  person
    expect in terms of an official's authority to make a  promise.   I  was
    reminded that the Presenting Officer before the Tribunal on 20 February
    2013 had indicated in open court  before  a  Tribunal  Judge  that  the
    appellant would be granted asylum.

26. Contrary to what has been submitted on behalf of the respondent, it  is
    not even now clear what the limits of the authority of  the  Presenting
    Officer were.

    My assessment

27. There were two grounds of appeal before Judge Pooler.   The  first  was
    that the decision was not in accordance with the law on the basis  that
    the appellant had a legitimate expectation that she  would  be  granted
    asylum in the light of what was said by the Presenting  Officer  on  20
    February 2013. The second was the asylum and human rights ground.

28. Entirely correctly in my view, Judge Pooler identified the first  issue
    to be determined as being what was said on 20 February 2013.  He  noted
    that an earlier hearing had been adjourned with a  direction  made  for
    the respondent to file a statement  from  the  Presenting  Officer,  Ms
    Houghton, who had been the Presenting  Officer  on  20  February  2013.
    That direction was not complied with and he did not  have  a  statement
    from her.  Nevertheless, neither party before Judge Pooler asked for  a
    further adjournment and both invited him to proceed, which is  what  he
    did.

29. At [14] of his determination Judge Pooler identified the evidence  that
    he had before him on the issue, being a record of proceedings completed
    by the judge on 20 February 2013,  Counsel's  attendance  note,  and  a
    document dated 20 February 2013 prepared  by  Ms  Houghton  and  headed
    "Refusal Withdrawal Pro Forma".  Judge Pooler noted that the pro  forma
    contained no reference to what was said at the hearing beyond the  fact
    that the Tribunal and the appellant's representatives were informed  of
    the decision to withdraw.  However, it was seen that Counsel's note and
    the judge's record of proceedings are consistent, in that both recorded
    that the appellant was told that she would be granted asylum, Counsel's
    note being explicit as to the fact that this was said by Ms Houghton.

30. At [16] Judge Pooler stated that his provisional view at  the  hearing,
    as indicated to the parties, was that on the basis of the  unchallenged
    evidence before the Tribunal,  the  Presenting  Officer  did  tell  the
    appellant that she would be granted asylum.   At  [18]  he  noted  that
    although the pro forma completed by  Ms  Houghton  did  not  assist  in
    establishing what was said at the hearing on 20 February 2013 it is  of
    assistance in establishing that she  had  required  permission  from  a
    senior caseworker before  withdrawing the  respondent's  decision.   He
    then stated as follows:

         "This is in my judgment indicative of a lack of authority  invested
         in her to make decisions of such significance; and I  am  satisfied
         that Ms Houghton did not have authority to bind the  respondent  to
         the grant of refugee status."

31. Later, at [21], he  concluded  that  the  ground  of  appeal  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law is disposed of  "simply  on
    the basis  that  Ms  Houghton  did  not  have  authority  to  bind  the
    respondent to grant asylum, and that what she said at the  hearing  did
    not amount to a promise by a  public  authority."   In  coming  to  his
    decision he referred to two authorities, namely Nadarajah  v  Secretary
    of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1363  and  EU
    (Afghanistan).

32. As Mr Smart accepted, there is an unchallenged finding by Judge  Pooler
    to the effect that Ms Houghton did tell the appellant that she would be
    granted asylum.  That is not a matter that requires further exploration
    by me.

33. The next matter to be determined is whether Judge Pooler was  right  to
    conclude that Ms Houghton did not have authority to make any  'promise'
    that asylum would be granted.  The pro forma which he had  before  him,
    and which was completed by Ms  Houghton  on  20  February  2013  states
    amongst other things:

         "Having discussed this matter with SCW Kelvin Hibbs, permission was
         granted to withdrawn [sic] our decision and return file to CO."

34. Later on the pro forma it is stated that the decision to  withdraw  was
    approved by Kelvin Hibbs SCW.   Presumably,  'SCW'  means  Senior  Case
    Worker.

35. Although Judge Pooler did not have before  him  any  witness  statement
    from Ms Houghton, nor of course the witness statement from Kelvin Hibbs
    which I have, as I have already indicated no application  was  made  to
    Judge Pooler for an adjournment on behalf of the  appellant  or  for  a
    witness statement from Ms Houghton to be provided.  Mr Martin makes the
    point that it was not for him on behalf of the  appellant  to  get  the
    respondent to provide the evidence that she was  directed  to  provide.
    That I agree with.  However, what it does mean is that Judge Pooler was
    only able to proceed on the basis of the evidence that was before  him.
    It is clear,  as  Judge  Pooler  concluded,  that  Ms  Houghton  needed
    authority before  withdrawing  a  decision,  and  in  that  regard  she
    referred to a senior caseworker.

36. I am satisfied that Judge Pooler was entitled to conclude that in those
    circumstances Ms Houghton would not have had authority  in  his  words,
    "to make decisions of such significance"; that is on  the  question  of
    asylum.  It is also to be noted that the pro forma says nothing at  all
    about any likely, or even possible, grant of asylum.  It only  explains
    the basis on which the decision was being withdrawn.

37. It is as well to state what those reasons are,  as  given  on  the  pro
    forma.  I summarise.   Ms  Houghton  wrote  that  having  reviewed  the
    evidence available to  her  she  had  withdrawn  the  refusal  for  the
    following reasons.  She stated that the Immigration Judge, in line with
    recent Court of Appeal  judgments  relating  to  the  Danian  point  in
    relation to sur place activities in the UK, would need to be  satisfied
    that none of these activities would bring an appellant to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities, whether or  not  they  were  carried  out
    solely to bolster an asylum claim.   She  then  wrote  that  given  the
    "numerous documents internet (sic)", CDs, photographs  and  documentary
    evidence produced by the appellant, the Immigration Judge wanted to  be
    certain of the respondent's position.  She went on to  state  that  the
    judge indicated that she was not satisfied that the Secretary of  State
    had given due consideration to this point in the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter.

38. She stated that she had informed the judge that there  was  a  previous
    determination from Immigration Judge Birk dated 2 June  2010  in  which
    the appellant had not been found credible in  respect  of  her  initial
    asylum claim and that that was the starting point.  She noted  however,
    that the Immigration Judge wanted details regarding the points she  had
    raised.  Ms Houghton states in the pro forma that she requested time to
    take  instructions.   There  then  follows  the  indication  that   she
    discussed the matter with the senior caseworker, Kelvin Hibbs.  The pro
    forma goes on to state that both the appellant's mother and sister  had
    been granted asylum in the UK on the basis  of  political  opinion  and
    that although on the basis of the current country  guidance  which  she
    refers to, that was not an enhanced risk, but it is believed that  this
    factor should have been considered by  the  decision  maker.   The  pro
    forma indicates that the Tribunal and the  appellant's  representatives
    were informed of  the  decision  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    withdrawn.

39. Nothing in that document reveals anything other than that in the  light
    of the concern expressed by the Immigration Judge, the matter would  be
    looked at again.

40. Although not referred to on behalf of the appellant, I did  raise  with
    Mr Smart the last line of the pro forma which states, in bold  type  as
    follows: "The decision maker should now take  the  necessary  steps  to
    implement this decision."  Mr Smart informed me, with  reference  to  a
    blank pro forma, that this was merely part of the template for the  pro
    forma.  A blank pro forma that was shown to me is said to be similar to
    the one completed by Ms Houghton.

41. It is as well at this point to deal with the question of why  there  is
    no witness statement from Ms Houghton.  That is explained, in  part  at
    least, by the copies of emails provided at the hearing before me.   The
    emails are between a Senior Presenting Officer, Mr John  Parkinson,  Ms
    Houghton, and Mr Hibbs.  One from Ms Houghton  dated  14  October  2014
    refers to extensive sick absence, which she  explains.   She  indicates
    that she is willing to provide a witness statement if  still  required.
    A further email dated 6 January 2015 contains similar  information  and
    also refers to maternity leave whereby she will  not  be  returning  to
    work until "next year".  Although it looked as if  in  January  2015  a
    witness statement was going to be prepared, Mr Parkinson  indicates  in
    his email dated 23 March 2015 that a witness statement for Ms  Houghton
    was never in fact drafted.

42. Whilst it is understandable on the basis  of  the  information  in  the
    emails that Ms Houghton was not initially able  to  provide  a  witness
    statement, it does not seem that  the  matter  was  pursued  with  much
    vigour on behalf of the respondent.  It is not necessary for me to seek
    to apportion any blame in this respect.  Suffice it to say, the witness
    statement should  have  been  prepared  in  line  with  the  Tribunal's
    direction.  However, in the circumstances, its absence does not  affect
    Judge Pooler's conclusion that Ms Houghton did not  have  authority  to
    make any promise or representation in relation to asylum.

43. The question does arise however, as to whether a lack of  authority  to
    make a representation or promise is the end of the enquiry in terms  of
    whether there is  a  legitimate  expectation.   Furthermore,  a  closer
    examination of the principles inherent in the  doctrine  of  legitimate
    expectation is required.  Thus, in  Nadarajah  (cited  above)  Laws  LJ
    stated at [67]-[68] as follows:

         "67. For my part I would  accept  Mr  Underwood's  contention  that
             there is no abuse of power here,  and  therefore  nothing,  in
             terms of legitimate expectation, to entitle the appellant to a
             judgment compelling  the  Secretary  of  State  to  apply  the
             unrevised Family Links Policy in his case. I would so conclude
             on the simple ground that  the  merits  of  the  Secretary  of
             State's case press harder than the appellant's, given the  way
             the points on  either  side  were  respectively  developed  by
             counsel. If my Lords agree, that disposes of the appeal. But I
             find it very unsatisfactory  to  leave  the  case  there.  The
             conclusion is not merely simple, but simplistic. It is  little
             distance from a purely subjective adjudication. So far  as  it
             appears to rest on principle, with respect to Mr  Underwood  I
             think it superficial to hold that for a legitimate expectation
             to bite there must be something more than  failure  to  honour
             the promise in question, and then to list a range of  possible
             additional factors which might  make  the  difference.  It  is
             superficial  because  in  truth  it  reveals   no   principle.
             Principle is not in my judgment supplied by the call  to  arms
             of abuse of power. Abuse of power is a name for any act  of  a
             public authority that is not legally justified. It is a useful
             name, for it catches the moral impetus of the rule of law.  It
             may be, as I ventured to put it in Begbie, "the  root  concept
             which governs and conditions our general principles of  public
             law". But it goes no distance to tell you, case by case,  what
             is lawful and what is not. I accept, of course, that there  is
             no formula which tells you that; if there were, the law  would
             be nothing but a checklist. Legal principle lies  between  the
             overarching  rubric  of  abuse  of  power  and  the   concrete
             imperatives of a rule-book. In Coughlan (paragraph  71,  cited
             above) Lord  Woolf  said  of  legitimate  expectation,  "[t]he
             limits to its role have yet to be finally  determined  by  the
             courts. Its application is still being developed on a case  by
             case basis." I do not  begin  to  suggest  that  what  follows
             fulfils the task. But although as I have said I would conclude
             the case in the Secretary of State's favour on  the  arguments
             as they stand, I would venture to offer some suggestions -  no
             doubt obiter - to see if we may move the law's  development  a
             little further down the road, not least so as to perceive,  if
             we can, how legitimate expectation fits with  other  areas  of
             English public law.

         68.  The search for principle surely starts with the theme that  is
             current through the legitimate expectation cases.  It  may  be
             expressed thus. Where a public authority has issued a  promise
             or adopted a practice which represents how it proposes to  act
             in a given area, the law will require the promise or  practice
             to be honoured unless there is good reason not to do so.  What
             is the principle behind this proposition? It  is  not  far  to
             seek. It is said to be grounded in fairness, and no  doubt  in
             general terms that is so. I would prefer to express it  rather
             more broadly as a requirement of good administration, by which
             public bodies ought to deal straightforwardly and consistently
             with the public. In my  judgment  this  is  a  legal  standard
             which, although not found in terms in the European  Convention
             on Human Rights, takes its place alongside such rights as fair
             trial, and no punishment without law. That being so  there  is
             every reason to articulate the limits of this requirement - to
             describe what may count as good reason to depart from it -  as
             we have come to articulate the limits of other  constitutional
             principles  overtly  found   in   the   European   Convention.
             Accordingly a public body's promise or practice as  to  future
             conduct may only be denied,  and  thus  the  standard  I  have
             expressed may only be departed from, in circumstances where to
             do so is the public body's legal duty, or is otherwise, to use
             a now familiar vocabulary, a proportionate response (of  which
             the court is the judge, or the last judge) having regard to  a
             legitimate aim pursued  by  the  public  body  in  the  public
             interest. The  principle  that  good  administration  requires
             public authorities to be  held  to  their  promises  would  be
             undermined if the law did  not  insist  that  any  failure  or
             refusal to comply is objectively justified as a  proportionate
             measure in the circumstances."

44. Later, at [70] he stated that:

         "70. There is nothing original in my description of  the  operative
             principle  as  a  requirement  of  good  administration.   The
             expression was used in this context at least as  long  ago  as
             the Ng Yuen Shiu case, in which Lord  Fraser  of  Tullybelton,
             delivering the  judgment  of  the  Privy  Council,  said  this
             (638F):

                  'It is in the interest  of  good  administration  that  [a
                  public authority] should act fairly and  should  implement
                  its promise, so long as implementation does not  interfere
                  with its statutory duty'.

             My aim in outlining this approach has been to see  if  we  can
             conform the shape of the law of legitimate  expectations  with
             that of other constitutional principles; and also to  go  some
             small distance  in  providing  a  synthesis,  or  at  least  a
             backdrop, within or against which the authorities in this area
             may be related to each other. I would make these  observations
             on the learning I have summarised earlier.  First,  there  are
             some cases where, on a proper apprehension of the facts, there
             is in truth no promise for the future: Ex p.  Hargreaves;  see
             also In re Findlay [1985] AC 318. Then in Ng Yuen Shiu and  Ex
             p. Khan  the  breach  of  legitimate  expectations  -  of  the
             standard of good administration - could not be justified as  a
             proportionate response to any dictate of the public  interest;
             indeed I think it  may  be  said  that  there  was  no  public
             interest to compete with  the  expectation.  In  Coughlan  the
             promise's denial could not be  justified  as  a  proportionate
             measure. The three categories of case there described by  Lord
             Woolf  represent,  I  would  respectfully   suggest,   varying
             scenarios  in  which  the  question  whether  denial  of   the
             expectation was proportionate to the public  interest  aim  in
             view may call for different answers. In Begbie, the legitimate
             expectation was frustrated by the operation of  statute.  Bibi
             went off essentially on  the  basis  that  the  authority  had
             "simply not acknowledged that the  promises  were  a  relevant
             consideration in coming to a conclusion  as  to  whether  they
             should be honoured". Its primary importance  arises  from  the
             court's  comments  on  reliance,  including  its  citation  of
             Professor Craig. That there is no hard  and  fast  rule  about
             reliance to my mind illustrates the fact, which I have already
             sought to emphasise, that it is in principle no  more  than  a
             factor to be  considered  in  weighing  the  question  whether
             denial of the expectation is justified - justified, as I would
             suggest, as a proportionate act or measure."

45. On the question of whether  Ms  Houghton  had  authority  to  make  any
    promise or hold out any expectation that the appellant would be granted
    asylum, the decision in Bloggs 61 v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 686 is instructive.  In essence, this was  a
    judicial review claim in relation to representations allegedly made  by
    police officers to the appellant that he would be kept in prison within
    one of the protected witness units rather than in a normal prison.   At
    [30] Auld LJ stated that it was plain from the  legal  framework  which
    had been summarised that the police:

         "...  had  neither   actual   authority   to   make   the   alleged
         representations on which the appellant relies, nor the authority to
         implement any such as might have been made.  As to the latter,  not
         even the Prison Service had authority to grant him the status of  a
         protected witness for the duration of his sentence."

    At [38] he stated as follows:

         "The starting point, as both  counsel  acknowledged,  is  that  the
         Police could not bind the Prison Service to treat the appellant  as
         a  protected  witness  unless  they,  the  Police,  had  actual  or
         ostensible authority to do so. There is no evidence that the Police
         had such actual authority, quite the contrary as Mr. Jay  submitted
         and as Ouseley J found,  in  paragraph  64  of  his  judgement,  by
         reference to the extracts from the Police Circular and  the  Prison
         Service Instructions which I have  set  out  above.  Nor,  for  the
         reasons urged by Mr. Jay and helpfully summarised by Ouseley J.  at
         paragraphs 64 and 65 of his judgment, was there any  basis  on  the
         evidence for holding that  the  Police  had  ostensible  authority,
         namely from any specific or general act or practice of  the  Prison
         Service of holding out, or of adopting regardless of  its  own  its
         management requirements, whatever promises police officers make  in
         this context."

    Further, at [39] one finds the following:

         "But, even if in private law terms the Prison Service had  in  some
         way held out the Police as having authority to commit it  generally
         or in the case of this appellant  to  retaining  protected  witness
         status for the whole of a sentence, the appellant  could  not  have
         relied upon the principle of legitimate expectation to enforce that
         commitment. That is  because,  although  it  would  not  have  been
         inconsistent with its statutory powers  in  the  1952  Act  or  the
         Prison Rules, it would not have been  a  "legitimate"  expectation.
         This is where, in the circumstances of this case,  the  public  law
         concept of legitimate expectation parts company  with  private  law
         principles  of  ostensible  authority  or  estoppel.  Even  if  the
         appellant had not appreciated at the time of  such  representations
         as were made that the Police did not  also  speak  for  the  Prison
         Service and/or that the Service  could  not,  in  any  event,  bind
         itself in that  way,  he  could  not  claim,  in  reliance  on  the
         representations that he  had  a  legitimate  expectation  of  their
         fulfilment."

46. This resonates with a point to which I shall return in terms of whether
    the appellant could in any event have had any "legitimate"  expectation
    of being granted asylum.

47. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that Judge Pooler was  correct  to
    find that the absence of authority on the part of Ms Houghton  to  make
    any promise or representation in terms  of  the  grant  of  asylum  was
    sufficient to dispose of the argument that  the  respondent's  decision
    was not in accordance with the law.

48. Mr Martin draws attention to the  letters  written  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant seeking relevant documentation in  connection  with  what  is
    said to have been an expected grant of refugee  status.   The  lack  of
    response on behalf of the Secretary of State is another  unsatisfactory
    feature of the way the appellant's  case  has  been  handled  by  those
    acting on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State.   This  is  potentially
    relevant in terms of what may be said  to  be  other  features  of  the
    doctrine of legitimate expectation, for example the question of whether
    an individual has acted to their detriment.  In this case,  that  means
    that the appellant has been unfairly made to believe that she would  be
    granted  refugee  status,  and  that  that  belief  extended   over   a
    significant period of time.  Mr Smart however, draws attention  to  the
    fresh refusal letter dated 4 April 2014, submitting that by  that  time
    the appellant would have been aware  that  she  was  not  going  to  be
    granted asylum.  This also ties in with one of the six factors referred
    to in submissions on behalf of the claimant in the case  of  Nadarajah,
    namely where the promise is the result of an honest  mistake  which  is
    then corrected, tending to weigh against enforcement  of  the  decision
    (see [64] of Nadarajah).

49. However, even accepting that there was "detrimental  reliance"  by  the
    appellant in the sense that she will have  unfairly  been  put  in  the
    state of mind of expecting to be  granted  asylum,  for  a  significant
    period of time, and even if it could be said that the correction of any
    mistake was not  rectified  in  a  timely  manner,  there  is  still  a
    formidable hurdle  for  the  appellant  to  overcome,  given  that  the
    appellant on the facts of her claim was not, and is not, entitled to  a
    grant of refugee status.  Judge Pooler went on to consider  the  merits
    of the asylum claim and for legally sustainable reasons concluded  that
    she had not given a credible account.  His decision in that respect has
    not been challenged.

50. The principle is clear from the decision in Bloggs and  from  ex  parte
    Coughlan [2001] QB 213 at [86].  Similarly, in Nadarajah at  [68]  Laws
    LJ stated that:

         "A public body's promise or practice as to future conduct may  only
         be denied, and thus the standard  I  have  expressed  may  only  be
         departed from, in circumstances where to do so is the public body's
         legal duty, or is otherwise, to use a now  familiar  vocabulary,  a
         proportionate response (of which the court is  the  judge,  or  the
         last judge) having regard to a legitimate aim pursued by the public
         body in the public interest. The principle that good administration
         requires public authorities to be held to their promises  would  be
         undermined if the law did not insist that any failure or refusal to
         comply is objectively justified as a proportionate measure  in  the
         circumstances."

51. As I have indicated, the appellant has been found not to be in need  of
    asylum.  She is not entitled to the status that it is now  claimed  she
    is entitled to by reason of  what  was  said  at  the  hearing  by  the
    Presenting Officer on 20 February 2013.

52. Insofar as it is argued that  I  should  find  that  the  appellant  is
    entitled to some period of leave, perhaps in terms of some  'corrective
    principle' I need do nothing other than reproduce a quotation  from  EU
    (Afghanistan), set out by Judge Pooler at [22]  of  his  determination.
    At [6] of EU (Afghanistan) the following was said:

         "I have to say that, like the Court of Appeal in S, I have great
         difficulties with the judgments in Rashid. In cases that are
         concerned with claims for asylum, the purpose of the grant of leave
         to remain is to grant protection to someone who would be at risk,
         or whose Convention rights would be infringed, if he or she was
         returned to the country of nationality. Of course, breaches of the
         duty of the Secretary of State in addressing a claim may lead to an
         independent justification for leave to remain, of which the
         paradigm is the Article 8 claim of an asylum seeker whose claim has
         not been expeditiously determined, with the result that he has been
         in this country so long as to have established private and family
         life here. But to grant leave to remain to someone who has no risk
         on return, whose Convention rights will not be infringed by his
         return, and who has no other independent claim to remain here (such
         as a claim to be a skilled migrant), is to use the power to grant
         leave to remain for a purpose other than that for which it is
         conferred. In effect, it is to accede to a claim to remain here as
         an economic migrant. The principle in Rashid has been referred to
         as "the protective principle", but this is a misnomer: the person
         seeking to rely on this principle needs to do so only because he
         has been found not to be in need of protection. I do not think that
         the Court should require or encourage the Secretary of State to
         grant leave in such circumstances either in order to mark the
         Court's displeasure at her conduct, or as a sanction for her
         misconduct. I agree with the short judgment of Lightman J in S. He
         said:

             ... I have the gravest difficulty seeing how the fact that the
             challenged administrative act or decision falls within one
             category of unlawfulness as distinguished from another, and in
             particular the fact that it constitutes an abuse of power
             giving rise to conspicuous unfairness, can extend to the
             remedies available to the courts."

53. For the above reasons, I am not satisfied that there is  any  error  of
    law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Accordingly,  the
    appeal against its decision is dismissed.

    Decision

54. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision to dismiss the appeal on  all
    grounds therefore stands.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  7/05/15

