
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02074/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st December 2015                 |On 25th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     RM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Smith, Solicitor of Dicksons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. On 20th  August  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Reid  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Garbett  in  which  she  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse  asylum,  humanitarian
    and human rights protection to the appellant a male citizen of Iran.

 2. Judge Reid noted that the grounds  of  application  contended,  amongst
    other things, that the judge had relied upon matters which were not put
    to the appellant at the hearing or raised in the refusal letter  before
    making  adverse  findings  of  credibility;   that   findings   as   to
    implausibility in relation to a grant of bail were not reasonable;  and
    the judge did  not  give  adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    appellant was not a genuine convert to Christianity.

 3. Judge Reid thought it  arguable  that  the  judge  had  not  given  the
    appellant an opportunity to address possible evidential inconsistencies
    and that inadequate reasons have been given for the  conclusions  about
    the appellant's claimed conversion to Christianity.

 4. At the hearing before me Ms Smith relied upon  the  grounds  which  set
    out, in greater detail, the two main issues raised.  I  summarise  them
    below.

 5. The first concerns the re-translations of "bail" documents  which  were
    submitted  by  the  appellant  at  the  hearing  allegedly  to  correct
    inaccuracies in the original  translations  of  these  documents.   One
    translation indicated that bail had been requested for 30 days when the
    re-translation indicated seven days but subject to an illegible part of
    the document.  In another the appellant  is  described  differently  in
    each translation.  Further, it is contended that the appellant was  not
    given the opportunity to explain what "verdict"  meant  in  a  document
    dated 20th February 2013 and,  additionally,  whether  the  authorities
    would allow the appellant twenty days to report to them when the  grant
    of bail appeared to have expired.   The  judge's  conclusions  in  this
    respect are to be found in paragraphs 44 to 47, inclusive.  It is  also
    contended that the judge was wrong to find that it would be implausible
    for the appellant to  have  been  granted  bail  in  the  circumstances
    revealed by the documents when country evidence submitted showed to the
    contrary.

 6. As to the judge's findings in relation to Christianity,  it  is  argued
    that the judge's  conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  not  genuinely
    converted to that faith (paragraph 62 of the decision) is  inadequately
    reasoned.

 7. Ms Smith further explained that the judge had allowed the appellant  to
    produce (after the hearing) a certificate from the translator  involved
    in the re-translations in order that the accuracy of the bail documents
    could be verified as the  appellant  had  claimed  that  each  original
    translation contained errors.  She argued that  the  judge  should,  in
    those circumstances, have taken  into  account  the  documents  as  re-
    translated, particularly the stated illegibility in the  bail  document
    originally thought to request bail for 30  days.   She  also  submitted
    that it would be wrong to conclude that, when making her submissions at
    the First-tier hearing, she had not  relied  upon  the  re-translations
    when clearly they had been submitted to clarify errors in  the  earlier
    versions.

 8. Additionally, Ms Smith emphasised that the  judge  had  been  wrong  to
    assume that the appellant had been the subject of a "verdict" when  the
    re-translations made it clear  that  the  letter  of  warning  of  20th
    February 2013 (referred to by the judge in paragraphs 44 to 45) did not
    contain that word.  In relation to this issue and  the  second  warning
    letter of 13th April 2013 the judge had not been given the  opportunity
    to explain the inconsistency to which the judge referred in  paragraphs
    46 and 47.

 9. As to the findings about Christianity, Ms  Smith  also  submitted  that
    these had  depended  upon  the  flawed  conclusions  about  credibility
    arising from the court documents which had been re-translated.

10. Mr McVeety reminded me of the response submitted on 27th August 2015 in
    which it was submitted that the decision did not show  material  errors
    on points of law.  However, he agreed that the judge had  placed  great
    weight on the matters to which the re-translations referred  which  did
    not appear to have been handled correctly and the Christianity findings
    were evidently influenced by other credibility conclusions.

11. After hearing submissions and after I had considered the matter  for  a
    few moments, I indicated that I was satisfied  that  the  decision  did
    show material errors on points of law such that it  should  be  re-made
    and now give my reasons for those conclusions.

12. The decision by the judge is well composed and comprehensive.  However,
    in the two main areas of contention  the  decision  suggests  that  the
    judge did not fully consider the evidence submitted by the appellant to
    correct perceived translation errors and, despite adequate reasoning in
    other parts of the decision, did not  give  adequate  reasons  for  the
    conclusion that  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  a  Christian  and  to
    evangelise his faith was not credible.

13. Paragraph 9 of the decision shows that the judge was concerned with the
    re-translations  of  four  court   documents   submitted   which,   the
    respondent's representative had noted, did not contain a certificate by
    the translator.  The judge therefore allowed  certified  copies  to  be
    produced by the appellant's representatives following the  hearing  and
    invited the respondent to make comment on those documents  after  their
    receipt.  Whilst the documents were received before the judge made  her
    decision, the respondent made no further comment  on  them.   In  these
    circumstances it was incumbent upon  the  judge  to  give  reasons  for
    apparently not accepting  the  latest  certified  translations  of  the
    relevant documents.  In paragraph 43 of the decision, for example,  the
    judge considers, as an issue of credibility, the  difference  in  dates
    between the translated and re-translated versions.  The judge therefore
    appeared  to  be  questioning  the  certified  translations  when   the
    respondent had chosen to make no further comment on those versions  and
    there was no evidence before the  judge  to  suggest  that  the  latest
    translations might also be wrong.   Further, in paragraphs 44  and  45,
    the judge refers to the letter of warning of 20th February 2013 on  the
    basis that it makes reference to  a  "issued  verdict".   But  the  re-
    translated version makes no such reference.  In any  event,  the  words
    "issued verdict" might also refer to a verdict  issued  in  the  future
    after arrest and expiry of a twenty day reporting  period  rather  than
    before those events as the judge concludes.

14. I also accept the  appellant's  contention  that  matters  relating  to
    perceived inconsistencies in the translations  of  the  court  document
    should have been notified to him before the judge  reached  conclusions
    upon them.  It was not sufficient to assume that the reliability of the
    re-translations  could  be  examined  when  those  documents  had  been
    prepared by an apparently independent translator who had  appended  his
    certificate and the respondent  had  not  commented  on  the  certified
    versions.

15. As to the second point, relating to the appellant's claimed  conversion
    to Christianity, the judge sets out the evidence and  the  respondent's
    views of it in the paragraphs preceding paragraph 61  and  accepts  the
    oral evidence of Reverend Lowe. However, in paragraph 62, she gives  no
    specific reasons for indicating that she  is  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had genuinely converted to  Christianity  save  for  reliance
    upon previous findings on credibility which are vitiated by the  errors
    to which I have already referred.

16. I have considered whether the errors identified might not  be  material
    but I am unable to reach  that  conclusion.   That  is  because  it  is
    evident that the court documentation featured  highly  in  the  judge's
    findings on credibility both in relation to the claimed persecution and
    conversion to Christianity. In relation to the latter specific  reasons
    were also required to reject the evidence of Reverend  Lowe  when  this
    was submitted in line with the guidance in Shirazi [2003] EWCA Civ 1562
    to confirm that the appellant had genuinely converted to  Christianity.



17. Representatives agreed that the matter should be heard  afresh  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Having regard to the content of paragraph 7.2  of
    the Practice Statement for the Upper  Tribunal  issued  by  the  Senior
    President on 25th September  2012,  in  particular  the  need  for  the
    hearing of evidence, I was satisfied  that  the  matter  should  be  so
    remitted.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows an error on a  point  of  law.
The decision is  set  aside  and  the  matter  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for hearing afresh.

Anonymity

Bearing in mind the circumstances of this appeal  and  that  the  First-tier
Tribunal made an anonymity  direction  I  consider  that  such  a  direction
should be made in the Upper Tribunal as follows:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

DIRECTIONS

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

19. The matter is to be re-heard by the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  the
    Stoke Hearing Centre.

20. The hearing to take place on a date specified by the Resident Judge.

21. The hearing should not be before Judge Garbett.

22. A Farsi interpreter should be provided for the hearing.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
