
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02703/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th May 2016                              |On 1st June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     P P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lingjorthy (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Majid, promulgated on 7th March  2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 2nd  March  2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, thereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State applied for, and was granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, and he was born on [ ]
    1989.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  11th
    February 2015, refusing him leave to remain in  the  UK  as  an  asylum
    seeker.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The crux of the Appellant's claim is that whilst in the  UK,  where  he
    has undertaken a Bachelors degree at Greenwich University, he had  been
    to France to raise money for a Tamil group that was associated with the
    LTTE.  He had attended one of their meetings in London.  He had  helped
    raise money in the  UK  for  use  in  the  Tamil  cause  under  various
    charitable banners.  He had also in France met the ex-commander of  the
    LTTE, Colonel Parithi, who was in charge of the French LTTE movement in
    the diaspora (see paragraph 14 of the determination).   This  now  puts
    him at risk of persecution at the lower standard.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge set out in great  detail  the  contents  of  the  Appellant's
    statement  (see  paragraph  11  of  the  determination),  of  some  ten
    paragraphs before concluding that "the Appellant is  gravely  suffering
    from the effects of the  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  persecution".   The
    judge was clear that the Appellant "has  credibly  told  he  fears  the
    threat of death on return and has 'suicidal' thoughts" (paragraph  12).
    The judge referred to evidence which he regarded as being in the public
    domain of the risk that would attach to a person such as the  Appellant
    and ended his determination with the words that there was "lethal  risk
    which can visit this Appellant" (paragraph 17).

 5. Curiously there was also reference to the claim  of  a  Ugandan  asylum
    seeker (at paragraph 16), although upon closer  analysis  it  is  clear
    that the judge is attempting to demonstrate the application of "anxious
    scrutiny" principles to asylum cases  here.   There  was  in  addition,
    also, a reference to the "legal requirements stipulated by  immigration
    law" (at paragraph 18).

 6. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge did not have regard  to
    the country guidance case law of GJ  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka [2013] UKUT 00319 because that requires a decision maker to  have
    regard to the risk factors which would apply, given that the civil  war
    has now ended and only those that pose a threat to the  unitary  nature
    of the Sri Lankan state are at risk from the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.
    Moreover, the judge had given inadequate reasons for his  findings  and
    made some procedural errors.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on 4th April 2016.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 20th  May  2016,  Mr  Tufan,  appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, stated that the determination could not  stand  for
    the following reasons.  First, looking  at  the  determination  in  the
    round, there were irrelevant matters that the judge had made references
    to.  He had made references to the Immigration Rules (at paragraph  18)
    in a way that was not relevant.  He  had  also  referred  to  a  Kenyan
    asylum seeker's claim (at paragraph 16) which had  added  confusion  to
    the determination (although as I have indicated already this was in the
    context of the judge attempting to show that the principles of "anxious
    scrutiny" must apply in all asylum cases).  Second, the judge had  most
    importantly not referred to  the  country  guidance  case  of  GJ  (Sri
    Lanka).   Third,  he  had  simply  set  out  a  large  section  of  the
    Appellant's witness statement, as evidence, and  relied  upon  it,  and
    then allowed the appeal simply on that  basis.   Fourth,  there  was  a
    reference to the case of Ex parte Gondolia [1991] Imm AR 519, which  it
    was again unclear to see the relevance  of  in  the  context  of  these
    proceedings, and that  too  was  an  irrelevant  matter.   Finally,  in
    referring to the "relevant law" the judge had drawn attention  to  "the
    rule of law" (see paragraph 6(e)), and  this  was  again  raised  in  a
    manner that was quite confusing.

10. For his part, Mr Lingjorthy handed up his skeleton argument which makes
    it quite clear that although the case of GJ (Sri Lanka) is not referred
    to "the fact-finding  brings  the  Appellant  under  the  risk  factors
    contained in GJ and Others and therefore he is at risk on return"  (see
    paragraph 3).  First, he submitted that the  Tribunal  should  approach
    the grounds of application by the Secretary of State with some caution.
     Second, Judge Lever granted permission because there was no  reference
    to the country guidance case of GJ (Sri Lanka).  That did not mean that
    GJ had not been followed.   Third,  Mr  Lingjorthy,  who  had  appeared
    before Judge Majid below, had presented a skeleton argument at the time
    before the Tribunal and that had made extensive references to the  case
    of GJ (Sri Lanka), such that the case must have  been  known  to  Judge
    Majid, and reliance placed upon it, and all that the  judge  thereafter
    did was to make findings of fact.  Finally, given that  the  judge  had
    set out at paragraph 11 of the determination all the relevant  evidence
    that he was accepting, it was not difficult to see how  the  principles
    of GJ (Sri Lanka) fell to be applied in the Appellant's  favour.   This
    is because paragraph 7(d) of GJ makes it quite clear  that,  "a  person
    whose name appears on a computerised  'stop'  list  accessible  at  the
    airport, comprising a list of those against whom  there  is  an  extant
    court order or arrest warrant" is at risk of persecution.

11. In reply, Mr Tufan submitted that the determination was  written  in  a
    way, where it was not clear what had been accepted in the evidence  and
    what had not been accepted, and one was just left to surmise  that  the
    Appellant had satisfied one of the risk factors in GJ (Sri Lanka).   If
    anything, the judge had deviated  from  the  requirements  of  GJ  (Sri
    Lanka) because he was referring to there being a  "truce  between  them
    and the LTTE" (at paragraph 18) whereas, in fact, there was no truce as
    such, and what had happened was that the LTTE had been eliminated as  a
    political force in Sri Lanka by the dominant governmental forces.   All
    that one was left with was the Appellant's  sur  place  activities  and
    these did not necessarily mean that he would succeed.  One still had to
    demonstrate that one posed a risk to the unitary nature of  the  state.
    That was not clear from the determination.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, it is not clear at all  as  to  what  the  judge  does
    accept and what he does not  from  the  evidence  put  forward  by  the
    Appellant.  What we have is a recital of the specific contents  of  the
    relevant paragraphs in the Appellant's witness  statement.   These  are
    set out at length at paragraph 11 of the  determination  and  they  run
    into no less than ten  individual  paragraphs.   At  the  end  of  this
    recital, the judge states (at paragraph 12) only that "the Appellant is
    gravely suffering from the  effects  of  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities'
    persecution".  It is not clear from this what facts the judge has found
    in the Appellant's favour.

13. Second, the judge does not apply the substance of the direction  in  GJ
    (Sri Lanka).  It is clear that he makes no reference  to  this  country
    guidance case.  I accept, however, that this in itself is not fatal  to
    the determination.  What is required  is  that  the  substance  of  the
    country guidance direction should be taken into account.  This does not
    appear to be the case here.  Mr Lingjorthy submits that paragraph  7(d)
    of GJ (Sri Lanka) falls to be  applied  on  the  facts  of  this  case.
    However, the judge does not make a finding that the  Appellant  is  the
    subject of "an extant court order or arrest warrant" which is  what  is
    required in paragraph 7(d).

14. Third, these anomalies are magnified by the fact that the true  picture
    in Sri Lanka currently is represented by  reference  to  the  statement
    that there is a "truce between them and the LTTE" (paragraph 18), which
    is a statement made in the context  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    cannot, this being the case, be trusted to be "sincere"  about  such  a
    truce.  In the same way, there are references to matters that  are  not
    relevant, such as the reference to the "legal  requirements  stipulated
    by immigration law" (paragraph 18) and to the importance of the rule of
    law.

Re-making the Decision

15. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal to the extent that  it  is
    remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor  House  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge Majid under  Practice  Statement
    7.2(b) because the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding  which
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such that, having regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16. I direct that although the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  has  been
    involved in sur place activities in France and in the  UK,  that  these
    matters must  not  only  be  factually  determined  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, but also that the existence of such sur place activities must
    be considered in the context of GJ (Sri Lanka) whereby it is made clear
    (at paragraphs 335 to 336) that only those activists who  are  "working
    for Tamil separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri  Lankan  state"
    are at risk of ill-treatment and persecution.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor  House  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge Majid on a de novo basis.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 31st May 2016
