
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/02354/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly             |Determination Sent         |
|On 3rd July 2013                           |On 9th July 2013           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D BIRRELL

                                   Between

                              SEBLE BERHE HAGOS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr C Timson instructed by Blavo and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
1. We have considered whether any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence we do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Lever who dismissed her appeal on the 11th April 2013.


Background


3. The Appellant claimed to be a citizen of Eritrea. She applied for  asylum
   on the 18th but the  Respondent  refused  her  application  on  the  11th
   February 2013 and a decision was taken to remove her by way of directions
   under paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.
4. The Appellant's claim was that she was born in Assab in Eritrea but  then
   moved to Ethiopia at the age of  about  1  with  her  family.  They  were
   deported back to Eritrea when she was 15. The Appellant stated  that  her
   family were Pentecostal Christians and she  had  been  detained  in  2002
   after the police detained her at a house church.  Her  uncle  bribed  the
   police to secure her release and also arranged for agents to take her  to
   Sudan. She remained in Sudan for four years working for  a  Saudi  family
   and when they left she used an agent to  leave  Sudan  and  take  her  to
   Greece where she remained for two years.  The Appellant's claim was  that
   she was at risk in Eritrea because she had escaped from prison  and  left
   the country illegally.  The  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  she  was
   Eritrean.
5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and on 11th April  2013
   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lever  (hereinafter  called   "the   Judge")
   dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal
   were lodged on the basis in essence that the Judge had erred  in  law  in
   that he had provided inadequate reasons for his findings  on  credibility
   and that he had failed to properly apply  the  guidance  in  ST  Ethiopia
   [2011] UKUT 00252 and on 14th May  2013  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Zucker gave permission to appeal on all grounds.

Hearing

6. At the hearing we heard submissions from  Mr  Timson  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a. He relied on the grounds of appeal.

   b. In relation to paragraph 53 of the Judge's determination it was unfair
      of the Judge to dismiss the evidence of the  Appellant's  attempts  to
      obtain an Ethiopian passport in the light of ST. The client was  in  a
      difficult position as the solicitors will have told her what  she  was
      expected to do in relation to claiming a passport from  the  Ethiopian
      Embassy and that if she did not this would be used against her.

   c. This was a determination with a lot of findings but few  reasons.  The
      fact was that she had used agents to leave Eritrea  and  therefore  to
      suggest that they did not have the funds was nonsensical.  There  were
      no reasons given for the findings  that  the  family  were  not  in  a
      position to bribe the police to secure her release or  use  agents  to
      leave Sudan.




7. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Harrison submitted that :

   a. He relied on the Rule 24 response.

   b. The Judge's determination was lengthy and contained a number of strong
      findings which were directed not only at her but at those who  advised
      her.

   c. The Judge was entitled to find that it was hardly surprising that  the
      Ethiopian Embassy refused to provide her with  a  passport  given  her
      claim and her inability to provide any evidence.

   d. The Judge's findings  were  very  full,  thoroughly  sensible  ,  well
      considered and reasoned and the conclusions were open to him.

   e. The Judge found that the Appellant had little or  no  credibility  and
      having found that dismissed her appeal.

Finding on Material Error

8. Having heard  those  submissions  we  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

9. The Judge set out at paragraph 31 of his determination that  all  matters
   including  basic details such as her name, date of birth and  country  of
   nationality, depended on the  Appellant's  credibility.  The  Judge  then
   analysed her account in great detail between paragraphs  33  and  54  and
   made well reasoned credibility findings based  on  his  analysis  of  the
   evidence.

10. It is suggested in the grounds of appeal that the Judge failed  to  give
   reasons for his finding that the Appellant's failure  to  speak  Tigrinya
   undermined her claim to  be  Eritrean.  The  Judge  had  noted  that  the
   Appellant spoke Amharic which is the national language of Ethiopia rather
   than Tigrinya  which  is  the  main  official  language  of  Eritrea.  He
   recognised that this of itself did not demonstrate that  she  was  not  a
   national of Eritrea however we are satisfied that the Judge then set  out
   clear reasons why he found that the Appellant's inability  to  speak  any
   Tigrinya undermined her claimed  nationality.  The  Judge  sets  out  the
   reasons at paragraphs 34 to  37.The  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
   declared inability in her screening interview  to  speak  even  a  little
   Tigrinya was of concern given that her mother spoke  Tigrinya;  that  she
   lived with her mother in Eritrea until  she  was  15;  that  she  herself
   claimed to speak a little English and Arabic in addition to Amharic which
   suggested that she was able to learn other languages even within a  short
   period of time. Given all of these factors  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
   conclude that her lack of use of Tigrinya or knowledge  of  the  language
   undermined her claimed nationality.

11. It was argued that the Judge was not entitled at paragraph  39  to  make
   an adverse credibility finding on the basis that the Appellant  described
   herself as a  Protestant  rather  than  a  Pentecostal.  However  we  are
   satisfied that the Judge was entitled to make that finding given that the
   core of the Appellant's account was that she was a committed  Pentecostal
   from birth and would  appreciate  the  'significant  difference'  in  the
   description (paragraph 39) and yet gave her religion as Protestant in the
   Screening  Interview.  There  was  no  suggestion  that   the   Appellant
   misunderstood the question being  asked  she  simply  stated  Pentecostal
   Christians would describe themselves as Protestant  if  asked  for  their
   religion. The Judge was  entitled  in  her  circumstances  to  find  this
   explanation as lacking in credibility.

12.  The  Judge  made  findings  in  relation  to  the  credibility  of  the
   Appellant's assertion that her release  from  detention  was  secured  by
   bribery and that  she  used  agents  in  the  course  of  her  flight  at
   paragraphs 45 to 48 which it is suggested are confused and lack  clarity.
   We are satisfied that the Judge set out his reasoning  with  clarity  and
   was entitled to take into account  the  findings  that  he  had  made  in
   relation to the modest circumstances of her uncle and family generally in
   reaching the conclusion that this did not 'lend itself  to  the  sort  of
   money that would have been required' in both  the  circumstances  of  the
   bribe and payment of agents to leave Eritrea.

13.  It was argued that the Judge  in  paragraph  53  held  it  against  the
   Appellant that she  was  unable  to  secure  an  Ethiopian  passport  and
   therefore had misunderstood or misapplied the  guidance  in  ST.  We  are
   satisfied that the Judge has not misunderstood the findings in that  case
   given that the ratio of the case was  that  judicial  fact  finders  will
   consider whether those who claim to have  been  arbitrarily  deprived  of
   Ethiopian nationality have approached the Ethiopian Embassy in  order  to
   assert their identity with the relevant  supporting  documentation.  This
   was not the Appellant's claim.  She claimed to be  an  Eritrean  and  the
   Judge was entitled to conclude that this  was  the  basis  on  which  she
   approached the embassy with no evidence to suggest that she was  entitled
   to an Ethiopian passport. We  are  satisfied  that  he  was  entitled  to
   conclude therefore that her attempt to obtain an Ethiopian  passport  did
   not assist her claim given that her  claim  given  that  background.  The
   Judge concluded that this was a 'cynical and disingenuous ploy'   on  the
   advice and instructions of her solicitors to attempt to bring her  within
   the terms of ST and in the circumstances of her claim he was entitled  to
   come to that conclusion.

14. We are satisfied moreover that the Judge made it plain that he  did  not
   make an adverse credibility finding against the Appellant in relation  to
   this as he accepted that the impetus behind the application was  that  of
   her representatives.

15. It was finally argued that the Judge was not entitled to find  that  the
   letter from the Eritrean Community in Lambeth dated the 14th  March  2013
   carried no evidential weight.  The  Judge  considered  this  document  in
   detail at paragraph 54 of the determination  and  set  out  a  number  of
   reasons why he concluded that the letter was of no evidential weight: the
   Appellant had never lived in London and yet the letter describes her as a
   'member of our community since 2013'; the letter was based on a 15 minute
   meeting with the author of the letter; the letter is a  generic  proforma
   with the only original addition being the Appellant's name; that  it  was
   difficult to see how the author was able to assert that the Appellant was
   an Eritrean on the basis of  the  15  minute  meeting  as  there  was  no
   indication of what specific enquiries or tests they had  carried  out  in
   relation to her in that 15 minutes. It was open to the Judge on the basis
   of those findings that the letter carried no evidential  weight  although
   again he made clear that as he found that it was produced at the  request
   of her solicitors he did not make an adverse credibility finding  against
   her.

16. We were therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read  as
   a whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

17. We therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

18. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
6.7.2013

D. Birrell

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell







