
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02484/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26th November 2013                           |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           elampriya kirushnagopal
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
                  & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Seifert made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 13th May 2013.





Background

 2. The Claimant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 26th February 1986.  She
    came to the UK using her own passport on 11th July 2009  on  a  student
    visa which was subsequently extended until 28th February 2013.

 3. On 1st February 2013 she lodged a claim for asylum and  her  leave  was
    subsequently curtailed.

 4. When the Claimant was 17, she was detained as a consequence of the army
    conducting routine checks.  She was beaten and threatened and  released
    after three days. Two years later, in 2006,  she  was  detained  for  a
    second time on suspicion of being an LTTE member.   She  was  taken  to
    Colombo and held with another twenty people in a detention centre.  She
    was raped.  She had hot water poured on her and burned with cigarettes.
     The army took her fingerprints and photograph but did not ask  her  to
    sign any documents and she was not charged with any offence.   She  was
    however taken to court in handcuffs and told that  she  should  make  a
    confession that she was an LTTE  member.  After  she  returned  to  the
    detention centre she managed to escape  with  the  help  of  a  soldier
    called Abudallif.  She was taken to his house by a friend and  remained
    there for two and a half to three years.   A  family  friend  put  some
    money into his bank account and he organised  her  departure  from  Sri
    Lanka.

 5. The Claimant provided a Medical  Foundation  report  which  was  highly
    supportive of the claim.

 6. The Claimant's credibility had been  challenged  by  the  Secretary  of
    State but, having  considered  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  the  judge
    concluded that she was a credible witness.  She  accepted  her  general
    account of events and the reasons which she had given for not  applying
    for asylum sooner i.e.  she  had  been  suffering  from  mental  health
    issues.

 7. The judge was referred to a number of different cases during the course
    of the hearing which she listed at paragraph 25 of  the  determination,
    including TK (Tamils - LP updated) Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 49 and  EG
    v UK 41178-08 ECHR 846.

 8. She concluded as follows:

         "I have had regard to her evidence that she was not a member of the
         LTTE but may be perceived or linked to the LTTE.  She would also be
         returning as a failed asylum seeker from the UK.  Although she  was
         able to obtain  a  passport  and  leave  Sri  Lanka  without  undue
         problems in 2009 this does not necessarily mean that she can return
         there safely.  I find that there is a  reasonable  likelihood  that
         she is at risk as she claims."

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Secretary of State's sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds
    that the judge had failed to adequately reason her findings.  The judge
    should have considered the lack of  evidence  from  Sri  Lanka  of  any
    outstanding arrest warrant or any evidence of further interest  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities in the Claimant  when  considering  whether  she
    would be at risk on return.  She had not correctly  assessed  the  risk
    factors in TK and failed to adequately explain why the  Claimant  would
    be at risk to the authorities upon return.

10. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford  on
    12th July 2013.

11. The Secretary of State renewed her application to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and submitted that the judge had failed  to  reason  why  the  Claimant
    would be of any interest on return given that she had left Sri Lanka on
    her own passport to come to the UK as a student in 2009.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede for the
    reasons stated in the grounds on 14th August 2013.

13. The Claimant filed a Reply and  submitted  that  the  judge  had  given
    adequate reasons for her decision and had referred to recent  objective
    evidence supporting her claim.  She did address the risk factors in the
    country guidance case of TK.

Submissions

14. Although reference was made to the credibility findings in the  grounds
    advanced to the First-tier Tribunal  they  were  not  repeated  in  the
    renewed application to the Upper Tribunal and Mr Bramble made it  clear
    that there would be no challenge to the judge's findings of fact.

15. He said that the Claimant had not however adequately explained why  she
    was able to leave Sri Lanka on  her  own  passport.   He  reminded  the
    Tribunal that she had remained in Sri Lanka for a  considerable  period
    of time after the second detention.  The judge had made  an  incomplete
    assessment of the risk which was sufficient to show material error, and
    had erred in her approach to the case law, and relied on EG v UK.

16. Mr  Mackenzie  provided  a  skeleton  argument  for  the  hearing.   He
    submitted that the judge had given  wholly  adequate  reasons  for  her
    decision and whilst she could have set out the risk factors in  TK  the
    decision which she had reached was consistent  with  the  substance  of
    that case and the failure to set out the  risk  factors  in  terms  was
    immaterial.   He submitted that the case relied upon by the Respondent,
    namely EG v UK specifically endorsed the risk factors  outlined  in  TK
    and added nothing to the Secretary of State's case.

17. He referred me to TK and cited the following paragraphs:

         "59. The government has made  numerous  statements  expressing  its
             concern about LTTE remnants  and  its  intent  to  track  down
             remaining LTTE cadres.  It has also expressed its  resolve  to
             dismantle the LTTE's overseas  procurement  network.   At  the
             same time it has also made a number of statements  in  broader
             terms expressing its intention to pursue all those with  links
             to the LTTE."

         "71. For its part the Sri Lankan Government has adopted a policy of
             trying to drive home its military victory by weeding out  LTTE
             remnants..... in the course of flushing the LTTE  out  of  its
             traditional strongholds the Sri Lankan authorities have gained
             considerable  intelligence  about  the  LTTE  membership   and
             support structures.  Outside the north there is evidence  that
             persons who are seen to have actively assisted the  LTTE  e.g.
             with  fundraising,  are  being  pursued   with   a   view   to
             Prosecution."

         "134.    However for a returnee a  record  noting  past  membership
             would very likely lead  to  detention  for  a  period  and  we
             continue to think that in relation to persons detained for any
             significant period ill-treatment is a  real  risk.   The  same
             would apply in our judgment to persons  currently suspected of
             being LTTE members; if that  is  how  their  record  describes
             them,   then   detention   and   ill-treatment   are    likely
             consequences."

         "174.    Like the ECHR, we continue to think that great caution  is
             needed in respect of someone known to have a  previous  record
             of a detention but like the ECHR in NA we also think that  the
             basic question we have to decide is whether an  applicant  can
             establish a real risk that he or she would  be  of  sufficient
             interest to the authorities in their  efforts  to  combat  the
             LTTE as to warrant his or her detention and interrogation  (NA
             para 133) in the light of all the available evidence.  In this
             regard it seems to us that what will determine the  extent  of
             interest the  authorities  at  the  airport  will  show  in  a
             returnee is not the existence of a record but what any  record
             will disclose."

18. The accepted facts in this case are that the Claimant was perceived  to
    be linked to the LTTE, was detained, brought to court, and subsequently
    escaped. The judge's conclusions were therefore fully  consistent  with
    those of the Tribunal in  TK,  and   there  was  nothing  in  TK  which
    supports the Secretary of State's argument that the  authorities  would
    no longer be interested in former suspected LTTE members.

19. With respect to the submission that the Claimant would  not  have  been
    able to pass through the airport in 2009 without being stopped had  she
    been of interest to the  authorities,  Mr  Mackenzie  referred  to  the
    Respondent's evidence in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter.   In  that
    letter at paragraph 50 the Respondent outlines the information given to
    her by the British High Commission in Colombo.

20. There is nothing in it which establishes that there is any mechanism to
    ensure that immigration officers are aware of previous interest  unless
    a decision had been taken to impound a suspect's passport or an  arrest
    warrant had been issued.  The controls outlined by the High  Commission
    at Colombo Airport are similar to those at any  other  airport  through
    the world.  They describe standard security protocol.

21. Mr Bramble did not wish to make any response.



Findings and Conclusions

22. The grounds of application do not identify  any  legal  error  in  this
    determination.

23. The only ground pursued by Mr Bramble with any enthusiasm was  that  in
    relation to  the  Claimant's  departure  from  Sri  Lanka  but,  as  Mr
    Mackenzie was able to point out from the evidence in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter, the Secretary of State cannot establish that there  was
    a mechanism in place to prevent her leaving because the evidence relied
    upon by her does not show that she would have been placed on  an  alert
    or wanted list.

24. Mr Mackenzie was also able to demonstrate that there is nothing in  the
    Secretary of State's point that the judge did not refer to  EG  because
    EG endorsed the conclusions in TK.

25. On the accepted  facts  the  Claimant  suffered  rape  and  torture  in
    detention.  She bears scars.   She  was  taken  to  court  and  escaped
    custody.  The Secretary of State has not been able to point to anything
    in the evidence before the judge  to  establish  that  the  authorities
    would no longer be interested in her on return.  The finding  that  the
    Claimant was at risk as someone perceived to be linked to the  LTTE  is
    entirely consistent with the guidance in TK.

Decision

26. The grounds disclose no arguable error of law  in  the  decision.   The
    judge's decision stands.  The Claimant's appeal is allowed.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

