
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02981/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2014                          |On 3 December 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               AFZAL MOHAMMAD
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hawkin of Counsel instructed by HRS Solicitors
LLP






                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I  shall  refer  to  as  "the  Applicant"  is  a
    Pakistani national born on 4 June 1970.  In previous proceedings in the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber or its predecessors it  has  been  found
    that he came to the United Kingdom in 1998.   His  previous  claim  for
    indefinite leave on the basis of fourteen  years'  long  residence  was
    ultimately dismissed on 8 March 2011.

 2. The Applicant then sought asylum which the Appellant (the SSHD) refused
    on 1 May 2014.  On 2 May 2014 the Respondent made a  decision  to  give
    directions for his removal to Pakistan.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 3. On 12 May 2014 the Applicant through his solicitors  lodged  notice  of
    appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended.   The  grounds  refer  to  his  mental  condition  and
    psychological incapacity  and  that  following  his  detention  by  the
    Respondent in 2011 his mental condition had deteriorated and he had now
    received a  working  diagnosis  that  he  is  suffering  from  paranoid
    schizophrenia.  The grounds mention the length of  time  the  Appellant
    had been in  the  United  Kingdom  and  refer  without  particulars  to
    Articles 2, 3 and 14 of the European Convention.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 4. By a determination promulgated on 7 October 2014 Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Blum dismissed the appeal on asylum and Article 3 of  the
    European Convention grounds and allowed it on human rights  grounds  by
    way of reference to Article 8.

 5. On 22 October 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shimmin granted the
    SSHD permission to appeal on the basis  that  the  Judge  had  arguably
    erred by  considering  the  availability  and  cost  of  mental  health
    treatment in Pakistan when compared to the cost in the  United  Kingdom
    in his approach to the claim under Article 8 and had  not  adopted  the
    more appropriate test of the effect on the Applicant's private life  if
    he was removed to Pakistan.

The Upper Tribunal

 6. The Applicant did not attend the hearing in person but was  represented
    by Mr Hawkin of Counsel.  His carer, Mr Shah referred to  at  paras.22,
    31-34 and 36-37 of the determination, was in attendance.  At the  start
    of the hearing Mr Hawkin  handed  up  the  Applicant's  response  under
    Procedure Rule 24.

 7. For the SSHD Mr Kandola relied on the grounds for appeal.   Looking  at
    the determination as a whole, it was evident the Judge had allowed  the
    appeal for reasons of the comparative difference to  the  Applicant  in
    the quality of medical care he would  receive  on  return  to  Pakistan
    which compared poorly with the care he received in the United  Kingdom.
    The Judge had considered this at length  in  paras.36  and  37  of  his
    determination.  He had not taken into sufficient account  the  judgment
    in MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279 and  the  determination  in
    Akhalu (Health claim: ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC).  Mr Shah
    as the Appellant's carer could return to Pakistan with the Applicant to
    assist in setting up appropriate care arrangements for him in Pakistan.
     The Judge had therefore erred in allowing the appeal under Article 8.

 8. For the Applicant, Mr Hawkin relied on the PR 24 response.   The  Judge
    at para.37 of his determination had expressly stated:-

         ... This decision is not made on  the  basis  of  a  difference  in
         medical treatment between the UK and Pakistan  but  on  the  actual
         impact to the very specific nature of the Appellant's private  life
         that he has established in  the  UK  as  a  result  of  his  mental
         illness, both in terms of his relationship  with  Mr  Shah  and  in
         terms of his current daily social experience and expectations,  and
         the destitution he is likely to face on his return  without  anyone
         to support him.

    He submitted the Upper Tribunal should be  slow  to  conclude  a  Judge
    meant something other than what he said and there was no good reason to
    think  the  Judge  had  said  what  he  had  said  at  para.37  of  his
    determination unless he had meant it.

 9. Mr Hawkin continued that the learning relevant to this appeal to be had
    from MM and Akhalu was that cases would be rare where the issue was the
    disparity of care  between  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  country  of
    removal.  It should be noted the Judge had taken full  account  of  the
    public interest at para.28 of his determination.

10. The Judge had reached his conclusion at para.37 after he had summarised
    the range of issues affecting or relevant to the Applicant in paras.28-
    36 of his determination and had relied on the expert medical and social
    worker evidence which had been filed with the Tribunal.  At para.36  he
    had considered the extent and quality of the Appellant's  private  life
    in the United Kingdom and not just the difference  in  the  quality  of
    medical care he received in the United Kingdom compared  with  what  he
    would be likely to receive on removal to Pakistan.  Mr Kandola for  the
    Respondent had no further submissions to make.

Consideration

11. I find the Judge addressed a wide range of factors in addition  to  the
    disparity between  the  medical  facilities  available  in  the  United
    Kingdom and Pakistan.  He noted the Applicant had more likely than  not
    arrived in 1998 and had been in the United  Kingdom  since  then.   The
    Applicant had not claimed to suffer from a medical condition for  which
    there was no treatment available in Pakistan or claimed there  was  any
    reason why he would be  unable  to  work  there.   This  had  been  the
    conclusion of the Upper Tribunal's determination promulgated on 8 March
    2011 already mentioned in paragraph 1.  This was before  the  Appellant
    had been detained by the SSHD and been diagnosed.

12. The Judge dismissed the Refugee Convention  claim  and  turned  to  the
    claim under the European  Convention.   He  noted  the  high  threshold
    needed to make a successful claim in medical treatment cases  explained
    in N (Uganda) v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31.  He noted at para.23 what  medical
    treatment would be available for the Applicant in  Pakistan  and  found
    that in respect of the availability of medical treatment the  Applicant
    had not shown that his circumstances  crossed  the  high  threshold  to
    demonstrate a breach of Article 3.

13. The Judge went on to consider the Applicant's claim  under  Article  8.
    He noted that although the Applicant could speak Urdu in which language
    he had given evidence on 13 December 2010 he did  not  have  any  other
    ties to Pakistan.  He also accepted the evidence from Mr Shah  whom  he
    found to be credible: see para.24 of his determination.  He noted  that
    the Applicant suffered  a  dramatic  decline  in  mental  health  while
    detained in December 2011, referring to a psychiatric report;  that  he
    had been an in-patient for an aggregate period of seven months and  was
    said to have undergone a catastrophic personality change.  He  referred
    to a further medical report giving  a  working  diagnosis  of  paranoid
    schizophrenia and that he was neither able to instruct  solicitors  nor
    competent to give evidence: see paras.29-31 of his determination.

14. At para.32 the Judge noted that the social worker's  evidence  had  not
    been challenged and was satisfied that the Appellant was  incapable  of
    independent living: see para.32.  At para.34 he starts to set  out  his
    findings.  The first sentence of para.34 contains the finding that  the
    Applicant is likely to be rendered destitute if  removed  to  Pakistan.
    The Judge referred to the medical evidence that the Applicant would  be
    likely to be unable to access medical  treatment  in  Pakistan  without
    assistance and referred at para.35 to the very limited availability  of
    psychiatric and psychological care outside family in Pakistan.

15. At para.36 he  noted  the  strength  and  quality  of  the  Applicant's
    relationship with Mr Shah who effectively is his carer  and  Mr  Shah's
    wife.  At para.37 the Judge explained that his decision was  not  based
    on the difference in medical treatment available in the United  Kingdom
    and in Pakistan but on the basis of the private life the Applicant  has
    established particularly with Mr Shah his carer which  had  come  about
    because of the Applicant's mental condition and finally refers  to  his
    starting point at para.34 that the  Applicant  is  likely  to  be  left
    destitute on return to Pakistan.

16. The Judge took the correct approach which he outlined  in  para.26  and
    its footnote.  I would add the comment that MM was a  deportation  case
    and that this appeal is a removal case.  Before the First-tier Tribunal
    there was no evidence what facilities the SSHD would  arrange  for  the
    Applicant if he were to be removed to Pakistan.

17. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error
    of law and therefore shall stand.





Anonymity

18.  There was no request  for  any  directional  order  for  anonymity  and
    having considered the papers in the Tribunal file and heard the  appeal
    find that none is required.



NOTICE OF DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error
    of law and shall stand.
    The consequence is that the appeal of the Applicant is allowed and  the
    appeal of the SSHD is dismissed.


     No anonymity direction or order is made.

Signed/Official Crest                                                   Date
02. xii. 2014




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





