
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02291/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 February 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               NY (Sri Lanka)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Muquit, Counsel instructed by A & P Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals on error of law grounds  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Goldmeier  sitting
    at Taylor House on 31 July 2015)  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse to recognise him as a refugee,  or
    as otherwise requiring international or human rights  protection.   The
    First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction, and I consider  it  is
    appropriate that the appellant continues to be accorded  anonymity  for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On a  renewed  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted the appellant permission
    to appeal for, inter alia, the following reasons:

          1) Although the decision is generally carefully reasoned,  it  is
             arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge Goldmeier has erred in
             law in concluding that there is "nothing" to suggest that  the
             appellant's name appears on any extant court order  or  arrest
             warrant  [107]  and  there  is   "nothing"   to   suggest   an
             intelligence led enquiry would conclude  the  appellant  is  a
             significant Tamil activist or has an intention to  become  one
             on return [123].

          2) The judge accepted  that  the  appellant  was  arrested  post-
             conflict  in  September  2013  during  which   time   he   was
             photographed,  fingerprinted  and  tortured,  and  that  under
             torture he signed a document confessing to his involvement  in
             the  LTTE.  The  judge  accepted  that  his  release  was  not
             officially sanctioned but procured by  way  of  bribery,  such
             that he will be be recorded as  an  escapee.  The  judge  also
             accepted that the Sri  Lankan  authorities  have  visited  the
             appellant's  mother  on  four   occasions   asking   for   his
             whereabouts and the most recent occasion was  in  March  2015.
             Those matters arguably indicate that the appellant may  be  of
             continuing adverse interest and there may be an  extant  court
             order/arrest warrant for him.

Discussion

 3. It is convenient at this stage to refer to the country guidance case of
    GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319. This country guidance replaces all existing country guidance  on
    Sri Lanka, and it includes the following headline guidance:

         "(2) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed
             since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri  Lanka
             itself is a spent force  and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
             incidents since the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state ... Its  focus
             is on preventing both (a) the resurgence of the  LTTE  or  any
             similar Tamil separatist organisation and (b) the  revival  of
             the civil war within Sri Lanka.

         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  Security  Services
             there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection.

         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
             government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils  are
             required to return to a named address  after  passing  through
             the airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
             whose names appear on a 'stop' list will be detained from  the
             airport.   Any  risk  for  those  in  whom  the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities  are  or  become  interested  exists  not  at  the
             airport, but after arrival in their  home  area,  where  their
             arrival will be verified by the CID or  police  within  a  few
             days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

             (b)  Journalists ...

             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes ...

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised 'stop' list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a 'stop'  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
             'watch' list.  A person whose name appears on a  'watch'  list
             is not reasonably likely to be detained  at  the  airport  but
             will be monitored by the security services after  his  or  her
             return.  If that monitoring does  not  indicate  that  such  a
             person is a Tamil activist working to destabilise the  unitary
             Sri Lankan state or revive the internal  armed  conflict,  the
             individual in question is not, in general,  reasonably  likely
             to be detained  by  the  security  forces.   That  will  be  a
             question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any  diaspora
             activities carried out by such an individual."

 4. Tony Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team settled a detailed  Rule  24
    response opposing the appeal. But having heard Mr  Muquit  develop  the
    grounds of appeal, Ms Holmes accepted  that  the  positive  credibility
    findings made by Judge Goldmeier (which are recited above) were  highly
    problematic when set alongside the judge's concomitant finding that the
    appellant did not have a risk profile which engendered a real  risk  of
    persecution on return.

 5. I find that an error of law is made out for the reasons  given  by  UTJ
    Plimmer when granting permission. In short,  the  judge  did  not  give
    adequate reasons for finding that the appellant would not be at risk on
    return given the extent to which he accepted the appellant's account of
    events in Sri Lanka between September 2013 and March 2015.

 6. Mr Muquit's primary case on remaking  was  that  I  should  proceed  to
    remake the decision in the appellant's favour on the  ground  that  the
    judge's positive credibility findings lead  ineluctably  to  a  finding
    that he will be at real risk of persecution on return.

 7. However, as I explored in oral argument, Judge Goldmeier also made  one
    crucial  adverse  credibility  finding  at  [108].  He   rejected   the
    appellant's evidence that his interrogators  were  under  the  mistaken
    impression that he was of higher rank in the LTTE than was the case. It
    is arguable that this particular finding is inadequately reasoned.  But
    the same can be said of the judge's positive credibility findings.  The
    essential problem with what is otherwise a carefully reasoned  decision
    is that the judge did not apply the guidance  in  GJ  and  Others  when
    assessing the credibility of the appellant's account of events  in  Sri
    Lanka from September 2013 onwards, and only applied  his  mind  to  the
    guidance after he had decided which aspects of the appellant's  account
    he accepted (most of it) and which aspect he rejected (the authorities'
    alleged misperception of the appellant's role and status in the LTTE).

 8. Although the guidance is primarily directed at risk on  return,  it  is
    also highly relevant to the assessment of the credibility of a claim by
    an ex-LTTE cadre of persecution in 2013, more than four years after the
    end of the civil war. Of particular pertinence is the guidance given in
    headnote (8) that an individual's past history will only be relevant to
    the extent that it is perceived by  the  authorities  as  indicating  a
    present risk to the unitary state.

 9. If the authorities had an accurate perception in September 2013 of  the
    appellant's true role and status in the LTTE (in the past and/or  since
    the end of the civil war), then prima  facie  the  appellant's  claimed
    arrest and detention in September 2013 runs  counter  to  the  guidance
    given in headnote (8) of GJ and Others, and it is on that  account  not
    credible.

10. The finding at [108] is inconsistent with the finding in [107] that the
    appellant's release was not  officially  sanctioned,  that  he  may  be
    recorded as an escapee, and that the authorities  have  been  searching
    for him  since  his  "escape".  For,  absent  an  acceptance  that  the
    authorities wrongfully perceived the appellant as having a higher  rank
    in the LTTE that  was  the  case,  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  the
    authorities would have a continuing adverse interest in the appellant.

11. Accordingly, I find that the error of law is such that the decision  as
    a whole is unsafe, and that none of the findings of fact  made  by  the
    judge can safely or fairly be preserved.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds is vitiated by a material error  of  law,  and
    accordingly the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside in its
    entirety, and this appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    Taylor House for a complete rehearing on all issues  and  none  of  the
    findings of fact of the previous Tribunal shall be preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

