
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA028752015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|And at Field House                            |                              |
|On 7 March and 13 May 2016                    |On 24 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     D O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant
Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr A McVeety (07.03.16) and Mr S. Kandola
                           (13.05.16), Senior Home Office Presenting
                           Officers
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Ms Patel, IAS Sheffield (07.03.16) and Mr
                           Peter Blackwood, Counsel instructed by IAS
                           Sheffield (13.05.16)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Garbett sitting at Bennett  House  on
    10 September 2015) allowing on Article 8 grounds her appeal against the
    decision of the Secretary of State to remove her under  Section  10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999,  her  asylum/human  rights  claim
    having been refused.  Her husband and their children were dependants on
    her claim, but none of them appealed in their own  right.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the claimant's asylum claim, and there is
    no cross-appeal against this decision.  The First-tier Tribunal made an
    anonymity direction, and I consider that it  is  appropriate  that  the
    claimant and her family continue to be  accorded  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 29 October 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Joanna  McWilliam  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal as in her view it was  arguable
    that  the  judge  had  erred  in  relation   to   the   assessment   of
    reasonableness pursuant to Section 117B(6) of the  2002  Act.   It  was
    arguable that the judge did not properly consider reasonableness in the
    context of the wider public interest.

The Family's Material History

 3. The appellant's family unit comprises herself, her partner F, and their
    three boys, all born in the United Kingdom.  V was born [ ] 2006, M was
    born on [ ] 2008, and N was born on [  ]  2012.   All  members  of  the
    family are Nigerian citizens.  The claimant entered the United  Kingdom
    on a visit visa on 5 April 2004, and overstayed.  Her partner F has  at
    all material times been present in the country illegally (since 2005  -
    see below) as well as being a convicted criminal who is the subject  of
    a deportation order.

 4. On 15 May 2009 F applied for an EEA residence card based on an asserted
    marriage to a Czechoslovakian national.

 5. On 7 January 2010 the claimant applied on behalf  of  herself  and  her
    children for discretionary leave to remain on private life grounds, she
    having resided in the United Kingdom for over four years.  On 15  April
    2010 the claimant was served with an IS15A notice as a person liable to
    removal from the United Kingdom as an overstayer.

 6. F was arrested by the police on 3  November  2010,  and  following  his
    arrest he too was served with an IS15A notice.  In  early  2011  F  was
    convicted at Burnley Crown Court of seeking or obtaining leave to enter
    or remain  in  the  UK  by  deception  on  22  December  2008,  and  of
    knowingly/wilfully  making  a  false   declaration   to   procure   the
    marriage/certificate/licence on the same  day.   He  was  sentenced  to
    fifteen  months'  imprisonment  on  count  one,  and  to  six   months'
    imprisonment on count two, to be served consecutively.  So in total  he
    received a sentence of 21 months' imprisonment.

 7. On 5 February 2011 the claimant was cautioned by the police for battery
    of a 3-year-old child.

 8. On 6 April 2011 the claimant submitted  an  application  on  behalf  of
    herself and the two eldest children for further leave to remain in  the
    UK.  These applications were refused on 4 August 2011.

 9. F was served with a liability  for  automatic  deportation  letter  and
    questionnaire on 28 April 2011.   The  completed  questionnaire  stated
    that F had been in a relationship with the  claimant  since  2005,  and
    that he was the father of her two children.  He also confirmed that  he
    had arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 February 2005 using  a  Nigerian
    passport in a different name.  The surname was the same, but the  first
    names were different.

10. F was served with an automatic deportation order decision letter and  a
    signed deportation order on 31 August 2011.   On  7  September  2011  F
    claimed asylum.  The asylum application was refused on 11 October 2011.
     His appeal against the refusal of asylum and the deportation  decision
    was dismissed on 18 January 2012.  Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was refused on two occasions, and  his  appeal  rights  became
    exhausted on 7 March 2012.

11. On 28 August 2012 the claimant attended the Asylum  Screening  Unit  in
    Croydon, in order to claim asylum in her own right,  with  her  partner
    and two children as dependants.

12. In a letter dated 5 February 2015  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her
    reasons for refusing  to  recognise  the  claimant  as  a  refugee,  as
    otherwise requiring international or human rights protection.

13. On the topic  of  the  children's  best  interests,  it  was  noted  at
    paragraph 74 that the children spoke  English  which  was  one  of  the
    official languages of Nigeria.  Her youngest son was 2 years  old,  and
    therefore he was still very young and completely dependent upon her and
    her partner.  The two  elder  sons  were  at  school  and  were  firmly
    settled.  But these children would be able to continue their  education
    in Nigeria.  Whilst it was acknowledged that  the  level  of  education
    available to her children might  not  be  of  equal  standard  to  that
    available to them  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  was  clear  from  the
    objective information that education  in  Nigeria  was  accessible  and
    free.

14. In the Section 55 consideration, there was copious  citation  from  the
    case law of E-A (Article 8 - best interests of  child)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 00315 (IAC), MK (Best interests of child) India [2011] UKUT  00475
    and EV (Philippines) and Others v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

15. It was a generally agreed principle that children should grow up within
    their family and their own cultural identity  wherever  possible.   The
    immigration status of the children was dependent  upon  the  claimant's
    asylum claim and there was no evidence available to suggest that  their
    family life could not continue on return to Nigeria.  She, her  partner
    and her three children would be removed to Nigeria together as a family
    unit, and so the children's social wellbeing would be protected  within
    that family unit.  As they would be returning to and living in  Nigeria
    with their parents, it was considered they would be safe, supported and
    well cared for.  She had not demonstrated there were any  obstacles  or
    difficulties that went beyond matters of  choice  or  inconvenience  to
    show why the children  should  not  accompany  her  on  her  return  to
    Nigeria.  It was not accepted they were so integrated to life in the UK
    that they could not adapt to life in Nigeria.

16. The claimant had previously raised the Article 3 rights of  her  eldest
    child V because of his "severe autism" and the fact that  he  had  been
    born with severe hypospadias.  On 11 July 2011 a consultant  paediatric
    urologist had written to  the  UK  Border  Agency  stating  that  these
    conditions should not compromise his fitness to  travel.   On  15  July
    2011 a Country of Origin Information Request  was  made  regarding  the
    availability of treatment for hypospadias and fistulas in Nigeria under
    request number 07/11-045.  The  response  received  on  2  August  2011
    showed  that  treatment  for  these  specific  medical  conditions  was
    available in Nigeria.

The Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

17. In the grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  claimant's
    representatives argued that the deportation of the  family  to  Nigeria
    would breach the children's Article 8 rights.  The two eldest  children
    were aged 8 and 6.  They were settled and  in  school.   Although  they
    were not British citizens, they were born in the UK, had never been  to
    Nigeria, and had no ties there.  Given their periods  of  residence  in
    the UK and their ages, they would undergo great hardship in  relocating
    to Nigeria, and it would not be in their best interests for them to  be
    removed from the UK.

18. In a letter dated 22 May 2014, the claimant's solicitors confirmed that
    F was dependent on  his  wife's  asylum  and  Article  8  claim.   They
    referred to paragraph 399 of  the  Rules  pertaining  to  the  proposed
    deportation of a foreign criminal, and submitted that paragraph  399(a)
    applied because the eldest child V had now lived in the UK continuously
    for at least the seven years immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the
    immigration decision and it would not be reasonable to expect the child
    to leave the UK, and there was no other family member who was  able  to
    care for the child in the UK.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

19. At paragraph [33] of her decision, Judge Garbett  said  that  the  case
    turned on Article 8.  At paragraph [34], she found that  no  issue  had
    been taken with the claimant's evidence regarding her life and that  of
    her family in the UK.  Her three children were born here and had  never
    visited Nigeria.  The  two  older  children  attended  school  and  had
    developed friendships.  The children only spoke English.  V had  health
    problems and  had  been  issued  with  a  final  statement  of  special
    educational needs.  He received  one-to-one  support  at  school.   The
    claimant said that the education of V and M would be severely disrupted
    if they were to return to Nigeria.

20. At paragraph [35] the judge rejected the submission that there would be
    significant obstacles  to  the  claimant's  integration  on  return  to
    Nigeria.  The judge's reasoning was that she spent her life in  Nigeria
    up until the age of 30.  She spoke Yoruba, she was educated in  Nigeria
    and she had worked in Nigeria.  Although  she  had  left  Nigeria  some
    eleven years ago, she was an educated and resourceful woman  and  could
    reintegrate.   So  she  did  not  meet   the   requirements   of   Rule
    276ADE(1)(vi).

21. The judge did not make a finding on the submission that V qualified for
    leave to remain under Rule 276ADE(1)(vi).

22. The judge went on to address an Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules,
    setting out at  paragraph  [41]  Section  117B  in  its  entirety.   At
    paragraph [45] she  cited  Zoumbas  v  SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  74,  and  at
    paragraph [46] she said she was  also  guided  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision of Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (Decisions  affecting  children;
    onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197.  The judge continued:

         "47. Assessing the best interests of the children is a broad notion
             requiring an assessment of diverse factors.  It is in the best
             interests of the children to remain with their  parents  as  a
             family unit.  The respondent says this will be accommodated in
             their removal to Nigeria as a family.  However there are other
             considerations.  The appellant's children have resided in  the
             United Kingdom since birth, and significantly V has lived here
             for nine years and M for six years.  Both  of  these  children
             attend school.  V and M have formed ties  outside  the  family
             unit, removal  of  which  would  impact  their  wellbeing.   V
             receives a great deal of support from healthcare professionals
             for his learning difficulties and medical conditions.  None of
             the children speak any language other than English and none of
             them have ever visited Nigeria.  These children should not  be
             blamed for their parents' conduct and poor immigration record.



         48.  In conclusion, I find that, the appellant has  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship with a qualifying child; it would  not
             be reasonable to expect that child and the other  children  of
             the family to leave and it would be entirely contrary  to  the
             best interests of the children to have to leave this  country.
             There is of course a public interest  in  the  maintenance  of
             immigration control and having considered the factors set  out
             above  I  find  that  they  render  the  appellant's   removal
             disproportionate  to  the  need  for   effective   immigration
             control.  For these reasons the appellant succeeds."

The Error of Law Hearing in Stoke

23. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Patel vigorously defended the judge's decision.  The judge  was
    right to direct herself that the children  should  not  be  blamed  for
    their parents' poor immigration record.  She submitted that  permission
    to appeal should not have been  granted,  citing  Treebhawon  &  Others
    (Section 117B (6)) [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC) and Greenwood  (No.  2)  (Para
    398 considered) [2015] UKUT 629 (IAC).

Reasons for finding an Error of Law

24. EV (Philippines) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  874  provides  the  most  recent
    guidance from the senior courts on the  interrelationship  between  the
    best interests of children and the question whether it is reasonable to
    expect a child to return to the country of his or her parent's  country
    of origin.  Clarke LJ said:

         "34. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the  present,
             the need for immigration control outweighs the best  interests
             of the children, it is necessary  to  determine  the  relative
             strength of the factors which make it in their best  interests
             to remain here; and also to take account of any  factors  that
             point the other way.

         35.  A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

         36.  In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain?  The longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance.  By contrast if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite.

         37.  In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
             account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
             immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of
             the country and the fact that, ex  hypothesi,  the  applicants
             have no entitlement to remain.  The immigration history of the
             parents may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers,  or
             have acted deceitfully."

25. Lewison LJ said:

         "49. Second, as Christopher Clarke LJ points out, the evaluation of
             the  best  interests  of  children  in  immigration  cases  is
             problematic.  In the  real  world,  the  appellant  is  almost
             always the parent who has no right to remain in the  UK.   The
             parent thus relies  on  the  best  interests  of  his  or  her
             children in order  to  piggyback  on  their  rights.   In  the
             present case, as  there  is  no  doubt  in  many  others,  the
             Immigration Judge made two findings about the children's  best
             interests:

             (a)  the best interests  of  the  children  are  obviously  to
                  remain with their parents; [29] and

             (b)  it is in the best interests of the  children  that  their
                  education in the UK [is] not to be disrupted [53].

         50.  What, if any, assumptions are to be made about the immigration
             status of the parent?  If one takes the facts as they  are  in
             reality, then the first of the  Immigration  Judge's  findings
             about  the  best  interests  of  the  children  point  towards
             removal.  If, on the other hand, one assumes that  the  parent
             has the right to remain, then one is assuming  the  answer  to
             the very question the Tribunal has to decide.  Or is there  is
             a middle ground, in which one has to assess the best interests
             of the children without regard to the  immigration  status  of
             the parent?"

26. The judge went on to analyse in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 in order to elicit an answer to  this
    question.  He reached the following conclusion:

         "58.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis the  facts
             are as they are in the real world.  One parent has no right to
             remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the  background
             against which the assessment is conducted.  If neither  parent
             has the right to remain, then that is the  background  against
             which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question
             will be is it reasonable to expect the  child  to  follow  the
             parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?"

    On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable  to  expect  the  children  to
    follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would  be
    separated and the children would be deprived of the right to grow up in
    the country of which they were citizens.  That was a long way from  the
    facts of the case before them.  No-one in  the  family  was  a  British
    citizen.  None had the right to remain in the country.  If  the  mother
    was removed, the father had no independent right to remain.   With  the
    parents removed, then it was entirely reasonable to expect the children
    to go with them:

         "60. Although it is, of course a question of fact for the Tribunal,
             I cannot see that the desirability of being educated at public
             expense in the UK can outweigh the benefit to the children  of
             remaining with their  parents.   Just  as  we  cannot  provide
             medical treatment for the world,  so  we  cannot  educate  the
             world."

    Jackson LJ agreed with both judgments.

The relationship between s117B(6) and the Rules - Treebhawon explained

27. In AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held  that  the
    duty of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  quite  clear.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was required  to  have  regard  to  considerations  listed  in
    Section  117B.   It  had  no  discretion  to   leave   any   of   those
    considerations out of account, if  it  was  a  consideration  that  was
    raised on the evidence before it.  The Tribunal continued in  paragraph
    [13]:

         "There is also in our judgment no requirement that the  FtT  should
         pose and answer the same question  more  than  once,  simply  as  a
         matter of form.  Thus since both  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
         Immigration Rules, and S117B(6), both raise the  same  question  in
         relation to a particular child, of  whether  or  not  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK: it is  a  question
         that need only be answered once."

28. At paragraph [23] of Treebhawon, a Presidential panel held that when  a
    Tribunal is  first  considering  an  appellants'  Article  8  claim  by
    reference to the Immigration Rules, the purpose of the exercise  is  to
    decide whether relevant qualifying  conditions  are  satisfied  by  the
    person concerned, and that the exercise is performed without  reference
    to Part 5A (and hence Section 117B).  The latter  is  engaged  directly
    only where the decision making process reaches a  stage  of  concluding
    the person does not satisfy the requirements of the Rules.

29. Part 5A does not apply to  the  exercise  conducted  under  the  Rules,
    following  Treebhawon.  But  this  is   academic,   as   the   domestic
    jurisprudence requires the decision-maker  to  assess  relevant  public
    interest considerations arising under Article 8(2) - such as the strong
    weight "to be given to the need  to  maintain  immigration  control  in
    pursuit of the economic well-being of the country and the fact that, ex
    hypothesi, the applicants have  no  entitlement  to  remain"  -  before
    reaching a conclusion under Rule 276ADE as to whether it is  reasonable
    to require a child who has accrued seven years' residence to leave  the
    UK.

30. When Judge Garbett's approach is assessed against the guidance given by
    the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines), an error  of  law  is  clearly
    made out.  The judge had a choice.  She could either have followed  the
    real world approach  championed  by  Lewison  LJ,  or  she  could  have
    followed the conventional hypothetical approach comprehensively set out
    by Clarke LJ (assessment of best  interests  for  and  against  removal
    without immigration control overtones, followed by assessment of  wider
    proportionality  considerations).   She  did  neither.   Instead,   she
    performed an inadequate best interests assessment, whereby she  focused
    almost exclusively on the best interests which militated in  favour  of
    the children remaining  here,  and  failed  to  engage  with  the  case
    advanced in the refusal letter as to the respects  in  which  the  best
    interests of the children would be served by them returning with  their
    parents to  the  country  of  their  nationality.   In  particular,  as
    submitted by Mr McVeety, the judge did not make any finding one way  or
    the other on  the  availability  of  educational  support  and  medical
    treatment for child V in Nigeria.

31.  In  addition,  the  judge's  assessment   of   wider   proportionality
    considerations was wholly inadequate.  Earlier, the judge had  directed
    herself that the  parents  had  an  abysmal  immigration  history.   As
    highlighted by paragraph [37] of EV (Philippines), this  was  a  matter
    which the judge had to take into account,  and  to  which  she  had  to
    attach weight  in  fortifying  the  public  interest  in  the  family's
    removal.  However, the judge misdirected herself in treating the public
    interest considerations in favour of  the  family's  removal  as  being
    effectively neutralised by one of the best interests  principles  cited
    with approval by Lord Hodge at paragraph 10 of Zoumbas  v  SSHD  [2013]
    UKSC 74:

         "(7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
             not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

32. As Lord Hodge goes on to observe at paragraph [11], the  principles  he
    endorses  in  paragraph  [10]   arise   from   the   United   Kingdom's
    international obligations under the United Nations  Convention  on  the
    rights of the child, and in particular Article 3.1 which provides  that
    in all actions concerning children, the best  interests  of  the  child
    shall be a primary consideration.

33. What the judge appears to have misunderstood  is  that  the  "no  blame
    principle" operates at the initial stage of assessing the child's  best
    interests.  It is an exclusionary principle  which  prevents  the  best
    interest  assessment  being   contaminated   by   immigration   control
    overtones.  The assessment of the child's best interests takes place in
    an ideal world scenario, where hypothetically the children's status  is
    not adversely  affected  by  their  parents'  conduct.   But  when  the
    decision-maker moves on, as he must, to consider wider  proportionality
    considerations, the "no blame principle" ceases to bite.

34. This is  illustrated  by  the  Upper  Tribunal's  approach  in  MK,  in
    particular the following passage in their decision  at  paragraph  [62]
    which is cited at paragraph 73 of the refusal letter:

         "Considering matters in the round, whilst we  accept  the  children
         are not to blame for their parents' conduct, we view  the  latter's
         poor immigration  history  as  adding  significant  weight  to  the
         factors weighing against the family's claim to remain  in  the  UK.
         Even had we accepted the judge's view that in the  years  since  25
         August 2004 the parents and their children had become 'embedded' in
         the UK, we would still have attached very significant weight to the
         fact that on the given facts both  parents  sought  to  make  their
         family life here, and to school their children here,  in  the  full
         knowledge that their immigration status  was  precarious  and  that
         they had no legitimate expectation of being allowed  to  integrate.
         They are not British citizens  nor  have  they  ever  been  settled
         within the meaning of the Immigration Acts."

35. A further significant error in both the assessment of the child's  best
    interests and also in the public interest assessment  was  the  judge's
    failure to take into account the  fact  that  the  father,  who  shared
    parental responsibility for the children's care and upbringing,  was  a
    foreign criminal who had exhausted his appeal rights in respect  of  an
    order to deport him to Nigeria as a foreign criminal.  The significance
    of this  was  twofold.   Firstly,  it  meant  that  the  best  interest
    assessment should have been asymmetric.  The judge should have assessed
    the children's best interests on the basis that the only way  in  which
    the family could remain together was if the  mother  and  the  children
    followed  the  deported  father  to  Nigeria.   Alternatively,  if  the
    claimant was going to be permitted to mount a collateral attack on  the
    deportation order, the judge had  to  assess  the  public  interest  by
    reference to the deportation Rules  governing  family  life  and/or  by
    reference to Section 117D of the 2002 Act.  As  is  apparent  from  the
    letter from the claimant's representatives which I have  cited  earlier
    in this decision, they recognised in 2014 that  the  claimant's  appeal
    brought into play the public interest in removing  a  foreign  criminal
    because they were putting forward the father  as  a  dependant  on  the
    claimant's Article 8 claim.

36. I accept that the Secretary of State by way  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal did not specifically raise the ramifications of  the  father's
    status as a foreign criminal, but the Upper Tribunal  cannot  ignore  a
    Robinson obvious point.  Moreover, if  it  is  relevant  to  take  into
    account the adverse immigration history of the  parents  in  the  wider
    proportionality assessment, a fortiori it must  be  necessary  to  take
    into account the fact that one of the parents is facing deportation  as
    a foreign criminal.  So the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in EV
    (Philippines), which is heavily relied  upon  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, is sufficient to raise  the
    issue of the  father's  status  as  a  foreign  criminal  by  necessary
    implication.

37. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    vitiated by a material error of law such that it should  be  set  aside
    and remade.

Future Disposal

38. I do not consider that it is necessary or  appropriate  to  remit  this
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.  Most  of  the
    facts bearing upon the assessment of the children's best interests, and
    the assessment of the public interest, are uncontroversial.   The  main
    issue in controversy is whether, and if so, to what extent, V returning
    with his family to Nigeria will be  inimical  to  his  best  interests,
    taking into account his  medical  conditions  and  special  educational
    needs.  The resolution of this issue will turn on documentary  evidence
    in two categories.   Firstly,  documentary  evidence  relating  to  the
    availability of treatment and support in Nigeria.  Secondly, up-to-date
    evidence from professionals responsible for V's education  and  medical
    treatment in the UK about his condition and progress.

Directions for the Resumed Hearing

39. Both parties were given permission to serve  additional  evidence  that
    was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  topic  of  V's  best
    interests, including the availability (or  lack  thereof)  of  suitable
    treatment and support in Nigeria.

The Resumed Hearing at Field House

40. For the purposes of the  resumed  hearing,  the  claimant's  solicitors
    served two bundles of  documents  that  had  been  compiled  since  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal. They also served a letter dated  11
    May 2016 from V's head teacher of the primary school which  he  attends
    in Derby.

Up to date evidence about V's special needs

41. In order to place the additional material in context, it is  convenient
    to begin with the final statement of special  educational  needs  which
    was issued on 23 July 2015.  This was made by  Derby  City  Council  in
    accordance with Section 324 of the Education Act 1996 in respect  of  V
    who resided with other members of his family at an  address  in  Derby.
    His home language was said to be English/Yoruba and  his  religion  was
    given as Roman Catholic.

42. The background of V is that he was  born  prematurely  and  spent  long
    periods in hospital when he was young as a result of health  conditions
    associated with prematurity.  He was late in  meeting  his  development
    milestones and continued to be developmentally  delayed.   He  and  his
    family had moved to Derby from Manchester in 2012.

43. V was a boy with an endearing personality  who  interacted  with  staff
    socially.  He enjoyed being part of his class, was a motivated  learner
    and took pride in his  work.   His  spatial  ability  was  an  area  of
    considerable strength and he  was  good  at  measuring.   V  liked  the
    television and computers.  He enjoyed making things, such  as  jigsaws,
    and particularly enjoyed looking at books at school.

44. The views of his parents were that he found schoolwork  difficult,  but
    enjoyed the support he had to help  him  understand  it  and  he  liked
    school.  They were concerned about V's development since  he  was  born
    and they were worried about how he would get on in his life,  including
    school and work.  They would like him to get more involved in a  social
    life.

45. V's views were that he was trying hard at his learning and was  getting
    better and better.  He said the best learning was making  things.   The
    only thing he found really difficult was times  tables.   He  liked  to
    meet new friends in his class and  in  playtime.   Outside  school,  he
    liked football club and doing his maths homework.

46. V is assessed as having special  educational  needs  in  the  areas  of
    communication and educational attainment.

47. On the topic of his spatial, social and emotional  development,  V  had
    made progress socially with his peers and was becoming more  engagingly
    interactive, but his communication difficulties were a limiting  factor
    in the development of friendships.  There  were  professional  concerns
    that his learning difficulties could lead to emotional difficulties.

48. On the topic of motor and sensory skills, V fed himself  independently,
    but depended on some adult support to get dressed as he  can  sometimes
    put his clothes on the wrong way round.   He  was  independent  in  his
    toileting skills.  V was generally fit and healthy.  He had asthma  for
    which he had inhalers, but this was not severe.

49. In summary, V's areas of special educational needs were:

       . speech, language and communication skills;

       . literacy, numeracy and non-verbal reasoning skills;

       . social and emotional skills.

50. On 14 December 2015 Angeline Seymour, a degree qualified senior  social
    worker who has worked as an  approved  social  worker  specialising  in
    adult mental health as well as  child  and  family  work,  completed  a
    "social circumstances" report for the family, detailing the bonds, ties
    and dependency that they had in  the  UK  and  the  result  that  their
    removal from the UK would have upon them.  For this purpose, she had an
    interview with the family for  two  hours  on  29  November  2015.  The
    children V, M and N had been residing in NASS  accommodation  in  Derby
    since 2012.  Before moving to Derby, V and M  had  attended  a  primary
    school in Manchester.  Since  September  2013  the  children  had  been
    attending a Catholic primary school in Derby.  The youngest  child  had
    only been attending a nursery school in Derby since  January  2015.   V
    was currently in year 5 at the primary school.  His parents informed Ms
    Seymour that before attending at school, he had found it  difficult  to
    mix with his peers and some aggression had been  reported.   They  also
    explained his difficulties with  learning  to  read,  write  and  learn
    simple maths.  Since transferring to the school and  receiving  one-to-
    one support, his parents had seen an improvement in all  areas  of  his
    education.  He continued to struggle to keep up with his peers, and the
    long term plan was for V to transfer to a special education school.

51. Having started in reception at the primary school, M was now in year 2.
     On speaking to the children,  and  having  seen  their  recent  school
    reports, it was clear to Ms  Seymour  they  were  well-established  and
    connected to the British education system.  Not only were they  settled
    in their current school, they had made  friends  there  and  were  well
    supported there.  In her opinion, it would be inappropriate to  disrupt
    these connections.

52. Throughout the interview,  the  mother  presented  as  very  upset  and
    tearful.   She  found  it  difficult  to  cope  when  her  husband  was
    incarcerated, and she had been referred to the Community Mental  Health
    Team for counselling.  Her sleep pattern had been  negatively  affected
    by the stress of her family's  immigration  difficulties,  leaving  her
    with low mood, headaches and little motivation.  The husband said  that
    owing to his wife's current presentation,  he  was  supporting  her  to
    attend college and study in an attempt to lift her mood.  He  had  also
    taken on a lot of the household chores.

53. Ms Seymour addressed the question of what  the  family  could  hope  to
    return to in Nigeria.  The parents informed her that they had no-one to
    return to in Nigeria.   There  was  a  local  school  where  they  both
    originated from, but the teachers there were regularly on strike.   She
    was informed the family had no savings to pay  for  accommodation,  and
    there was no access to social housing in Nigeria.  This would leave the
    family  homeless,  which  would  present  a  significant  risk  to  the
    children.  As well as developmental delays, V was diagnosed with asthma
    for which he required treatment.  If one cannot pay for treatment,  one
    is simply turned away from hospitals.  The parents were concerned  that
    not only would this leave V without the specialist care  and  treatment
    that he required, all the children would be open to  diseases  such  as
    malaria, typhoid and waterborne infections.  There  would  also  be  no
    access to any specialist educational support in respect of  V's  needs,
    and that would probably leave V being excluded from any education.   He
    would also be vulnerable to bullying and exploitation.

54. In her summary, Ms Seymour said that the circumstances the family would
    face if they were forced to relocate to Nigeria  were  not  within  her
    expertise to comment upon.  On the basis of the situation  as  reported
    to her, any forced relocation would mean that the children  would  lose
    out in their ability to continue with their relationship with  extended
    family and friends in the UK.  She  was  of  the  view  that  permanent
    relocation of the family from the UK was likely  to  cause  significant
    detriment to the children and also to the integrity of the family  unit
    as a whole.  If the situation was not resolved in a  positive  way,  it
    would lead to deterioration in the physical and mental  health  of  the
    mother,  and  more  importantly  to  deterioration  in  the   emotional
    wellbeing of the children.

55. In a letter dated 22  March  2016,  Michelle  Lowe,  from  the  Special
    Educational  Needs  and  Disability  Information,  Advice  and  Support
    Service, reported that she had been contacted by the  claimant  as  she
    wanted support in identifying and obtaining a special school  placement
    for her son V.  V had attended mainstream primary school since he began
    compulsory schooling but had come to the point where he needed  a  more
    specialist setting to support  his  level  of  additional  needs.   The
    family had identified a special school and were going through a process
    with the local authority to obtain a placement  for  V  from  September
    2016.  She would continue to support them through this process  for  as
    long as necessary.

56. On 24 March 2016 the head teacher of the primary school attended  by  V
    and M said that specialist provision for V was now available for him in
    Derby.  In Nigeria, V's parents would not  get  the  financial  support
    required to meet V's needs.  The education available to him there would
    not  contain  the  detailed  specifics  necessary  for  V  to  achieve.
    Children who had such severe developmental delay were not treated  with
    respect in Nigeria.

57. In a letter dated 11 May 2016, the head teacher reiterated that  V  was
    late  in  meeting  his   developmental   milestones   and   was   still
    developmentally delayed particularly in language.   He  presented  with
    the behaviour of a younger child. V needed support to  communicate  and
    build relationships with children his own age.  At present, his  levels
    of attainment were within one year expectations in  English,  and  also
    within one year expectations in maths.  Previously V had  been  working
    at P scales.  Throughout his time at his current  school  he  had  made
    slow progress towards the national curriculum targets.  When  he  first
    came to the school, he had found it very difficult to communicate  with
    others (adults and children).  In the school's positive supportive  and
    caring environment he had  made  small  steps  towards  developing  key
    skills such as reading and writing.  Moving V from this country  to  an
    environment where he did not have specialist provision would damage and
    possibly erase any success that  he  had  had  so  far.   It  had  been
    reported  that  people  with  educational  needs  were   treated   very
    inappropriately in Nigeria.  She strongly believed that removing V  and
    his family would have a negative impact on his future development.

Oral evidence from the claimant

58. Mr Blackwood called the claimant as a witness, and she adopted  as  her
    evidence-in-chief a short witness statement signed by her on  27  April
    2016.  She wished to  reaffirm  that  it  would  not  be  in  V's  best
    interests for him to leave the UK.  Following a  statement  of  special
    needs, the local authority was now  obtaining  a  placement  for  V  to
    attend a specialist school.  His  current  setting  at  the  mainstream
    school was not sufficient for his needs any longer.   At  a  specialist
    school he would get specialist one-to-one teaching.  Michelle Lowe  had
    shown them three special needs schools, one in  Derby,  one  in  Burton
    upon Trent, and one in Long Eaton.

59. V was still being cared for by Dr Williams at the Royal Derby  Hospital
    in relation to his hypospadias.  He had been physically examined by  Dr
    Williams in February 2016, and he had told them that he would  like  to
    see V for a check-up in a year's time.

60. V acted like a child under 5 rather than a boy of nearly  10.   He  got
    upset easily when he did not understand things.  He was  not  happy  he
    was not able to do the same things as other children of his  age.   She
    did not think his special needs would be taken care of in Nigeria.  She
    thought he would be abandoned by the educational system.  She would not
    be able to afford to pay any fees for him to attend a  special  school.
    She knew that children with special needs were treated as outcasts  and
    sometimes seen as witches in Nigeria.

61. In answer to supplementary questions from Mr  Blackwood,  the  claimant
    said she would make an application to register V as a British  national
    in the coming months, as he is about to reach his 10th  birthday.   She
    was asked what would happen in the event of her appeal being dismissed.
     Would some of them stay, while others  left?   She  answered  no,  she
    wanted the family to stay together.  If her  appeal  was  allowed,  she
    would prefer to live in Manchester rather than Derby as  her  husband's
    cousins lived in Manchester, and they were very helpful  to  her.   But
    the choice of residence would also be dictated by the location  of  V's
    special needs school.  At present, he was due to be at a special  needs
    school in Derby, so she would need for V to be transferred to a special
    needs school in Manchester.

62. In cross-examination, Mr Kandola asked the claimant why  V  would  have
    problems in  Nigeria  given  that  he  had  made  some  progress  in  a
    mainstream school here, such as learning to be able to write etc.   The
    claimant answered that children with learning difficulties did  not  go
    to school in Nigeria.  The  claimant  was  asked  whether  V  had  been
    diagnosed with autism.  She answered she did not  know.   Mr  Blackwood
    confirmed that there had been no formal diagnosis of autism.

Closing submissions

63. In his closing submissions on behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  Kandola
    submitted  that  the  proposed  removal  of  the  entire   family   was
    proportionate, having regard to the appalling  immigration  history  of
    the parents and also the father's criminality.  All three children  had
    been educated at the expense  of  the  taxpayer,  and  there  had  been
    additional expenditure to the taxpayer in caring for V.  The fact  that
    the level of schooling and care available to V in Nigeria would not  be
    as good or as comprehensive as that which he could access in the UK did
    not tip the scales in favour of  the  whole  family  being  allowed  to
    remain here.

64. In response to an enquiry from me, Mr Kandola checked his file  and  he
    established that the deportation orders against the  claimant  and  the
    children had been marked invalid in 2014 because of the time which  had
    elapsed since the deportation orders had been made against them.

65. In reply, Mr Blackwood referred me to his extensive skeleton  argument,
    and submitted that the refusal decision was not in accordance with  the
    law, citing Mandalia v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] UKSC 59; and that following PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined
    family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) the family could,  and
    should, succeed under Rule  276ADE(1)(iv),  even  though  both  parents
    relied solely on Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

66.  In  oral  submissions,  Mr  Blackwood  accepted  that   the   father's
    criminality was relevant in the proportionality  assessment.   However,
    he submitted that the public interest in the family's removal had  been
    reduced on EB (Kosovo) grounds by the lengthy delay  in  deporting  the
    father and/or by the decision of the Secretary  of  State  in  2014  to
    cancel the deportation orders which had been served on the claimant and
    the children (although not cancelling the deportation  order  that  had
    been served on the father).  This also meant, Mr  Blackwood  submitted,
    that the claimant and her children were not subject to deportation, and
    thus the claimant could claim the benefit of Section 117B(6).

Discussion and Findings on Re-making

67. As the rights of the children are at the forefront of this  appeal,  Mr
    Blackwood's submission as to the legality of the  refusal  decision  is
    arguably academic.  Nevertheless, it is convenient to address the issue
    as it sheds light on an important question which is  whether  V  has  a
    private life claim under the Rules as well as being a qualifying  child
    under the statute.

68. In order to have a viable claim under Rule 276ADE(1)  the  requirements
    to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the grounds of private
    life in the UK are that at the date of application, the applicant:

    '(iv)    is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK  for  at  least  seven  years   (discounting   any   period   of
         imprisonment)  and  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         applicant to leave the UK.'

    As shown by Mr Blackwood's chronology at paragraph 14 of  his  skeleton
    argument, the last relevant application was the  claimant's  claim  for
    asylum on 28 August 2012.  It was the refusal of the claimant's  asylum
    and associated human rights claims in February 2015 which triggered the
    Section 10  removal  decisions  against  the  claimant  and  the  three
    children.  At the time when the claimant made her asylum claim,  V  had
    not accrued seven years' residence in the UK.  V accrued  seven  years'
    residence  on  31  July  2013  while  the  asylum   claim   was   under
    consideration.  The representations made in 2014 did not  constitute  a
    new application, with the consequence that the Secretary of State  came
    under an obligation to treat V as having impliedly made an  application
    under Rule 276ADE(1)(iv) on the ground that he  had  now  accrued  over
    seven years' residence in the UK.

69. Mr Blackwood cites paragraph 276AO of the Rules which provides that for
    the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1) the requirement  to  make  a  valid
    application will not apply when the Article 8 claim is raised:

    '(i) as part of an asylum claim, or as part of a further submission  in
         person after an asylum claim has been refused; ... or

    (iii)    in an appeal (subject to the consent of the Secretary of State
    where applicable).'

70. However, the claimant's representatives did not in terms make  a  human
    rights claim on V's behalf, relying either expressly  or  impliedly  on
    Rule 276ADE(1)(iv).  Instead, they submitted that  the  deportation  of
    all members of the family (including the father) was not in  accordance
    with the Immigration Rules relating to deportation, and  in  particular
    with reference to paragraph 399(a) under which it had to be established
    that:

      a) it would not be reasonable to expect V to leave the UK, and

      b) that there was no other family member who was able to care for V in
         the UK.

 1. As V's father was not making  a  parallel  application  to  revoke  the
    deportation order made against him as a foreign  criminal,  I  consider
    that it was open to the Secretary of  State  not  to  engage  with  the
    claimant's representatives on the territory of deportation, and equally
    not to treat the further representations as including  a  private  life
    claim by V under Rule 276ADE(1)(iv).

 2. There is also the additional consideration that V, along with the other
    children, was only given an out of country right of appeal  in  respect
    of the Section 10 removal decision.  This can be challenged by  way  of
    judicial review, but for present purposes it is simply a fact.

 3. The facts of PD and Others are  very  different.   In  that  case,  the
    parents and child made a joint application for leave to  remain  on  12
    February 2013.  There was  no  ambiguity  about  the  child  making  an
    application in his own right based on  him  having  accrued  well  over
    seven years' continuous residence in the UK.

 4. V is not disadvantaged by not being able to invoke Rule  276ADE(1)(iv),
    as precisely the same issue arises  under  the  statute.  Mr  Blackwood
    accepts that in determining the question of  reasonableness  under  the
    Rules the same public interest considerations are  in  play  (including
    the father's criminality) as  are  in  play  outside  the  Rules.   His
    concession in this regard is in line with AM (Malawi).

 5. Before going on to consider the Article 8 claim outside  the  Rules,  I
    will summarise the position of each of the other family  members  under
    the Rules.

 6. V's father does not have a viable family or private  life  claim  under
    Appendix FM or Rule 276ADE as he is a foreign criminal  in  respect  of
    whom a deportation order has been made, and the deportation  order  has
    not been revoked.  The claimant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM because there  are  not  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her
    enjoying family life with her husband in the country of return, and she
    cannot invoke EX.1(a).  She also does not qualify  in  the  alternative
    under Rule 276ADE  as  there  are  not  significant  obstacles  to  her
    reintegrating into life in Nigeria.

 7. M was born on 3 October 2008, and so he did  not  accrue  seven  years'
    residence until 3 October 2015, which is after the date of the decision
    under appeal.  The youngest child N was born on 6 September  2012,  and
    so is still a long way off accruing seven years' residence here.

 8. Turning to an  Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules,  I  accept  that
    questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test are  engaged  in  respect  of  the
    establishment of private  life  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    claimant's family life rights are not engaged, as it  is  not  proposed
    that some members of the family should be  removed,  while  others  are
    allowed to stay.  Questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar test must be answered
    in favour of the respondent.

 9. On the issue of proportionality, the best interests of  affected  minor
    children are a primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.
     Section 117B(6) provides that in a case of a person who is not  liable
    to deportation, the public  interest  does  not  require  the  person's
    removal where -

      a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
         a qualifying child, and

      b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United
         Kingdom.

10. Both V and M are qualifying children under Section 117(1) of  the  Act,
    as they have both lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
    of seven years or more.  The father cannot take the benefit of  Section
    117B(6) as he is a person who is liable to deportation.  The  difficult
    question is whether the mother should or should not  be  treated  as  a
    person who is liable to deportation as the family member of  a  foreign
    criminal.  Although the deportation order against her was cancelled  in
    2014, it does not follow that she is no longer liable  to  deportation.
    Pursuant to his professional duty not to  misinform  the  Tribunal,  Mr
    Blackwood very properly drew to my attention that Section 3(5)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 provides as follows:

         'A person who is not a British citizen  is  liable  to  deportation
         from the United Kingdom if -

         (a)  the Secretary of State deems his deportation to  be  conducive
             to the public good; or

         (b)  another person to whose family  he  belongs  is  or  has  been
             ordered to be deported.'

11. In light of the statutory  provision,  I  consider  that  the  claimant
    cannot take the benefit of Section 117B(6)  as  she  is  a  person  who
    remains liable to deportation.  However,  the  best  interests  of  the
    children  remain  in  play,  not  least  because  Section  71  of   the
    Immigration Act 2014, which is the Act by which Part 5A to the 2002 Act
    was introduced, stipulates that, "this Act  does  not  limit  any  duty
    imposed on the Secretary of State or any other person by Section 55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (duty  regarding  the
    welfare of children)".  Although Phelan has a  note  stating  that  the
    commencement of Section 71 is from a date to be notified, the Secretary
    of State's  duties  under  Section  55  are  clearly  engaged,  as  was
    recognised by the Secretary of State in the decision letter.

12. Although child M is a qualifying child, overall his best interests  lie
    in him returning with the rest of his family to Nigeria, the country of
    which he is a national, where he can enjoy family reunion with extended
    family members there (as noted in the decision letter) and can enjoy to
    the full all the benefits  attendant  upon  his  Nigerian  citizenship,
    including immersion in the social and cultural milieu from  which  both
    his parents spring.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the
    claimant was an educated  and  resourceful  woman  who  had  worked  in
    Nigeria, and so there are not substantial grounds  for  believing  that
    M's welfare or wellbeing would be imperilled by  an  inability  on  the
    part of his parents to find gainful employment  and  to  make  adequate
    provision for the family's maintenance and  accommodation.   M  attends
    school and has formed ties outside the family unit.  But he  can  carry
    on his education in Nigeria, and can make new ties outside  the  family
    unit with new friends, new teachers and new fellow pupils.

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that M had formed ties outside  the
    family unit, removal of which would impact on his wellbeing.   But  she
    did not explain why this would be so.  M would have the support of  his
    parents in adjusting to life in Nigeria,  and  an  inability  to  speak
    Yoruba would not be an impediment to him embarking on his education  in
    Nigeria.

14. The best interest considerations weighing for and against  V  going  to
    Nigeria are in contrast finely balanced.  In a key  respect,  his  best
    interests lie in him remaining here with continued access to  the  best
    possible educational support for his  severe  developmental  delay  and
    learning difficulties.  Mr Blackwood also prays in aid an asserted need
    for V to be able to access specialist medical treatment for  conditions
    such as severe  hypospadias  and  a  urethral  fistula.   However,  the
    evidence before me does not show that V is currently suffering from any
    physical conditions which require urgent specialist  medical  treatment
    or that V has any ongoing health problems, such as asthma, for which he
    is unlikely to have access to adequate medical treatment or supervision
    in Nigeria.

15. With regard to V's special needs, it is important to recognise  that  V
    has not been formally diagnosed as suffering from  autism.   While  his
    delay in development can be categorised as severe, he has thus far been
    in mainstream education, and it is not suggested that he  has  suffered
    ostracism or bullying on account of having a presenting behaviour of  a
    younger child.  There are not substantial grounds for believing that he
    would be refused access to mainstream education in Nigeria, or that  in
    a city such as Lagos (from where  the  claimant  originates)  he  would
    suffer social stigmatisation, still less accusations of witchcraft,  on
    account of his presentation.

16. The key consideration which ultimately makes it  overall  in  V's  best
    interest to return to Nigeria is that, as matters stand, there are only
    two possible outcomes.  The first is that V returns to Nigeria with the
    rest of his family, with the consequence that both parents are able  to
    continue to look after him (and each other) and to meet his needs.  The
    alternative scenario is that the claimant remains here with his  mother
    and other siblings.  It is simply not on the cards that his father  can
    stay here without having made a successful application  to  revoke  the
    deportation order against him.  It would be highly inimical to V's best
    interests to be separated from his father, and for  his  mother  to  be
    left to cope on her own.

17. But even if I am wrong to find that overall V's best interests  lie  in
    him returning with the rest of his family to Nigeria, I find  that  the
    respects in which it is in V's best interests to remain here are not so
    compelling so as to outweigh the wider  proportionality  considerations
    which weigh very strongly in favour of the removal of the entire family
    unit. The only consideration  in  the  family's  favour  arising  under
    section 117B of the 2002 Act  is  their  fluency  in  English.  On  the
    negative side, the parents' immigration history is abysmal, the  family
    is not financially independent, the father is a foreign  criminal,  and
    both parents are liable to deportation. I  do  not  consider  that  the
    public interest is reduced by the delay in deporting the father  and/or
    by the decision in 2014 to cancel the deportation orders  made  against
    the other members of the family. The claimant has held up the  putative
    removal of the entire family by  making  an  unmeritorious  trafficking
    claim, followed by an  unmeritorious  asylum  claim.  The  interference
    consequential upon the decision appealed against  is  proportionate  to
    the legitimate public ends of protecting the country's  economic  well-
    being and the prevention of crime and disorder.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the  claimant's  appeal  on
Article 8 grounds contained an error of law, and  accordingly  the  decision
is set aside and the  following  decision  is  substituted:  the  claimant's
appeal against the decision to  remove  her  is  dismissed  on  all  grounds
raised.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 24th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
