

                                [pic]


 Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
AA/02650/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


 Heard                   at                   Field                    House
 Decision & Reasons Promulgated
 On                     18                     July                     2016
  On 20 July 2016





                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between


                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant


                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



 Representation:


 For the Appellant:    Ms R  Head,  counsel  instructed  by  Lawrence  Lupin
 Solicitors
 For the Respondent:   Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                         DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


  1. This is an appeal against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
     Wylie, promulgated on 19 November 2015, in  which  she  dismissed  the
     appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse to grant her asylum.




     Background


  2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor during  2005.
     She made two unsuccessful  applications  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
     dependent relative during 2006  and  an  unsuccessful  application  on
     Article 8 grounds in 2014. A referral was  made  during  2014  to  the
     National Referral Mechanism as the appellant claimed to be a victim of
     trafficking for domestic servitude, however it was concluded that  she
     was not. The appellant sought asylum during 2014.  The  basis  of  her
     claim is that she suffered decades of ill-treatment in  Bangladesh  in
     that she was abused by an employer, kidnapped  in  Sylhet,  abused  in
     Chittagong and was embroiled in a land dispute with relatives whom she
     fears, having won the case.   The  Secretary  of  State  rejected  all
     aspects of the appellant's claim with the exception  of  her  identity
     and nationality owing to what were said to be vague  and  inconsistent
     aspects to her account.


  3. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, Judge
     Wylie heard evidence  from  the  appellant's  niece,  SN,  alone.  The
     appellant  being  too  mentally  unwell  to  give  evidence.   Medical
     evidence showing that the appellant suffers from recurrent  depressive
     disorder, Emotionally Unstable Personality Disorder and Post-traumatic
     Stress Disorder (PTSD) as well as a range of physical  complaints  was
     before the judge. An expert opinion of Dr  Mina  M  Siddiqi  regarding
     Bangladesh was also relied  upon.  The  judge  dismissed  the  appeal,
     finding that the appellant was not at risk of persecution  or  inhuman
     and  degrading  treatment  on  account  of  her  mental  health  owing
     principally to the  presence  of  family  members  in  Bangladesh.  No
     Article 8 case was advanced.




      Error of law


    4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought  on  the  basis
       that it was arguable that firstly, the judge had failed to take  into
       consideration the evidence of the witness and not  given  sustainable
       reasons for not placing weight on her evidence. Secondly,  the  judge
       had made no findings as to the risk faced by the appellant given that
       it was accepted by the judge that she was kept in forced servitude in
       the United Kingdom. Thirdly, it was said that the judge had failed to
       point to any evidence to show the appellant could access the required
       protection on return to Bangladesh and lastly, that the judge reached
       contradictory findings.


    5. Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede granted permission on the basis  that  it
       was arguable that the evidence actually given by the witness required
       further and closer consideration and  "may  arguably  not  have  been
       fully appreciated or considered by the judge."

    6. The Secretary of State's response of 23 June 2016  robustly  defended
       the judge's decision, and argued that the evidence before  the  judge
       was that the appellant's sisters in  Bangladesh  had  not  mistreated
       her; they had supported her both in Bangladesh and the United Kingdom
       and that the witness did not state in her evidence  that  the  entire
       family would not be able to support the appellant.

The hearing

    7. Ms Head relied on the application for permission to appeal and  grant
       of permission. She explained that a narrow point was  involved  which
       went to the core of the case, that is whether the appellant's sisters
       in Bangladesh would be willing to offer her support.  The  only  live
       evidence before the judge was that of  the  appellant's  niece  whose
       mother is one of the appellant's sisters.

    8. Ms Head argued that the judge had ignored undisputed evidence of  the
       appellant's ill-treatment by her brother in  the  United  Kingdom  as
       well as evidence that one of  the  appellant's  sisters  was  unwell,
       without a support network of her own and reliant on her son  who  was
       not also willing to care  for  the  appellant.   Nor  had  the  judge
       considered the evidence in relation to the appellant's son, whom  the
       appellant gave birth to at the age of 12  and  who  had  subsequently
       been cared for by others. The appellant's niece provided evidence  of
       her contact with the son and his unwillingness to provide support  to
       the appellant. Therefore, in finding that the appellant had a willing
       family available to  her,  the  judge  failed  to  consider  all  the
       evidence before and her and if that evidence was  rejected,  she  had
       failed to give reasons for doing so.

    9. Mr Melvin relied on the Secretary of State's  Rule  24  response  and
       argued that the findings made were open to the  judge.  He  submitted
       that the decision as a whole implied a rejection of the  evidence  of
       the niece. He commented that it would have been helpful had the judge
       had rejected her evidence outright. The asylum claim was based on the
       appellant's "numerous" family members failing to assist  her  if  she
       was returned to Bangladesh and the judge found this was not the case.
       He also adopted [5-6] of Judge Chambers decision refusing  permission
       to appeal and asked me to find there was no material error of law.


     Decision on error of law

 10. Judge Wylie made a material error of law. Her decision is  set  aside,
     in its entirety, for the following reasons.

 11. The judge accepted at [46] of her decision  and  reasons  that  single
     women  in  the  appellant's  position  would  be  at  risk  of  sexual
     harassment and that the appellant, owing to her  mental  and  physical
     conditions was "particularly vulnerable." At [47] the judge found that
     the appellant had family ties in Bangladesh consisting of two  sisters
     and a son as  well  as  a  brother  in  the  United  Kingdom  who  had
     previously offered her support  both  in  Bangladesh  and  the  United
     Kingdom. Nowhere in this decision is there any mention of the evidence
     given by the appellant's niece  in  her  witness  statement  that  the
     appellant's brother threw her out of his home and  encouraged  her  to
     take her own life. The appellant acted on that encouragement  and  was
     subsequently detained under a section of the Mental Health  act  1983.
     In addition, the witness  gave  evidence  that  her  own  mother  (the
     appellant's sister) was in poor health and in no  position  to  assist
     the appellant. The other sister in Bangladesh was  reliant  on  others
     and said to be unable to assist.



 12. With regard to the appellant's son, the evidence before the judge  was
     that he and the appellant had never enjoyed a close relationship given
     the circumstances of his birth at a time  when  the  appellant  was  a
     child and that she had suffered post-natal depression. The evidence of
     the niece was that the son had been imprisoned in  the  context  of  a
     land dispute within the family and  he  was  not  willing  to  provide
     support to the appellant. In view of the fact that  the  crux  of  the
     case was the support available to the appellant, it was  crucial  that
     the evidence relating to the relatives  in  Bangladesh  was  carefully
     assessed. It cannot be implied from any reading of the  decision  that
     the judge considered and rejected this evidence. If she did  so,  then
     reasons for doing so ought to have been clearly stated.

 13. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there  are  errors  of  law
     such that the decision be  set  aside,  to  be  remade.  None  of  the
     findings of the judge are to stand.

 14. I considered listing this matter to be heard in the Upper Tribunal, in
     view of practice  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
     Statements of 10 February 2010 (as amended), however the appellant has
     yet to have an adequate consideration of all  aspects  of  her  asylum
     appeal at the First-tier Tribunal and it would be  unfair  to  deprive
     her of such consideration.

 15. Further directions are set out below.

 16. An anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ. I consider it appropriate
     for anonymity  to  be  continued  and  therefore  make  the  following
     anonymity direction:

        "Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. "


Conclusions


     The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
     making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision to be re-made.





     Directions





   . This appeal is remitted  to  be  heard  de  novo,  by  any  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge (except Judge Wylie).
   . The appeal is to be listed for a hearing at Hatton Cross
   . An interpreter in the Bengali (Sylheti) language is required.
   . Time estimate is 3 hours.


 Signed     Date: 19 July 2016
 Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
