
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02939/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 October 2015                   |On 20 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     OS
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Azmi, Counsel
For the SSHD:     Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. I have anonymised the appellant because this decision refers to his
         asylum claim.

Summary of asylum claim

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan who claimed asylum  on  arrival
         in the United Kingdom  ('UK')  on  2  September  2014.    The  SSHD
         refused the claim for asylum and  the  appellant  appealed  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  dated  6
         February 2015.

      3.  The  appellant  contends  that  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in Sudan on account of an anti-regime political opinion
         imputed to him on account of his activities in  Sudan,  the  UK  as
         well as for reasons relating to his ethnic origin.

Procedural history

      4. In a decision dated 17 July 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge C Mather
         dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.   The  judge   comprehensively
         rejected the entire credibility of the appellant's asylum claim.

      5. In a decision dated 18 August 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Reid
         granted permission to appeal observing inter alia that Judge Mather
         arguably failed  to  engage  with  the  analysis  contained  in  Dr
         Verney's country expert report.

      6. The SSHD has submitted a rule 24 notice dated  25  August  2014  in
         which it is submitted that Judge Reid was entitled  to  reject  the
         appellant's credibility for the reasons provided.

Hearing

      7. At the beginning of the hearing I indicated a preliminary  view  to
         both representatives to the effect that the Judge had erred in  law
         in failing to take into account the background and other supportive
         evidence supportive of the appellant's claim, when determining  the
         credibility and plausibility of that  claim.   These  are  set  out
         clearly within the grounds of appeal prepared by Mr Azmi.

      8. Ms Johnston relied on the rule 24 notice and  invited  me  to  find
         that the Judge 'had done enough'.

      9. After hearing Ms Johnstone's brief submissions I indicated  that  I
         did not need to hear from Mr Azmi because I was satisfied that  the
         decision contains material errors of law and should be set aside.

     10.  Both  representatives  agreed  that  the  errors  of  law  that  I
         identified are such that the decision needs to be remade completely
         and that given the nature and extent of those findings, this should
         be done in the First-tier Tribunal.  I have had regard to para  7.2
         of the relevant  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  and  the
         nature and extent of the factual findings required in remaking  the
         decision, and I have decided that this is an  appropriate  case  to
         remit to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    Both  representatives  also
         agreed to the directions set out below.

Discussion

     11. The decision under appeal comprehensively rejects  the  credibility
         of the appellant's account.  I note that the Judge expressly stated
         that she had regard to all of the evidence put before her including
         the "objective background material" [16].   When  the  decision  is
         read as a whole, the Judge has failed to consider the  plausibility
         and reliability of the appellant's evidence in the context  of  all
         the available evidence.  The evidence  supporting  the  appellant's
         claim is very detailed.  His bundle (excluding case  law)  runs  to
         432 pages.  This includes the evidence I summarise below.
          i. In his detailed country expert report dated 12  June  2015  Dr
             Verney sets out a number of aspects of the appellant's  claim,
             which are consistent with the approach taken by  the  Sudanese
             authorities.  This includes: professionals being  interrogated
             on their return from the UK to Sudan; references to a referral
             he made on the appellant's behalf to Waging  Peace,  a  London
             based  non-governmental  organisation   that   campaigns   for
             awareness of human rights abuses in  Sudan;  the  practice  of
             surveillance on  the  part  of  the  Sudanese  authorities  on
             Sudanese nationals in the UK; the practice of using short-term
             detention and then release as a  means  of  keeping  suspected
             opponents under observation. Dr Verney also seeks to correct a
             factual mistake made by the  SSHD  regarding  the  appellant's
             ethnic origin and to make the point that as a Nubian  he  will
             be regarded adversely by the Sudanese authorities.
         ii. In a letter dated 13 May 2015, the Director  of  Waging  Peace
             addressed specific aspects of the appellant's account as being
             consistent with the background country evidence  available  on
             Sudan.  Detailed reports  were  attached  to  this  letter  to
             support the matters set out therein.
        iii. A letter from the General Secretary for  Abdulateef  Kamarat's
             Cultural Forum ('AKCF') confirmed the  appellant's  attendance
             at a forum on Sudan's economic policies in  Cardiff  dated  17
             June 2015.
         iv. A letter from the chairman of the Darfuri community  in  Wales
             dated  3  March  2015  supported   the   appellant's   claimed
             activities with Darfuris.

     12. In my judgment the First-tier Tribunal has  erred  in  law  in  its
         approach to the evidence set out at (i)  to  (iv)  above,  and  has
         erred in law in its credibility findings.  In R (HK) v SSHD  [2006]
         EWCA Civ  1037,  Neuberger  LJ  made  the  following  observations,
         relevant to deciding credibility in asylum appeals:
             "28.      Further, in many asylum cases, some, even  most,  of
             the appellant's story may seem inherently  unlikely  but  that
             does not mean that it is untrue. The ingredients of the story,
             and the story as a whole, have to be  considered  against  the
             available country evidence and reliable expert  evidence,  and
             other familiar factors, such  as  consistency  with  what  the
             appellant has said before, and  with  other  factual  evidence
             (where there is any).
             29.  Inherent  probability,  which  may  be  helpful  in  many
             domestic  cases,  can  be   a   dangerous,   even   a   wholly
             inappropriate, factor to rely on in some asylum cases. Much of
             the evidence will be referable to societies with  customs  and
             circumstances which are very different from those of which the
             members of the fact-finding tribunal have  any  (even  second-
             hand) experience. Indeed, it is likely that the country  which
             an asylum-seeker has left will be suffering from the  sort  of
             problems and dislocations with which the overwhelming majority
             of residents of this country will be  wholly  unfamiliar.  The
             point is well made in Hathaway on Law of Refugee Status (1991)
             at page 81:
                  "In  assessing  the  general  human  rights   information,
                  decision-makers must  constantly  be  on  guard  to  avoid
                  implicitly recharacterizing the nature of the  risk  based
                  on their own perceptions of reasonability."
             30. Inherent improbability in the context of asylum cases  was
             discussed at some length by Lord Brodie in Awala -v- Secretary
             of State [2005] CSOH 73. At paragraph 22, he pointed out  that
             it was "not proper to reject an applicant's account merely  on
             the basis that it is not credible or  not  plausible.  To  say
             that an applicant's account is not  credible  is  to  state  a
             conclusion" (emphasis added). At paragraph 24,  he  said  that
             rejection of a story on grounds of implausibility must be done
             "on reasonably drawn inferences and not simply  on  conjecture
             or speculation". He went on to emphasise, as did  Pill  LJ  in
             Ghaisari, the entitlement of the fact-finder to rely  "on  his
             common sense and his ability,  as  a  practical  and  informed
             person, to identify what is or is not plausible". However,  he
             accepted that "there will be cases  where  actions  which  may
             appear implausible if judged by ... Scottish standards,  might
             be  plausible  when  considered  within  the  context  of  the
             applicant's social and cultural background."

     13. The Judge attached very little weight to Dr Verney's report on  the
         basis that Dr Verney  accepted  the  appellant  to  be  a  credible
         witness, whereas she did not agree that he is credible  [31].   The
         judge has completely failed to consider Dr Verney's  evidence  that
         significant aspects of the appellant's claim were  consistent  with
         his knowledge of the behaviour of the Sudanese authorities.  Where,
         as here, an  appellant  relies  upon  country  expert  evidence  to
         specifically support aspects of his claim said to be implausible or
         incredible in the refusal letter, the judge is obliged to  consider
         this  when  making  the  credibility   assessment.    Findings   on
         credibility are  informed  (but  not  determined)  by  evidence  of
         inherent plausibility.  As Neuberger LJ said in HK "the ingredients
         of the story, and the story as  a  whole,  have  to  be  considered
         against  the  available  country  evidence  and   reliable   expert
         evidence".  Whilst a judge is entitled to reject expert evidence as
         unreliable, this judge has given no reasons for  rejecting  aspects
         of the report  which  addressed  the  plausibility  of  the  events
         described by the appellant in the context of Sudan, as  opposed  to
         their general credibility.

     14. The judge has erred in law in wholly failing to acknowledge or take
         into account the evidence from  Waging  Peace,  which  specifically
         addressed aspects of the appellant's account.

     15. The judge attached no weight to the AKCF letter [25] without giving
         any  reasons  for  this  finding.   The  fact  that  there  are  no
         photographs has been explained  by  the  appellant  yet  the  judge
         offers no reasons for rejecting this explanation.

     16. The judge concluded that the letter from the Darfuri  community  in
         Wales ('DCW') was inconsistent with the appellant's own case  [32].
         This is a mistake of fact that has caused unfairness.   The  letter
         states that the appellant assisted Darfuris and  this  led  him  to
         flee to Sudan.  The appellant's witness statement explains this  in
         broadly similar terms "I was accused of supporting  the  opposition
         groups because of my close links  with  the  Darfuri  students.  My
         position became untenable and I did not want to continue working in
         Sudan".  The judge did not accept the  appellant's  detailed  claim
         that he was  involved  with  human  rights  activists  and  Darfuri
         students in his witness statement [20] and was satisfied that  this
         was "an attempt  to  shore  up  a  weak  asylum  claim".   This  is
         completely unreasoned.  The judge has failed  to  engage  with  the
         detail of this aspect of the claim or the other evidence supportive
         of it such as power point slides and the DCW letter.

     17. The judge has repeatedly failed to give reasons for  rejecting  key
         aspects of the appellant's evidence.  The  evidence  is  summarised
         and then followed by "I do not accept this  evidence  is  credible"
         [see for example, 22, 28 and 29].  The judge  has  merely  given  a
         conclusion without providing reasons.

     18. I accept that the First-tier Tribunal has given some reasoning  for
         rejecting other aspects of the appellant's account, all of which  I
         have not addressed above.  However,  at  no  stage  has  the  judge
         considered the apparent plausibility of the appellant's account  in
         light of the evidence provided by the  country  expert  and  Waging
         Peace.  I am not confident that the decision would  have  been  the
         same  on  the  basis  of  the  other  reasons  for  rejecting   the
         appellant's credibility.  The  errors  I  have  focussed  upon  are
         sufficiently wide-ranging and fundamental to lead me  to  the  view
         that the conclusion on credibility is vitiated by errors of law and
         unsafe.  The decision must be remade entirely and de novo.

Decision

     19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

     20. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions

      1) The appeal shall be reheard de  novo  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         sitting in Stoke (TE: 2.5hrs) on the first date available.   Arabic
         interpreter necessary.

      2) 14 days before the hearing date the appellant shall file and  serve
         (1) a condensed  indexed  and  paginated  bundle  (to  replace  all
         previous bundles) containing only those documents relevant  to  the
         rehearing that are not contained in the SSHD's bundle, (2)  a  more
         detailed and comprehensive skeleton argument that  deals  with  the
         credibility and plausibility of the appellant's account  by  cross-
         referencing to pages in the condensed bundle.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
15 October 2015
