

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/02153/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at IAC Manchester                   |  Decision Promulgated           |
|On 3 May 2016                             |  On 16 May 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                      jaber hamad mohsin hamoud al-anzi
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Duncan, instructed by Christian Gottfried & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   ("SSHD") against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson allowing
   Mr Al-Anzi's appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse him leave
   to enter the UK following the refusal of his asylum claim.

2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall  refer  to  the  Secretary  of
   State as the respondent and Mr Al-Anzi as the appellant, reflecting their
   positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is considered by the respondent to be a national of  Kuwait
   born on 12 January 1974 and whose name is Jabar Hamad Mohsin.  He  claims
   to be a Kuwaiti Bidoon born on 3 February 1974 named Jaber  Hamad  Mohsin
   Hamoud Al-Anzi. He claims to have arrived in the UK on 12 or 13 May 2013.
   He claimed asylum on 13 May 2013. His claim was  refused  on  27  January
   2015 and he was refused leave to enter the same day. He appealed  against
   that decision and his appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal  on  21
   September 2015 and allowed in a decision promulgated on 21 October  2015.
   The respondent has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal against that decision.


4. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he is an  undocumented  Bidoon
   and is accordingly at risk in Kuwait. He claims to have been arrested  in
   Kuwait in 18 February 2011 after attending a demonstration with  his  two
   brothers Mashal and Fahad. Mashal and Fahad left  Kuwait  afterwards  and
   came to the UK where they were granted asylum, but he remained in Kuwait,
   fleeing in May 2013 after attending  another  demonstration  in  February
   2013 and following the arrest of one of his friends.

5. The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, noted  that  biometric
   evidence identified him as having applied in Baghdad for a  non-immigrant
   visa to the USA, in April 2013, in the identity of  Jaber  Hamed  Mohsin,
   using a national passport of Kuwait. The respondent  noted  further  that
   the appellant had, during his asylum interview, denied having ever held a
   Kuwaiti passport and denied having been in Baghdad or having applied  for
   a US visa and had maintained his claim  to  be  a  Bidoon  who  had  been
   smuggled out of Kuwait and brought to the UK by an agent. The  respondent
   considered that the appellant would not have  had  access  to  a  Kuwaiti
   national  passport  if  he  was  an  undocumented  Kuwaiti  Bidoon.   The
   respondent noted that the appellant had failed to provide any evidence to
   show that he was the brother of the two undocumented Bidoon  refugees  to
   whom he had referred. The respondent accepted that the  appellant  was  a
   Kuwaiti national and that if it was accepted that he was an  undocumented
   Bidoon he would be at risk on return to Kuwait.  However  the  respondent
   did not accept that he was an undocumented Bidoon and did not accept that
   he was at risk on return to Kuwait.

6. The appellant's appeal  was  heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  21
   September 2015. He submitted DNA evidence confirming his relationship  to
   his two brothers and a statement in which he admitted having applied  for
   a visa in the American Embassy in Baghdad and explaining that he had lied
   about that as the agent had threatened to harm his family if he gave  any
   information about having been  in  Baghdad.  The  judge  heard  from  the
   appellant and his brother Mashal. On the basis of  a  Sprakab  linguistic
   report in the respondent's appeal bundle, the  judge  accepted  that  the
   appellant was born and raised in Kuwait. She also accepted that he was  a
   Bidoon and, given that his two brothers had been granted  refugee  status
   in the UK as undocumented Bidoons, accepted that he was  an  undocumented
   Bidoon. She found that he would therefore be at risk on return to  Kuwait
   and she allowed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.


7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge had failed to explain why she accepted that
   the appellant was a Bidoon, and an undocumented Bidoon, and had failed to
   resolve the conflict between his evidence to that effect and the  factual
   evidence that he had used a Kuwaiti passport to try and obtain a US visa.
   It was asserted further that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
   reasons why the  appellant's  brothers'  apparent  lack  of  registration
   should mean that the appellant was an undocumented Bidoon.

8. Permission to appeal was granted to the respondent on 6 November 2015.

9. I heard submissions from both parties at the  hearing  and  have  decided
   that the judge's decision is materially flawed and cannot stand.

10.   Contrary to the assertions made by Mr Duncan I do not accept that  the
   judge had all relevant matters in mind and made  clear  findings  in  her
   decision. On the contrary, her findings as to the appellant's status as a
   Bidoon, and an undocumented Bidoon, are not supported by full and  proper
   reasons and were made without addressing the conflicting evidence  relied
   upon by the respondent in refusing his claim.


11. In refusing the  appellant's  claim,  the  respondent  relied  upon  the
   significant matter that the appellant, having claimed at his interview to
   have never held any Kuwaiti documents and to have  never  had  a  Kuwaiti
   passport, had been identified by biometric evidence as having applied for
   a US visa in Baghdad with a Kuwaiti national passport. Furthermore,  that
   had taken place at a time when he had claimed to have been in  hiding  in
   his  employer's  home  in  Kuwait   following   his   attendance   at   a
   demonstration. In addition, when confronted with  that  evidence  at  his
   interview, the appellant denied having been in Baghdad and having applied
   for a US visa and maintained his account of  having  remained  in  Kuwait
   until his departure for the UK. Clearly several issues arose out of  that
   conflicting evidence: the conflict between the appellant's possession  of
   a Kuwaiti national passport and his claim to be a  Bidoon;  the  conflict
   between the appellant's account of having been in hiding in Kuwait  after
   attending a demonstration with the  evidence  that  he  was  in  fact  in
   Baghdad at the time; and the fact that  he  had  maintained  his  lie  by
   denying any knowledge of the matters put to him when  confronted  by  the
   respondent's evidence.


12. However the judge did  not  address  all  of  these  matters.  The  only
   reference she made to the conflicting evidence was  at  [30],  where  she
   found that the appellant's admission of having lied  to  the  immigration
   officer undermined his credibility, but then went on to state that he had
   least given an explanation and apology. At  no  point  did  she  actually
   engage with the conflicting evidence or make a finding that she  accepted
   his explanation for being in possession of  a  Kuwaiti  passport  or  for
   lying about his account, or, if she did,  give  reasons  as  to  why  she
   accepted it. The findings that she  made  at  [31]  in  relation  to  the
   linguistic report indicate that she misunderstood the significance of the
   appellant's visa application in Baghdad, considering it to be relevant to
   the question of whether he  was  of  Kuwaiti  or  Iraqi  nationality  and
   descent, whereas the respondent had never disputed that the appellant was
   from Kuwait. She did not engage with the most relevant point,  which  was
   the significance of the  appellant  being  in  possession  of  a  Kuwaiti
   national passport when claiming to be a Bidoon, a matter  raised  by  the
   respondent at [14] of the refusal  letter  as  being  contradictory.  Her
   conclusion at [31], that  the  appellant  was  a  Bidoon,  was  therefore
   unsupported by any, or any proper, reasoning.

13. Likewise, in accepting that the appellant  was  an  undocumented  Bidoon
   because of his brothers' accepted status, the judge failed to explain why
   his brothers' lack of registration meant that he was also an undocumented
   Bidoon. In addition the judge did not make any findings in regard to  the
   appellant's experiences in Kuwait and as to whether or not  she  accepted
   his account of having attended two demonstrations, having  been  arrested
   following the first detention and having fled  Kuwait  after  the  second
   detention. At [34] she found that his claim to have been involved with  a
   demonstration was consistent with the  background  information,  but  her
   findings went no further than that.


14. Accordingly I agree with the respondent that the judge  failed  to  make
   adequate findings on material matters  and  failed  to  provide  adequate
   reasons for the findings that she did make. The respondent's grounds have
   been made out. The judge's decision contains material errors of  law  and
   simply cannot stand. None of the findings can be preserved and the appeal
   clearly needs to be determined afresh on  all  grounds.  Accordingly  the
   appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.

DECISION

15. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal  is
   allowed. The decision is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the  First-
   tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh, pursuant to  section  12(2)(b)(i)
   of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice  Statement
   7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Simpson.







                               Signed                                  Date

                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
