
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02005/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |                 Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 24th July 2015                     |                 On 14th August 2015  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                          MRS Chiquitita Bagabirwa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 16th February 1990 is a citizen of  Rwanda.   The
    Appellant was not present and was unrepresented.   The  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr McVeety, a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made an application for asylum.  The  Respondent  had
    refused that  application  on  15th  March  2014.   The  Appellant  had
    appealed that decision and her appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cruthers sitting at Manchester on 28th May 2014.  The  judge  had
    noted at paragraphs 3 to 5 that the Appellant's case was put on appeal,
    on the basis of Article 8 of the ECHR alone.  The judge  had  dismissed
    the appeal.

 3. Application for permission to appeal  was  issued  containing  grounds.
    Permission to appeal was granted First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keane  on
    24th July 2014.  The judge noted that broadly the grounds  amounted  to
    no more than a disagreement with the findings of the judge.  However he
    said it was arguable in that the judge had made  an  error  of  law  in
    according  weight  to  the  Appellant's  financial   capabilities   and
    abilities in making a decision under Article 8.  The Respondent opposed
    that application on 8th August 2014.

 4. The matter comes before me firstly to decide whether an  error  of  law
    had been made or not.

Submissions

 5. The Appellant was not present.  She was unrepresented  the  firm  South
    Manchester Law Centre having gone out of practice.  I  have  looked  at
    the Grounds of Appeal as forming the basis of the  submissions  to  the
    Upper Tribunal and the permission to appeal granted on 24th July  2014.



 6. Mr McVeety on behalf of  the  Respondent  kept  his  submissions  brief
    merely pointing out the importance of financial considerations in terms
    of the public interest.

 7. I now provide my decision with reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 8. As indicated above the judge in this case was simply dealing  with  the
    question of Article 8 of the ECHR outside of the Rules it  having  been
    conceded by the Appellant's legal representative that she did not  face
    a risk of persecution on return to Rwanda nor could she  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules themselves.

 9. In consideration of Article 8 the judge had clearly looked in detail at
    the relevant  evidence  and  had  noted  a  number  of  cases  of  some
    relevance.  The judge had noted the case of AAO  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  840
    which made reference to adequate maintenance  although  potentially  in
    the context of refusal of leave to enter.  He had also  looked  at  the
    case of ZH (Tanzania)  and  Zoumbas.   The  judge  was  involved  in  a
    proportionality  exercise.   Although  his  decision  was  made  before
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act was incorporated by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014 nevertheless that amendment to the 2002 Act merely gave a list  of
    factors that must be taken into account in all  Article  8  cases.   In
    reality they were factors that almost invariably  should  or  would  be
    taken into account by judges.  It is clear from Section 117B(2) and (3)
    that the financial cost potentially to the country is an important  and
    integral part of an Article 8 consideration.  It has  always  been  the
    case.  The judge was entitled as part of the  proportionality  exercise
    to place weight upon such features.

10. The permission granting appeal noted, correctly, that  in  essence  the
    Grounds of Appeal amounted to no more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's conclusions.  I agree with that  observation.   The  judge  was
    entitled on the evidence before him to conclude that it  would  not  be
    disproportionate to remove the Appellant and  two  dependent  children.
    It was a decision open to the judge on the facts as presented and found
    by him and it cannot be said  that  such  conclusion  was  in  any  way
    unreasonable.

Notice of Decision

11. I find that no material error of law was made by the judge  and  uphold
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

12. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

