
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02513/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 28 September 2015                         | On 22 October 2015           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                                     C a
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, Counsel instructed M & S Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a Sri Lanka national who was born on 22 January  1981.
     He applied for asylum on 19  September  2014.   That  application  was
    refused on 27 January 2015 by the Secretary of State.   The  basis  for
    the refusal is set out in that letter. It is the appellant's claim that
    he is a homosexual and he had come to the realisation that he  was  gay
    during his stay in the United Kingdom.  The Secretary of State did  not
    find his account of his relationship to be  credible,  did  not  accept
    that there were any threats emanating from Sri Lanka on  the  basis  of
    his sexuality and did not accept that his partner who was  a  dependant
    on his asylum claim had given a true account  of  his  sexuality.   The
    decision was made therefore to refuse asylum, to refuse  the  grant  of
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of the  Immigration  Rules
    and to refuse the appellant's application under paragraph 276ADE (1) of
    the Rules.  Removal directions were then  given  to  Sri  Lanka  on  28
    January 2015.

2.   The appellant appealed that decision and the matter came before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ghani  who  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 3 June 2015.  To summarise, it was not accepted that the
    appellant had given a credible account in relation to his sexuality and
    the evidence of  his  partner  was  also  rejected.   He  rejected  the
    appellant's  case  that  he  was  at  risk  in  Sri  Lanka  and   found
    inconsistencies in the evidence both in relation to the  appellant  and
    his partner's sexuality and in relation to the threats that  were  said
    to have been made against them.  He also  found  that  internal  flight
    would be not unduly harsh or unreasonable.   He  dismissed  the  appeal
    under Article 8.

3.   The appellant sought permission to appeal against  that  decision.  The
    grounds were drafted by Counsel who represented the  appellant  at  the
    hearing and assert that several requests for an adjournment  were  made
    in the course of the hearing.  It is asserted  at  Ground  1  that  the
    First-tier Judge's refusal of the application for  an  adjournment  was
    unfair.  An application for an adjournment had been made  in  order  to
    present evidence from a witness who was on holiday during the  hearing.
    It is said that in refusing the adjournment request the only basis  for
    the refusal was that the appellant was aware of  the  issue  since  the
    date of the refusal, however the  First-tier  Judge  did  not  consider
    whether  the  evidence  was  cogent  and  relevant  and  there  was  no
    consideration of its impact in the context of the asylum claim.  It  is
    also said that the appellant requested an adjournment on the  basis  of
    threats on Facebook that were not translated and that  the  appellant's
    case was therefore not given the required anxious  scrutiny  in  asylum
    claims.  The other grounds assert that there are multiple errors of law
    in the decision and there is a lack of anxious scrutiny.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Reed  on
    3 July 2015.  It is said in the grant of permission at paragraph 3 that
    the issue of the appellant's sexual orientation was the cornerstone  of
    the appeal.  The proposed witness was in Sri Lanka  but  apparently  he
    had confirmed his willingness to attend a hearing  on  his  return  and
    drawing adverse  conclusions  on  the  appellant's  sexual  orientation
    founded on the lack of any friends being  prepared  to  come  and  give
    evidence in support was arguably in error of law.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Reed noted that it was clear from the Record of Proceedings  that
    the witness would be back in the UK on 17 June 2015 which was just  two
    weeks after the promulgation of the decision.

6.   The matter therefore comes  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  determine
    whether or not there was an error of law in the making of the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and if there is such an  error  what  to  do
    about it.  I heard  representations  from  both  parties.   Ms  Solanki
    served a skeleton argument.

7.   The appellant produced an  email  from  Counsel  who  appeared  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and Mr Clarke produced a note of
    the  hearing  from  the  Presenting  Officer.  There  was  no   factual
    disagreement between the parties as to what occurred in relation to the
    applications for adjournments.  The email from the  representative  for
    the appellant states that she  made  applications  for  an  adjournment
    described at Ground 1.  The  first  application  was  an  order  for  a
    material witness to attend and for a country expert to  be  instructed.
    There was a further issue as to the presence of  Facebook  warnings  to
    the witness by the appellant's wife.  The latter was shown  to  Counsel
    and to the First-tier Tribunal on a screen in a language she could  not
    understand. The content was described in evidence.  She applied for  an
    adjournment on that basis.  She confirms the description of matters  at
    paragraphs 18 to 19 of the grounds are correct.

8.   The note from the  Presenting  Officer  records  that  the  appellant's
    representative  requested  several  adjournments  during  the   hearing
    firstly in relation to a witness who was  in  Sri  Lanka  and  also  in
    regard to the request for an expert's report.  She  also  recalls  that
    there was a second application for an adjournment in the  afternoon  in
    relation to the threats recorded on a Facebook page.

9.   The submissions of the representatives at the hearing  before  me  were
    as follows.  Ms Solanki submitted that the refusal of the  adjournments
    was unfair and the approach to credibility  was  fundamentally  flawed.
    She submitted that there was a witness who  would  have  returned  from
    holiday two weeks' after the hearing.  There was a  second  adjournment
    application on the basis of the  Facebook  threats  as  they  were  not
    translated.  The judge dealt with this at paragraph 36 of the decision.
     The reason for rejecting the application was that  the  appellant  had
    known about the hearing since 27 January 2014.  The Rule 24 notice said
    that this was a  badly  prepared  case.   Ms  Solanki's  submission  in
    respect of that was that it  was  well-established  that  an  appellant
    should not be prejudiced by an error  of  their  representatives.   The
    major difficulty with  the  judge  refusing  the  application  for  and
    adjournment for a witness to attend was that  the  reason  for  finding
    against the appellant was the fact that no witness had come to  support
    him in relation to the assertion that he was gay.  Potentially it would
    not be an error of law if it had not been held against the appellant.

10.  The second difficulty, in  her  submission,  was  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeared to have forgotten about the Facebook page and did not
    record the adjournment request in respect of it.   The  judge  had  not
    referred to the Facebook  messages  and  had  not  explained  that  the
    appellant  requested  time  or  taken  into  account  the   appellant's
    explanation.  The appellant had been denied the opportunity to  present
    evidence.  The explanation for the absence of that  evidence  was  that
    the appellant was not properly advised.

11.  The second ground was the First-tier Tribunal approach to  credibility.
     Paragraphs 39 and 40 of the decision referred  to  guidance  from  the
    Home Office and guidance from the UNHCR in relation to  how  to  assess
    the claims from individuals claiming that they were gay.  The judge had
    concluded that the appellant's account lacked detail  and  appeared  to
    take against the appellant and his partner because they had  been  only
    attracted to each other.  He said that  the  claimant's  sexuality  had
    been undermined.  Ms Solanki said she referred to the guidance  in  her
    skeleton argument and it was clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
    approach was not correct.  It was not necessary that he had been  in  a
    previous relationship the gender  codes  were  different  in  different
    societies.  The appellant's explanation had been that it was the result
    of cultural traditions.

12.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  had  concluded  that  the  moment  that  the
    appellant became intimate with his partner would be momentous  and  the
    guidance  said  that  this  was  not  necessarily  so.   There  was   a
    discrepancy and  the  judge  had  found  that  there  was  no  credible
    explanation as to why his partner would tell his wife he was having  an
    affair.  The judge had not dealt with the explanation in coming  to  an
    adverse credibility finding.  The judge  found  it  material  that  the
    appellant had not thought of his sexuality in the past.   That  finding
    was a material error.  The  judge  had  also  erred  in  rejecting  the
    photographic evidence.  She asked for a remittal and a full re-hearing.




13.  Mr Clarke submitted that no  material  errors  were  disclosed  by  the
    determination.  The request had been made on the day  of  the  hearing.
    In the case of BT (Nepal) where an appellant criticised his  solicitors
    it was incumbent upon him to provide evidence that  he  had  approached
    his solicitors and that it had  been  put  to  them.   The  appellant's
    solicitors had not dealt with this and it was not possible  to  make  a
    finding  of  fact  without  those  matters  having  been  put  to   his
    solicitors.  A point was raised at the hearing  that  there  were  four
    months for this issue to  be  raised.   There  had  also  been  a  Case
    Management Review hearing and the existence  of  the  witness  was  not
    raised at that point.  It was therefore absolutely appropriate for  the
    First-tier  Judge  to  dismiss  the  application  for  an  adjournment.
    Fairness went both ways.  No other witnesses were there on the  day  of
    the hearing despite the appellant's  evidence  that  there  were  other
    witnesses to the relationship.

14.  Regarding the second request for an adjournment  it  appeared  to  have
    been 2:00pm in the afternoon.  The threats that were  relied  on  dated
    from 2012, the information on the Facebook page was not translated  and
    the Procedure Rules precluded the judge from taking this evidence  into
    account and there was an absence of any  corroboration.   According  to
    the Presenting Officer's note of the hearing there  was  nothing  faxed
    over and no message on a phone.  There was also nothing to  corroborate
    the threats asserted to have been made from  the  appellant's  parents.
    It was a long stretch to argue that  there  was  procedural  unfairness
    given there was no mention at the Case Management Review, nothing  from
    the solicitors and in the circumstances there was no error in  refusing
    the adjournment request.

15.  Turning to the credibility arguments he referred  to  paragraph  13  of
    the appellant's skeleton before the First-tier Tribunal.  That skeleton
    relied on the fact that feelings and experiences were  more  likely  to
    assist in an assessment of sexuality than the focus on  practices.   He
    submitted  that  the  judge  had  provided  comprehensive  reasons   by
    reference to Home Office guidance and UNHCR guidance.  The first  point
    was in relation to lack of self-realisation.  There were lots of "mays"
    and "buts" in the guidance but no particular  point  was  determinative
    and you could take each in the round.  The judge set out  at  paragraph
    41 of his decision the correct test and was mindful  of  the  guidance.
    He set out also at paragraph 39 that he was aware  of  the  "mays"  and
    "buts" but did not take any one particular point to  be  determinative.
    The appellant was now shying away from the things that he relied on  in
    the assessment of credibility.

16.  The First-tier Tribunal looked at the lack of  detail.   The  appellant
    had not said it was difficult for him to be open about  his  sexuality.
    His narrative account was not that he could not express  his  feelings.
    The evidence in relation to Sri Lanka was that there  was  stigma.   He
    had the opportunity at the hearing of providing more detail.

17.  The judge took in one of a number of elements and found that there  was
    no thought of being gay before 2010 but  that  was  not  determinative.
    The judge found at paragraph 45 that the  appellant  never  thought  of
    sexuality before the relationship and  the  only  explanation  that  he
    could give was that he liked his partner.  At question 41 of his asylum
    interview he said that he  never  felt  different.   That  was  another
    matter taken into account by the judge but again it was  not  concluded
    to be determinative.  It was appropriate for the judge to find that the
    appellant's inability to  pinpoint  a  time  from  when  he  went  from
    friendship to intimacy was appropriate in relation to his  findings  on
    credibility.  It was a proper assessment for  him  to  find  that  this
    moment would have been momentous.   The  judge  also  looked  at  other
    inconsistencies, the different accounts of what occurred in relation to
    birthday drinks and the credibility in relation to  how  his  wife  was
    informed.  His wife had found out from another house mate but that  had
    not been discussed with  his  partner  and  that  was  not  a  credible
    assertion.  It was difficult to see how the judge  could  not  identify
    that as being important.

18.  At paragraph 47 there was another issue which was  the  divorce  papers
    did not indicate sexuality as a ground for  divorce.   The  appellant's
    evidence was that he had never had previous feelings towards  men.   He
    failed to reflect on life in Sri Lanka and they were matters  that  the
    judge was entitled to take into account.  He looked exhaustively at all
    of the elements it would have been inappropriate if he had  not  looked
    at them.  Another complaint under the same first ground of  appeal  was
    that the context of sexuality was not taken into account.  Just because
    the relationship was not long-term there was no explanation as  to  why
    it was not going to be long-term, it was entirely out of character  and
    it would have created a greater shockwave that would have been enormous
    and monumental.  The absence of previous relationships was  significant
    but not determinative.

19.  The appellant did not provide any cultural  context  because  he  could
    not pinpoint when he had the feelings.  No context had been identified.
     The second point complained about was that the judge did not take into
    account the context.  The  length  of  the  relationship  was  entirely
    relevant.  That in a backdrop would be more memorable and profound.  It
    is said that it is irrational in the context  of  the  cuddles  getting
    more serious.

20.  The fourth point was the failure to  evidence  the  appellant  and  his
    witness's explanations.  This related to  the  issue  of  drinks  on  a
    birthday, the appellant's wife  and  his  return  to  Sri  Lanka  being
    inconsistent with his fear.  The judge set out his  findings  in  great
    detail.  He expressly referred to the  fact  that  they  were  speaking
    about different parts of the day and in relation to the wife he set out
    why it was that the wife was  not  told.   He  set  out  the  interview
    evidence  at  paragraph  9.   He  looked  at  evidence  regarding   the
    appellant's friend, "C".  There was a lack of verification in  relation
    to this as there was no witness statement from "C" and it was  open  to
    the judge to look upon this suspiciously.  The explanations put forward
    were never going to be determinative without substantial  corroboration
    and the judge  set  out  the  evidence  in  relation  to  each  of  the
    credibility findings and came to a conclusion in the  round.   He  said
    there  was  an  inconsistency  and  he  made  adverse  finding  on  the
    inconsistency.  He was mindful of the explanation and did not  have  to
    accept it.

21.  Ground 5 related to a failure  to  assess  the  account  and  ground  6
    related to gangsters and again it was open to the judge to make adverse
    findings.  There was no new evidence at the hearing as to  the  threats
    and the judge was entitled to make a finding on the inconsistency.   He
    found that the evidence was  not  satisfactory.   The  application  had
    changed his  evidence  later  in  the  date.   In  conclusion,  if  the
    credibility findings were erroneous it may be that findings in relation
    to risk were wrong but there were very  clear  findings  the  appellant
    could go to Colombo and the judge had to apply the case law.

22.  In response Ms Solanki said it was the same solicitors who  represented
    the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal who were instructed  today
    and Counsel put that  in  an  email.   They  accepted  the  appellant's
    allegation in relation to the poor preparation of the case. Indeed they
    would not allow Ms Solanki or her predecessor to attend court  if  that
    were not so.  Counsel had settled the grounds and solicitors were fully
    aware of what was being said.  The application had not been made at the
    Case  Management  Review.   The  important  point  was  what   fairness
    demanded.  It demanded that the appellant be given a chance to  produce
    the evidence.  With regard to Mr Clarke's submissions  in  relation  to
    credibility he said the issues were not determinative but the judge did
    take them as determinative against the appellant.   The  appellant  had
    described his  difficulties  in  relation  to  intimacy  and  described
    himself as shy.  In his statements and his  interview  he  referred  to
    culture, religion and traditions as being an issue in this case and the
    judge did not deliberate on those  explanations.   He  needed  to  give
    reasons for his decision  and  the  appellant  needed  to  be  able  to
    understand why he had come to this decision.   "C"  had  disclosed  the
    relationship to his wife and he could not  in  those  circumstances  be
    expected to obtain a witness statement.

23.  According to B26 of the respondent's bundle many people knew about  the
    relationship.  It was a failing on the part of the  solicitors  to  get
    the witnesses to court.  He did not mention that they were powerful and
    influential but had said that there were gangsters in the area  and  in
    his witness statement they  had  a  lot  of  influence.   In  his  oral
    evidence he had explained why they  were  like  gangsters  due  to  the
    influence they had.  There were material errors of law.

24.  I reserved my decision in relation to  whether  or  not  there  was  an
    error of law in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    determined that the correct forum would depend  on  whether  or  not  I
    found there was unfairness.

Decision and reasons

25.  It is accepted by the appellant that no adjournment  request  was  made
    prior to the hearing in relation to the appearance of a witness who was
    said to be able to substantiate the appellant's claim that he was  gay.
    Counsel produced at the hearing before me  two  witness  statements  in
    relation to the proposed witness and another witness.  I am not able to
    take those into account in determining whether there was  an  error  of
    law because they were not before the First-tier Tribunal.

26.  The Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 provide  the  power  to  postpone  or
    adjourn a hearing under the Case Management  powers  in  Rule  4(3)(h).
    There is no specific test set out  in  that  Rule.  In  exercising  its
    powers, the Tribunal  must  seek  to  give  effect  to  the  overriding
    objective when it exercises any power under the Rules.  The  overriding
    objective set out in Rule 2 is to deal with cases fairly and justly.

27.  In the case of Nwaigwe (adjournment - fairness) [2014] UKUT  00418  the
    President, Mr Justice McCloskey held as follows:

         "If a Tribunal refused to accede to an adjournment request  such  a
         decision  could  in  principle  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects.  These  include  a  failure  to  take  into  account  all
         material considerations  permitting  immaterial  considerations  to
         intrude, denying the party concerned a  fair  hearing,  failing  to
         apply the correct test and acting  irrationally.   In  practice  in
         most cases the  question  will  be  whether  refusal  deprived  the
         affected party of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where  a  general
         refusal is  challenge  on  fairness  grounds  it  is  important  to
         recognise that the question of the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether
         the First-tier Tribunal acted reasonably, rather  the  test  to  be
         applied is that of fairness.  Was  there  any  deprivation  of  the
         affected party's right to a fair hearing"

28.  The first request for an adjournment was dealt with at paragraph 36  of
    the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  where  it  is  said  "at  the
    commencement of the hearing the appellant's representative requested an
    adjournment on the  basis  that  there  was  a  witness  who  would  be
    available to give evidence but at the date of the hearing  the  witness
    was in Sri Lanka".  The reasons recorded by the judge for refusing that
    request were as follows:

         "I declined the request because I find that the appellant has known
         since 27 January what the issues  are.   The  representatives  also
         suggested there may be  an  expert's  report  that  could  be  made
         available to  the  court.   I  find  that  the  appellant  has  had
         sufficient time to prepare and therefore I declined the request for
         an adjournment."

29.  What is not considered there is the potential corroborative  effect  of
    the  evidence  and  whether  considerations  of  fairness  required  an
    adjournment for the witness to attend.  The refusal of the request  for
    an adjournment may not have  been  material  had  the  judge  not  made
    credibility findings related  to  the  absence  of  supporting  witness
    evidence.  However, he found at paragraph 47 of the decision that "even
    though the appellant alleges that some  of  their  friends  know  about
    their relationship no one has been prepared to come and  give  evidence
    in their support".  This is clearly therefore one of the  reasons  that
    he decided the appellant was not  credible  in  relation  to  the  core
    element of his claim, namely that he is a homosexual.

30   I conclude that in circumstances where  he  has  held  the  absence  of
    witnesses against the appellant but has refused to allow the  appellant
    to rely on witness evidence by way of refusal of an  adjournment,  such
    finding is unfair.  It is material because it inevitably and inarguably
    impacted on his assessment of the appellant's credibility  in  relation
    to his sexuality.  In the circumstances I find  that  his  findings  of
    fact in relation to the appellant's credibility  cannot  stand.  Having
    regard to the nature of the judicial fact-finding that must take place,
    by reference  to  Part  7.2  (a)  of  the  Practice  Statement  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tier Tribunal regarding the remittal of hearings this  case  should  be
    heard de novo before the First-tier.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remit  it  to  the
First-tier for rehearing. No findings are preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray


