
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02895/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 October 2014                           |On 31 October 2014             |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR



                                   Between

                             DION DIAS REGINALD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a 26 year old Sri Lankan national who has been in  the
    UK since December 2010, originally on a student visa.  He  applied  for
    asylum in December 2011 and his claim was refused on 8 March 2012.   He
    appealed against that decision.
2.   His appeal has been heard three times, having been  remitted  twice  by
    the Upper Tribunal.  His present  appeal,  and  on  which  he  seeks  a
    further remittal and rehearing, is against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Plumptre who, in a determination dated  10  March  2014,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

3.   Grounds of Appeal against that decision were  submitted  by  Mr  Nishan
    Paramjorthy of Counsel who had represented the appellant at almost  all
    the previous hearings.  He did not appear before me  as  the  appellant
    changed his solicitors and Counsel a few days before  the  matter  came
    before me.

4.   Permission to appeal was first refused by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Martin
    (sitting in the First-tier Tribunal).  She refused permission to appeal
    for the following reasons:

     "2. The first ground asserts that the judge erred in her  recording  of
             what was submitted about two  previous  determinations.   That
             discloses no arguable error of law  as  the  judge  states  in
             terms  that  she  ignored  the  two   earlier   determinations
             completely as they had both  been  set  aside  for  containing
             errors of law.


     3.  The second ground argues that the judge erred in not accepting  the
             evidence of Professor Lingam in relation  to  the  appellant's
             scars.  On the contrary the judge was entitled to find, as she
             did, that the description and photographs  of  the  scars  was
             such that they could not have  been  caused  in  the  way  the
             appellant claimed and the expert  failed  to  deal  with  that
             point."

5.   Permission to appeal was, however,  later  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kebede on 5 June 2014 on the following basis:

         "Whilst the judge clearly undertook a detailed  assessment  of  the
         medical report from Professor Lingam, the Grounds of  Appeal  raise
         issues which merit further and  more  detailed  consideration.   On
         that basis I am prepared to grant permission and find  the  grounds
         to be arguable."


6.   In relation to my decision on the issue of error of law,  there  are  a
    number of  paragraphs  in  Judge  Plumptre's  determination  which  are
    relevant and, for the purposes of reference, I set them out below.  The
    underlinings are mine.

         "9.   Unhappily  this  appeal  has  had  a  complicated  procedural
             history.  Suffice it to say that it has been twice remitted by
             the Upper Tribunal.  The history of the proceedings is set out
             with admirable clarity by  Deputy  UT  Judge  McWilliam  in  a
             determination dated 2 August 2013.  Thereafter there were  two
             abortive hearings before Judge Easterman  [in  the  First-tier
             Tribunal] who made notes and directions dated 3  October  2013
             and 6 December 2013.  The dilemma  was  that  Judge  Milligan-
             Baldwin had found that paragraph  14  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
             decision


                  '14. The finding that the appellant had been detained  and
                      tortured, which was not affected by any error of law,
                      is to be preserved unless anything emerges during the
                      hearing before the First-tier Tribunal to demonstrate
                      that such a finding ought not to be preserved'


              was ultra vires.  This direction related to findings by  Judge
             R  I  Walker  who  first  determined   this   appeal.    After
             considerable debate with Judge Easterman  when  the  appellant
             was represented by the same Counsel as  before  me,  agreement
             had been reached and was so maintained before  me,  that  this
             should be  a  de  novo  or  fresh  hearing.   However  it  was
             suggested to me by Ms Chopra [the  Presenting  Officer]  that,
             although a fresh hearing, the evidence of  the  appellant  had
             been tried and tested on two occasions and her  suggestion  to
             his evidence would be limited.


         10.   Mr  Paramjorthy  suggested  that   I   could   consider   the
             determination of IJ Walker  in  relation  to  paragraphs  1-28
             which summarised the appellant's claim but not paragraphs  29-
             38  where  findings  of  fact  and  credibility  issues   were
             intermingled.  During submissions Ms Chopra also  referred  me
             to observations of  Judge  Milligan-Baldwin  relating  to  the
             medical report of Professor  Lingam.   In  consequence  how  I
             approached  the  two  previous  decisions  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal - if at all - was  a  running  theme  throughout  the
             hearing.


         12.  I have concluded that  since  both  First-tier  determinations
             were found by the Upper Tribunal to contain errors of law that
             the only safe course is to ignore both of them.  Hence I  have
             summarised  the  appellant's  claim  from  his   own   witness
             statements, Asylum Interview Record and the refusal letter and
             not from paragraphs 1-28 of Judge  Walker's  determination  as
             suggested by Mr Paramjorthy.


         14.  I heard oral evidence from the  appellant  through  the  Tamil
             interpreter who adopted both his witness statements at pages 1-
             3 and 1-7 of the two bundles.   I  record  that  many  of  the
             questions and cross-examination related to the lateness of the
             appellant's asylum claim which I had indicated was an issue of
             concern to me given the number and severity of the appellant's
             scars.


         34.  In relation to the medical report  of  Professor  Lingam,  [Ms
             Chopra] submitted that IJ Walker had not  considered  this  in
             any detail although he had accepted  that  the  appellant  had
             been detained and  tortured.   Although  not  relying  on  her
             findings she suggested I consider the  observations  of  Judge
             Milligan-Baldwin at paragraphs 49-53 which  were  observations
             and separate from her findings at paragraph 54.  She asked  me
             to rely on discrepancies between the  appellant's  account  as
             per his AIR and witness statements and what  he  had  said  to
             Professor Lingam.  It was not credible that the appellant  had
             not obtained any medical treatment  after  his  release.   The
             presence of scars was not determinative of the claim  and  the
             issue was whether these were as a result of ill-treatment  and
             torture as the appellant claimed.


         35.  Mr Paramjorthy objected to the way Ms Chopra and the SSHD  now
             put its case.  This Tribunal should not look at  the  previous
             determinations as suggested.  They were  unreported  decisions
             which had  been  overturned  and  hence  should  not  form  my
             starting point re any assessment of evidence.  This was  a  de
             novo hearing.  Observations on the rationale of previous First-
             tier  Tribunal  Judges  should  not  form  any  part   of   my
             assessment.  Devaseelan was not applicable.  Contrary to  this
             submission he then suggested that I consider paragraph  33  of
             IJ Walker who had apparently accepted that the  appellant  had
             been detained and tortured as claimed.


         36.  At this point Ms Chopra intervened to say  that  she  was  not
             relying on any findings by either First-tier Judge  which  did
             not stand but was relying on the observations at paragraphs 45-
             53 of Judge Milligan-Baldwin.


         37.  Mr Paramjorthy made what he termed  a  public  law  submission
             that   I   was   not   reviewing   the   previous   First-tier
             determinations and submitted that I  could  not  look  at  the
             observations of  Judge  Milligan-Baldwin  as  to  the  medical
             report in isolation because such observations had resulted  in
             findings of fact.  I indicated that  I  could  circumvent  all
             these difficulties by not referring to the decision  of  Judge
             Milligan-Baldwin.


         38.   Mr  Paramjorthy  submitted  that  I  should   exclude   these
             observations from my findings and that there was no reason for
             favouring any findings of Judge Walker  over  Judge  Milligan-
             Baldwin who had made her own decision about the medical report
             and the appellant's scars.  It was wrong to tactically  favour
             the decision of one First-tier Judge over another.  Hence  his
             submission changed that I should not consider paragraph 33  of
             Judge Walker and that I should make my own assessment  of  the
             facts, the appellant's credibility and risk on return.


         41.  I make no criticism of either Counsel when  referring  to  the
             previous First-tier determinations of Judge Walker  and  Judge
             Milligan-Baldwin which were  clearly  made  in  an  effort  to
             assist me but ultimately did not  because  I  have  considered
             that the only safe approach is for  me  to  refer  to  neither
             decision - both of which have been  overturned  by  the  Upper
             Tribunal.  I have as Mr Paramjorthy rightly submitted made  my
             own assessment of the facts  of  the  appellant's  claim,  the
             appellant's credibility and risk on return."


7.   At the commencement  of  the  hearing  before  me,  Ms  Chapman  sought
    permission to include additional Grounds of Appeal which had  not  been
    included in the Grounds of Appeal submitted by Mr Paramjorthy.  Her new
    ground was on the basis that there had been a finding by  Judge  Walker
    that the appellant had been detained and tortured as claimed  and  that
    the Upper Tribunal had made a direction preserving those findings.   It
    is claimed that Judge Easterman  and,  later,  Judge  Plumptre  had  no
    authority to disregard the Upper Tribunal direction and that that alone
    was  sufficient  error  of  law   to   set   aside   Judge   Plumptre's
    determination.

8.   I gave permission  for  the  new  proposed  ground  to  be  argued  and
    detailed submissions were made by both representatives for and  against
    the point in issue.  I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal  did
    have jurisdiction and power to hear the appeal afresh without regard to
    the findings of either of the previous substantive hearings.  My  first
    reason for reaching that conclusion is contained in the wording of  the
    Upper Tribunal direction itself which provides  that  the  findings  of
    Judge Walker were to be preserved "unless anything emerges  during  the
    hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  to  demonstrate  that  such  a
    finding ought not to be preserved."  There having been an agreement  by
    the appellant's Counsel Mr Paramjorthy - Counsel of some seniority  and
    experience in this Tribunal - that the appeal was to be  heard  afresh,
    it was clear that the Judge  was  entitled  to  make  her  own  factual
    findings.

9.   That too is in itself good reason for rejecting the argument  that  the
    findings of Judge Walker should be preserved.  It is  abundantly  clear
    from the extracts set out above  from  Judge  Plumptre's  determination
    that Mr Paramjorthy agreed on behalf of the appellant not only that the
    appeal should be heard afresh but also that no account should be  taken
    by Judge Plumptre of either of the two previous  determinations.   Both
    representatives as  well  as  Judge  Plumptre  took  the  sensible  and
    reasonable decision that in the unusual  circumstances  of  this  case,
    where the appeal had already been heard twice  and  had  been  remitted
    twice, the best course of action was for the appeal to be  heard  again
    without any regard to previous decisions.

10.  It is  clear  from  the  latest  determination  that  the  judge  heard
    detailed oral evidence from the appellant,  she  was  referred  to  the
    medical report from Professor  Lingam  and  she  was  invited  by  both
    Counsel to make her decision based on the evidence that  she  heard  on
    that occasion.  Mr Paramjorthy submitted on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    that the judge should not consider either of the  previous  substantive
    determinations and she accepted those submissions.  See  in  particular
    paragraphs [35]-[38] of the determination as well as [41].

11.  The only other ground of substance relates to the medical  evidence  of
    Professor Lingam.  Again, submissions on that issue were made to me  by
    both representatives but I find myself in agreement with Upper Tribunal
    Judge Martin who initially refused permission to appeal for the reasons
    set out above.  Judge Plumptre considered Professor Lingam's report  in
    some detail at paragraphs [43]-[54].   Her  reasons  for  declining  to
    follow the conclusions of the report are clearly stated and  were  open
    to her on the evidence.  As such, they do not  disclose  any  error  of
    law.  I note, in particular, her reasons  at  [48]  and  [50]  and  her
    conclusions at [53].

12.  In summary, for the reasons I have set out above, I am  satisfied  that
    there was no error of law in the determination of  Judge  Plumptre  and
    her decision is to stand.

Notice of Decision

There was no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal determination of  Judge
Plumptre.  Her decision is to stand.

No anonymity direction was sought and none is made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
30 October 2014


