
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  AA/02468/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

| Heard at Manchester                     |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 6th November 2015                     |            On 4th February 2016     |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                            RANIA ABDS ABDULWAHED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Madubuke of AJO solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Rania Abds Abdulwahed date of birth 6 July  1982,  is  a
    citizen of Libya.  Having considered all the  circumstances  I  do  not
    make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Alty promulgated on 15 July 2015, whereby the judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent
    dated 26th January 2015. The decision by the Respondent was  to  refuse
    the Appellant's protection claim and human rights claim.

 3. By decision made on the 10th August 2015 leave to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination.

 4. The appellant had first come to the United Kingdom in  August  2012  on
    the basis of a visit visa. She had returned to Libya in  January  2013.
    She had then applied for a further visa but that was refused  in  April
    2013. She applied for another visa in May 2013 but  that  was  refused.
    Finally in September 2013 she had applied for a visit visa,  which  was
    granted. She travelled to the United Kingdom by direct flight  arriving
    on 18 September 2013.

 5. On 3 March 2014 the appellant applied for leave to remain as a partner.
    That application was refused. One of the documents in  support  of  the
    application indicates that the appellant and her now husband, Mr  Bali,
    have been in a relationship since May 2012. Mr Bali is  a  national  of
    Libya, who has been in the United Kingdom for some 13 years and  has  a
    business here. However according  to  the  evidence  he  has  regularly
    returned to Libya. Certainly he had been to Libya  twice  in  2013  and
    once in February 2014 to visit his father. Mr Bali must  have  been  to
    Libya at other times and commenced a "relationship" with the  appellant
    in Libya, if the statement from their friend is to be believed.

 6. The appellant and Mr Bali had married in December 2013.  Thereafter the
    application on 3 March 2014 had been made.  There  were  issues  as  to
    whether or not this was a genuine relationship. For whatever reason the
    application to remain on the basis of the relationship was refused.  It
    may be that the appellant could not meet the requirements  of  Appendix
    FM as she was in the United Kingdom on the basis  of  the  visit  visa.
    Post the decision however it appears that the appellant is pregnant and
    was due to give birth at the time of the hearing before me.

 7. The appellant had claimed asylum in September 2014 after the refusal of
    her marriage application. It was noted that the appellant had  made  no
    reference  to  any  risk  of  mistreatment  in  her  original  marriage
    application.

 8. Judge Alty had refused the Appellant's appeal on protection grounds. In
    respect thereof leave to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  had  not  been
    granted. As set out within the Leave to Appeal decision the  judge  had
    made valid findings with regard to the credibility of  the  Appellant's
    account, giving valid reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's  account,
    applying the correct standard of proof.

 9. With regard to the claim on human rights grounds leave had been granted
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal specifically in respect of  Article  8.
    Judge Alty have followed the guidance given in the case of Razgar  2004
    UKHL 27. The case advocated a five stage approach in considering family
    and private life and Article 8. The judge had found  that  this  was  a
    genuine and real marriage such that there was family life and then gone
    on to consider  whether  the  decision  significantly  interfered  with
    family life.

10. Within the leave it  is  suggested  that  the  judge's  conclusions  at
    paragraph 48 of the decision 'that the appellant's  removal  would  not
    have consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage Article 8  '
    is not supportable.

11. Even if that were the case within paragraph 49 the judge has gone on to
    consider whether or not the remaining criteria set out within the  case
    of Razgar 2004 UKHL27 are satisfied. The judge  has  proceeded  on  the
    basis that, if her conclusions in paragraph 48 that the decision  would
    not so significantly interfere with family life are wrong, she  had  to
    consider the remaining steps set out within the case of Razgar.

12. In respect of the remaining criteria within  Razgar  as  the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  the  decision
    was in accordance with the law and, as found by the judge, was for  the
    purposes of  maintaining  immigration  control  as  an  aspect  of  the
    economic well-being of the country.  Those were conclusions  the  judge
    was entitled to make on the basis of the evidence presented. The  final
    matter  to  be  determined  was  whether  or  not  the   decision   was
    proportionately justified.

13. In considering that issue it is suggested that the judge has failed  to
    consider the statutory requirements set out in section 117 A - D.

14. In considering the criteria under Razgar the judge had noted the length
    of time that the appellant had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    circumstances in which she had come to be married.  The  appellant  had
    arrived on the basis of the visit visa on 18 September  2013.  She  did
    not claim asylum until 9 September 2014. That was after her application
    for leave to remain as a partner had been refused in March 2014.

15. The judge had also noted that the appellant's partner  had  twice  been
    back to Libya in  2013  and  once  in  February  2014.  The  judge  had
    considered all the relevant circumstances in assessing whether  or  not
    the decision was proportionately justified.

16. In respect of this matter I would draw attention to the  case  of  Dube
    (ss117 A-D) [ 2015] UKUT 90 (IAC). The case  clearly  establishes  that
    judges were obliged to consider each of  the  factors  set  out  within
    section 117A-D in considering the public interest. However there was no
    requirement for  a  judge  specifically  to  refer  to  section  117A-D
    provided it was clear that the judge has in point of fact taken account
    of the factors set out within the section.

17. One only needs to look at paragraph 50, 51 and 52 to see that the judge
    has taken account of the factors.

18. The judge had noted that the appellant's partner have lived most of his
    life in Libya. Whilst he had been in the United Kingdom  for  about  13
    years and has established  a  business,  both  the  appellant  and  her
    partner had spent most of the  lives  in  Libya  and  the  partner  had
    visited their regularly over the last few years. It was noted that  his
    first language was Arabic as was first. It was noted that the appellant
    did not speak English.

19. The appellant was expecting a child but such child was at the  time  of
    the hearing yet to be born.

20. In approaching the issues with regard to the appellant  the  judge  has
    considered the relevant factors within section 117A-D.  The  judge  has
    given valid reasons for coming to the conclusions that she did.  Having
    suggested that the decision itself did not significantly interfere with
    the article 8 rights of the party the judge has in any event gone on to
    consider whether even  if  it  did  the  decision  was  proportionately
    justified. The judge has found that the  decision  was  proportionately
    justified. The judge has fully justified that conclusion and has  taken
    account of all appropriate factors.

21. In the circumstances the judge was entitled to make the  decision  that
    she did  with  regard  to  whether  the  decision  was  proportionately
    justified in was entitled to come  to  the  conclusion  that  no  one's
    article 8 rights would be breached by the decision taken.

22. There is a no material error of law in the determination.  I uphold the
    decision to dismiss this matter on all grounds.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


