
IAC-BH-PMP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02047/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke     |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 27th November 2014             |On 14th January 2015              |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A White, Counsel instructed by Braitch Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 26th June 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bird gave permission
    to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Crawford in which he dismissed the appeal on all  grounds
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse  asylum,  humanitarian
    and human rights protection to the appellant a 20 year old  citizen  of
    Afghanistan.

 2. In her decision Judge Bird noted that the grounds of application sought
    permission on the basis that the judge failed to deal  adequately  with
    the appellant's Article 8 rights and was wrong to  consider  Article  8
    under the Immigration Rules.  It was also alleged that  the  judge  had
    failed to make adequate findings in relation to the appellant's private
    and family life stemming from his relationship with his girlfriend.

 3. Whilst  Judge  Bird  thought  that  the  judge  was  not  in  error  by
    considering the application of the Immigration Rules in relation to the
    human  rights  claim,  she  thought  it  arguable  that   the   judge's
    consideration of human rights issues under  Article  8  was  inadequate
    when the threshold of engaging Article 8 was low by  reference  to  the
    Court of Appeal decision in AG (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801.

 4. The grounds of application themselves refer  to  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in Edgehill  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  402  for  authority  that  the
    proportionality assessment  should  have  been  performed  outside  the
    Immigration Rules bearing in mind that the appellant's application  for
    leave had been made on 16th February 2012.  Further, it is pointed  out
    that the application was a variation to leave already granted in  2009.
    Whilst the judge had applied the Razgar five stage tests  at  paragraph
    65  of  the  decision  it  was  considered  that  the   proportionality
    assessment was inadequate.

 5. As to the judge's findings of fact it is  argued  that  the  judge  was
    wrong to conclude that the appellant had precarious immigration  status
    when entering into  his  relationship  bearing  in  mind  that  he  had
    discretionary leave  at  that  time  when  the  relationship  began  in
    December 2011.  Additionally, the judge had applied  western  standards
    to the appellant's relationship with a single Muslim female coming from
    a conservative and  religious  family.   Additionally,  the  Article  8
    rights of the appellant's girlfriend should also have been considered.

Submissions

 6. At the hearing Ms White confirmed that the  judge's  dismissal  of  the
    asylum claim was not challenged.  She then reminded me of  the  grounds
    of application and the skeleton argument submitted with the  bundle  on
    11th November 2014 which expands upon the grounds of application.   She
    also added that, in relation to the family life  claim,  there  was  no
    requirement for the parties to live together and so the judge was wrong
    to reject family life by applying western standards.

 7. Mr McVeety reminded me of the response filed on  7th  July  2014  which
    pointed out that the appellant had established his private life on  the
    back of two false asylum claims and emphasised  the  relevance  of  the
    appellant never having lived with his girlfriend whose family  had  not
    been introduced to him.  The judge had correctly applied the five stage
    Razgar tests and reached conclusions open to him.  As  to  the  judge's
    consideration of the Immigration Rules he argued that Edgehill  had  no
    relevance.  In this  respect  he  referred  to  paragraph  30  of  that
    decision (although this puts forward an argument of counsel before  the
    Court of Appeal rather than the conclusions  of  the  court).   In  any
    event the judge had  considered  the  five  stage  test  in  Razgar  in
    relation to someone with a limited family life.   He  argued  that  the
    appellant's status was precarious as he only  had  discretionary  leave
    and had not been granted asylum.  He also argued that the appellant was
    clearly in the early stages of his  relationship  and  so  family  life
    could not be in existence.

 8. In conclusion Ms White reminded  me  that  she  also  argued  that  the
    respondent's delay in making the  decision  enabled  the  appellant  to
    further his relationship which had started in December 2011.

Conclusion

 9. The determination of Judge Crawford is 34 pages  long  and  gives  very
    detailed reasons, in over eight pages  of  cogently  argued  text,  for
    rejecting the asylum  claim  and  dismissing  the  human  rights  claim
    calling upon relevant conclusions reached in  relation  to  the  asylum
    claim particularly the appellant's manipulation of the asylum system on
    two occasions in an attempt to remain.

10. Despite  the  fact  that  the  appellant  claims  to  have  been  in  a
    relationship with his girlfriend since 2011 it is difficult to see  how
    his status in this country at any stage could be described as  anything
    other than precarious.  He was  only  granted  discretionary  leave  on
    account of his age.  Whilst he has been able to remain in this  country
    during the appeal process and this  has  enabled  his  relationship  to
    continue, that does not mean that the judge  was  wrong  to  reach  the
    conclusion that there were limitations to the  relationship  which  had
    not progressed to arrangements for marriage nor had the appellant  even
    been introduced to his girlfriend's family.  It is not evident that the
    judge was applying western standards to his conclusions in this respect
    particularly  bearing  mind   his   acknowledgement   that   a   family
    introduction was necessary.

11. The fact  that  the  judge  unnecessarily  applied  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE to  part  of  his  decision  on  human
    rights issues does not mean that the conclusions he reached in  respect
    of that claim can be said to be wrong.  The Rules reflect human  rights
    provisions  and,  most  significantly,  the  judge  went  on  to   give
    comprehensive consideration to the parties' circumstances and the human
    rights claim by applying the five stage Razgar tests  which  are  fully
    set out in paragraph 65.  It  is  evident  that,  in  setting  out  the
    conclusions in that paragraph, the judge  was  referring  back  to  the
    copious conclusions he reached about the appellant's family and private
    life in the United Kingdom which are to  be  found  from  paragraph  60
    onwards of the decision. These were conclusions properly open to him.

12. It is to be noted that, despite the allegation that the  judge  applied
    western standards to his consideration of the relationship,  the  judge
    was entitled to take  into  account  that  the  appellant's  girlfriend
    supported herself as a nursing assistant, was 32 years of  age  and  no
    attempts had been made for the relationship to be furthered because  of
    the conservative attitude of her family.  The judge was not in error in
    reaching the conclusion that family life had not  been  established  in
    those circumstances  albeit  that  he  accepted  that  the  appellant's
    private life involved his relationship with his girlfriend.

13. The comprehensive nature of the judge's consideration of  human  rights
    issues  acknowledging  private  life  incorporating   the   appellant's
    girlfriend  entitled  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the  respondent's
    decision was not disproportionate.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve a material error  on
a point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction   in   order,   in
particular, to protect the interests of the appellant's girlfriend  who  was
not named.  I make the same direction in the Upper Tribunal as follows:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 14th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
