
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/02954/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 October 2015                   |On 23 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     AA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Ms Rutherford, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.
      1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who has made an asylum claim and
         I have therefore made an anonymity direction.
      2. In a decision promulgated on 11 May 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Crawford dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and  human
         rights  grounds.   The  judge   comprehensively   disbelieved   the
         appellant's claim as to what happened to him in Iran.
      3. The appellant's grounds challenge the judge's findings of  fact  as
         being infected by errors of law.  Permission  to  appeal  has  been
         granted on this basis.
      4. The matter now comes before  me  to  decide  whether  the  decision
         contains a material error of law.   Ms  Rutherford  relied  upon  a
         skeleton argument and the grounds of appeal.  She made  brief  oral
         submissions, which Mr McVeety responded  to.   After  hearing  from
         both representatives I reserved my decision, which  I  now  provide
         with reasons.
      5. The decision under appeal is a detailed one.  The judge has set out
         the evidence before him in some detail at paragraphs 19 to 23.  The
         judge expressly referred to  the  appellant's  supplementary  April
         2015 witness statement, and  summarised  its  contents  (para  20).
         This  sought  to  address  the  SSHD's   concerns   regarding   the
         credibility of the appellant's account.  The judge  made  it  clear
         that in reaching his credibility findings he had carefully analysed
         the appellant's account in the evidence before him (para 31).
      6. I now turn to each of the alleged errors of law relied upon  by  Ms
         Rutherford as set out in the grounds of appeal.
      7. First, in  my  judgment  the  judge  was  entitled  to  regard  the
         description of the  nature  and  use  of  the  building  where  the
         appellant claimed to have worked  to  be  inconsistent  (para  31).
         Contrary  to  the  submission  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  it  is
         sufficiently clear from reading the decision as a  whole  that  the
         judge was aware of the appellant's explanation as contained in  the
         April 2015 statement and summarised it within  the  decision  (para
         20(iii)).  I do not accept the more general submission relied  upon
         by Ms Crawford that the judge failed to give adequate  reasons  for
         rejecting the appellant's explanations in the April 2015 statement.
          This is not a detailed document.  The  judge  has  summarised  its
         contents within the decision and clearly  taken  it  into  account.
         The judge was entitled to in effect find that  notwithstanding  the
         explanations  offered  by  the  appellant  he  still  regarded  the
         evidence  to  be  inconsistent  /  implausible   /   insufficiently
         explained.
      8. Second, the judge was entitled to be concerned that  the  appellant
         had been inconsistent as to whether he touched a  computer  or  not
         (para 32).  It is claimed that this inconsistency arose due  to  an
         error on the part of the interpreter.  This is difficult to follow.
          The appellant has  not  cited  interpreter  difficulties  in  this
         regard.  No reference is made to an  interpretation  error  in  the
         April 2015 statement.  At the hearing Ms Rutherford  accepted  that
         it was  probably  inaccurate  to  explain  this  as  being  due  to
         interpreter error when the appellant had simply said he did not say
         what is recorded in the interview transcript.  As the  judge  noted
         (para 20(v)) the appellant  claimed  that  he  did  not  touch  the
         computer itself but placed his hands on the table.  This in  itself
         is inconsistent with his May 2014 witness  statement  in  which  he
         says he merely looked at the computer.
      9. Third, the  judge  was  entitled  to  not  be  satisfied  with  the
         explanation as to how the appellant would have been seen looking at
         the computer  screen  (para  33).   In  his  asylum  interview  the
         appellant made it clear that he did not know how they found out  (Q
         133) and the judge reminded himself of this (para 19).
     10. Fourth, the judge was entitled to accept the SSHD's  argument  that
         the appellant implausibly failed to try to explain his situation to
         the authorities (para 34).  The  judge  was  well  aware  that  his
         employer advised him to leave Iran and that the employer was  close
         to the authorities.  Indeed the judge refers to  this  evidence  in
         some  detail  in  the  decision  itself  (para  22).   In  all  the
         circumstances the judge was entitled  to  be  concerned  about  the
         appellant's explanation as  to  why  he  did  not  try  to  explain
         himself.  After all on the appellant's own account he was  entirely
         innocent and saw nothing of any significance (see para  14  of  the
         April 2015 statement).
     11.  Fifth,  I  entirely  accept  that  there  is  no  requirement   of
         corroboration  in  asylum  appeals.   However  in  this  case   the
         appellant  claimed  that  his  family  members  had  been  recently
         questioned about him and that he was wanted by the authorities, yet
         the authorities made no attempt  to  issue  an  arrest  warrant  or
         summons (para 21).  In these circumstances the judge  was  entitled
         to be concerned that the appellant claimed the  authorities  wanted
         to arrest him yet had not issued an arrest warrant or summons.    I
         accept that the judge has clumsily worded paragraph 35 but I am not
         satisfied that this gives rise to any material error of law.  It is
         factually correct to  say  that  the  appellant  "has  produced  no
         evidence  such  as  a  summons  or  arrest  warrant".   Indeed  the
         appellant did not suggest that his family members were aware that a
         summons or arrest warrant was issued against him.   The  judge  was
         therefore not requiring  the  appellant  to  provide  corroborative
         evidence.  The judge  merely  commented  that  that  the  appellant
         produced no such independent  evidence.   In  any  event  there  is
         nothing in paragraph  35  to  suggest  that  the  judge  was  doing
         anything other  than  commenting  on  the  absence  of  independent
         evidence.  He did not draw adverse inferences from this.
     12. I am not satisfied that Ms Rutherford has been able to  demonstrate
         an error  of  law  on  the  part  of  the  judge  in  reaching  his
         credibility findings.
Decision
     13. I do not find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains
         an error of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
22 October 2015
