
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02521/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2016                                 |On 1 July 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Peters, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was granted a Tier 5 visa valid from  11  September  2013
    until 11 September 2014.  He arrived in the UK on 25 September 2013 and
    claimed asylum on 22 May 2014.

 2. He is a citizen of the DRC and was born on [ ] 1978.  His asylum  claim
    was made on the basis of his ethnicity  or  perceived  ethnicity  as  a
    Tutsi, fearing Hutu paramilitaries, the  army  and  the  population  in
    general.  His asylum  claim  was  rejected  by  the  respondent  and  a
    decision made to remove him under Section 10  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999.  His appeal against that decision came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S. T. Fox on 28 July 2015.  Judge Fox  ("the  FtJ")
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds, rejecting the credibility  of  his
    claim to fear persecution on return and rejecting his account  of  past
    events in the DRC.

 3. The grounds of appeal before me raise various criticisms of  the  FtJ's
    decision, asserting firstly that the FtJ had failed to  deal  with  the
    standard of proof applicable in asylum appeals.

 4. Various aspects of the FtJ's decision are  criticised  as  revealing  a
    lack of care on behalf of the FtJ, for example in terms of having  said
    that the appellant had discharged the burden of proof  in  establishing
    his claim (in two  places),  yet  evidently  rejecting  the  claim  and
    dismissing the appeal.

 5. It is also suggested that the FtJ failed to  have  regard  to  relevant
    country guidance, namely AB and DM (Risk  categories  reviewed,  Tutsis
    added) DRC CG [2005] UKIAT 00118 in terms of the appellant's  perceived
    ethnicity.  It is further argued that the  FtJ  erred  in  law  in  his
    rejection of the expert's report on this issue.

 6. In submissions on behalf of the appellant before me Mr Peters relied on
    the grounds.  It was submitted that notwithstanding what is said in the
    respondent's 'rule 24' response, the central  issue  was  not  in  fact
    credibility but the effect of the country guidance in AB and DM and the
    expert's report.

 7. In relation to the errors in the FtJ's decision, it was not  sufficient
    to reject the criticisms simply on the basis that they  are  in  effect
    'mere typos'.  Some parts of the FtJ's decision make no sense.   I  was
    referred to various aspects of the FtJ's decision in this respect.

 8. So far as the expert's report is concerned, the report itself  at  page
    26 shows the photographs of the appellant that were before  the  expert
    and colour ones were submitted to him.  The expert was in a position to
    judge the appellant's appearance from  those  photographs.   Similarly,
    the expert did not give any indication that he was not able  to  assess
    the information provided to him by the  appellant  simply  because  the
    appellant was interviewed over the phone.

 9. So far as the standard of proof is concerned, it was conceded on behalf
    of the appellant that in fact at [5] there was  sufficient  recognition
    by the FtJ of the standard of proof  and  that  ground  was  no  longer
    pursued.

10. On behalf of the respondent Mr Duffy referred to the FtJ's having  said
    at [22]-[23] that the issue of ethnicity was a  matter  raised  by  the
    appellant at the  last  moment.   His  credibility  was  a  significant
    matter.

11. So far as the phone interview with the expert is concerned, it was  not
    beyond the bounds of possibility that the appellant might have  feigned
    an accent.  If the appellant is not credible in terms of his  ethnicity
    or  perceived  ethnicity,  his  whole  account  would  be  lacking   in
    credibility.  The adverse credibility findings were open  to  the  FtJ.
    What weight he attached to the expert evidence was a matter for him.

12. Notwithstanding that there are errors in the FtJ's decision, one  needs
    to consider the decision as a whole.

    My conclusions

13. There is no merit in the ground in relation to the complaint about  the
    FtJ not dealing with the standard of proof.  It is dealt  with  at  [5]
    and that ground of appeal was rightly abandoned.

14. It is asserted on behalf of the appellant in the grounds that  the  FtJ
    erred in giving weight to an  immaterial  matter,  namely  credibility.
    The grounds also suggest that the appellant's perceived credibility  is
    of "fringe importance".  It is asserted that the case  turns  primarily
    on objective evidence within the COI Report, the  expert's  report  and
    case law, and not on the appellant's credibility.

15. I do not accept that this is so.  Part of the  appellant's  account  is
    that he was a pastor of a prayer group  which  was  open  to  everyone,
    including Tutsi and Hutu, and other ethnicities.  He says that  he  was
    attacked at a prayer group meeting in 2013, and that he was taken  away
    and raped.  He was the only Tutsi in the prayer group, all  the  others
    being Hutus.  The people that  attacked  the  appellant  were  two  men
    belonging to the M23 Group, a predominantly Tutsi group.

16. The FtJ rejected the contention that the appellant  would  easily  have
    been identified as a Tutsi because of his physical appearance, although
    not ruling out that local knowledge could have played  a  part  in  the
    attack.  However, he noted that the perpetrators were  said  to  be  of
    Tutsi ethnicity and that they claimed the appellant was a  traitor  for
    being in the company of Hutu people.  However, in the  absence  of  any
    firm evidence that his physical appearance  singled  him  out  the  FtJ
    concluded that there was no other reason as to why the  soldiers  would
    have perceived him to be a Tutsi.  The appellant's account was that  he
    had never seen those soldiers before.   At  [24]  the  FtJ  raised  the
    question of why no action was taken against  the  Hutu  people  at  the
    prayer meeting.

17. Putting aside for the moment what could be described as the  errors  of
    proofreading in the FtJ's decision, the FtJ  noted  at  [26]  that  the
    appellant was able to obtain  his  passport  while  in  Kinshasa  which
    required going out and about, and using public transport.  However,  he
    does not claim that he was physically harmed at that time, although  he
    said that he was racially abused.  The FtJ did not accept that  he  was
    racially abused because he did not  accept  that  the  appellant  would
    automatically be perceived as a Tutsi.

18. Furthermore, the FtJ noted at [27] that the appellant moved  freely  in
    and out of the DRC, as evidenced by the stamps on his  passport.   This
    is an indication the FtJ concluded that the appellant would not  be  at
    risk of persecution from the government.

19. In terms of the appellant's claim that he would be at risk as a witness
    to the rape of his sisters, this was rejected by the FtJ on  the  basis
    that those incidents happened several years ago, and it is not credible
    that those involved would wait for eleven, six or five  years  to  deal
    with the appellant once he returned to the DRC.

20. In terms of his ethnicity or perceived ethnicity the FtJ noted that the
    appellant appeared to have changed the emphasis in his claim to one  of
    ethnicity, a matter which the FtJ did not accept as being credible.  At
    [22] he concluded that the appellant had been inconsistent with respect
    to answers given  at  his  screening  interview  and  later,  initially
    claiming that he could not return to the DRC because he and his  family
    had been threatened by the army/FDLR for not joining up.  That is not a
    matter that appears in his asylum interview.

21. In addition, the FtJ took into account the circumstances in  which  the
    appellant claimed asylum.  He claimed asylum some  eight  months  after
    his arrival in the UK and the FtJ  rejected  his  explanation  for  the
    delay, the appellant having arrived as a Tier 5 Visa Migrant, taking up
    "his obligations" under the visa.  The FtJ assessed his explanation for
    the failure to make the claim earlier  and  rejected  it.   Although  I
    raised with  the  parties  the  issue  of  's.8'  and  the  credibility
    assessment in this respect, the matter was not advanced  on  behalf  of
    the appellant as being a significant issue.  In any event,  as  I  have
    indicated, the FtJ assessed the appellant's explanation  for  the  late
    claim and gave sustainable reasons for rejecting it.

22. There is an expert report from Mr  Alex  Ntung,  which,  amongst  other
    things, concluded that the appellant would be perceived as a person  of
    Tutsi ethnicity, and that the appellant's account was supported in this
    respect in terms of his accent, knowledge and background.  However, the
    FtJ noted that the  expert  concluded  that  the  appellant's  physical
    features are not typically Hutu or Tutsi  (see  [72]  of  the  expert's
    report).

23. The FtJ did not reject the expert evidence entirely,  stating  that  it
    had some merits.  However, he referred to "key issues" in which it  was
    found to be wanting.  One of these is in terms of the  interviews  with
    the appellant, the interviews apparently having taken place  by  phone.
    The FtJ, rightly in my judgement, characterises the interviews as being
    key elements in  assessing  the  appellant's  accent.  He  stated  that
    telephone communication is not an ideal basis upon which to  make  such
    important judgements, referring to the quality of  the  telephone  line
    and other factors.

24. He also referred to the fact that two photographs had been provided  in
    order to assist in assessing the appellant's  physical  features.   The
    FtJ did not consider that that was a satisfactory basis upon  which  to
    make that assessment.

25. The report from Mr Ntung does not itself  reveal  that  the  interviews
    with the appellant took place by phone.  It would have been helpful had
    it done so.  On the other hand, he does not indicate that  he  had  any
    difficulty in hearing the appellant or making  his  assessment  of  his
    accent.  Similarly, he did not indicate that  the  photographs  of  the
    appellant presented any difficulties in making  an  assessment  of  his
    physical features.  Mr Peters suggested that  colour  photographs  were
    provided to the expert, and there is no reason to doubt  that  this  is
    so.

26. In any event, the FtJ also  indicated  that  the  expert's  summary  of
    observations conflicts directly with the findings of the Upper Tribunal
    in BM and Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) CG [2015] UKUT
    293 (IAC).  The FtJ referred to one particular instance of  information
    relied on by Mr Ntung which the Upper Tribunal in BM and  Others  found
    could not be accepted in its entirety, being an  Amnesty  International
    Report.  However, the FtJ did not explain in detail what  the  conflict
    was or is between the decision  in  BM  and  others  and  the  expert's
    report.

27. There are a number of typographical and similar  errors  in  the  FtJ's
    decision.  These are to be found at [9] (referring to the appellant  as
    "her"), [18], [23], [24], [26]  (using  the  words  "in  can  chatter",
    presumably meaning 'in  Kinshasa'),  [32]  and  [37].   These  are  all
    proofreading errors which in places make the FtJ's  decision  difficult
    to understand.

28. In addition, although evidently dismissing the appeal, the FtJ said  at
    [33] that the appellant had discharged the burden of proof and that his
    removal would cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  At [39] he repeated that the respondent's  decision  would
    cause  the  United  Kingdom  to  be  in  breach  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.  In his concluding paragraph  at  [40]  he  said  that  the
    appellant had shown that "there are"  substantial  grounds  to  believe
    that he faces a real risk of  suffering  serious  harm  "on  return  to
    [blank]", leaving the country of destination unspecified.

29. It is evident that in other respects the FtJ gave careful consideration
    to the appellant's claim. However, the various errors I  have  referred
    to, the lack of evident care in the proofreading, and the evident  'cut
    and paste' approach to the concluding paragraphs, it must  be  said  do
    indicate a lack of care on the part of the FtJ.

30. It is not the case that every or any error of that sort amounts  to  an
    error of law; quite the contrary.  One needs to consider  the  decision
    as a whole to assess whether there is a comprehensive assessment of all
    the evidence.  On the other hand, it must be  borne  in  mind  that  in
    particular in an asylum claim, the utmost care should be given  to  the
    assessment of the claim and objectively speaking it must be shown  that
    the claim has been assessed with anxious scrutiny.  I am not  satisfied
    that this has been shown in this case in the light of the errors that I
    have referred to.

31. Whilst the FtJ made a number of adverse credibility findings which  may
    in other circumstances be said to  have  been  sustainable,  I  am  not
    satisfied that he gave satisfactory or legally sustainable reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence  in  the  expert's  report.   The  report  is  a
    detailed one and contains a number of positive features  in  favour  of
    the  appellant's  claim.   This  all  reflects   on   the   appellant's
    credibility, which I do not accept  as  suggested  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant is not a central issue.

32. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the decision of the  FtJ  involves  an
    error of law in the assessment of credibility and in the assessment  of
    the expert report, requiring the decision to be set aside.

33. In the circumstances, and considering the Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement at paragraph 7.2, it is appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the FtT for a hearing de novo before  a  judge  other  than
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S.  T.  Fox,  with  no  findings  of  fact
    preserved.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing  before  a
    differently constituted Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            29/06/16
