
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02993/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     PB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E MacKay, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Iran,  born  on  30  January  1991.   By
    determination promulgated on 17 August 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    D'Ambrosio allowed an asylum appeal by her  father  DB  (AA/02957/2015)
    and dismissed her  appeal.   The  respondent  does  not  challenge  the
    outcome in her father's case.

 2. The appellant's grounds are set out in 9  paragraphs.   In  a  rule  24
    response the respondent argues that the judge  carefully  distinguished
    the two cases, gave clear reasoning, and came  to  a  valid  conclusion
    with which the grounds merely disagree.

 3. The first substantive point in the grounds is  at  paragraph  2.   This
    criticises paragraph 74 of the determination, which says:

         "Note: here I asked Miss McHugh [the appellant's representative  in
         the First-tier Tribunal] to provide supporting country evidence ...
         that the Iranian authorities would  subject  every  member  of  the
         first appellant's family to persecution...  In  reply  Miss  McHugh
         said that the first appellant's wife and his elder son ... are both
         in hiding, which showed that they feared that the authorities would
         do that."

 4. The ground says that this was "looking for evidence of what would occur
    and not what was  a  serious  possibility  of  occurring".   Mr  MacKay
    submitted that this amounted to an error of applying the wrong standard
    of proof.

 5. I am satisfied  that  this  ground  misunderstands  the  determination.
    Paragraph 74 is no more than a record of the exchange which took  place
    when the judge (very reasonably) asked to  be  directed  to  background
    evidence to support the submission that risk  to  the  first  appellant
    might extend to the rest of the family.  Paragraph 74 does not  express
    any conclusion.  It does not even hint that the judge may have  applied
    any standard of proof other than the very well known lower standard, on
    which he directed himself at appendix one and at paragraphs  46  -  48,
    and which  permeates  the  resolution  of  the  case,  for  example  at
    paragraphs 86 and 91.

 6. The  conclusion  which  the  determination  does  reach  on  the  point
    mentioned at paragraph 74  comes  at  paragraph  89,  where  the  judge
    declines to find risk to family members in Iran or to  this  appellant.
    This conclusion is attacked at paragraph 8 of the grounds, but in terms
    which amount to no more than insistence and disagreement.

 7. Paragraph 3 of the grounds asserts that the judge  "failed  to  address
    the factual matrix  of  the  appellant's  position  on  return."   This
    misrepresents  the  determination,  which  addresses   precisely   that
    question.  It is only  an  insistence  that  the  circumstances  "would
    arguably place her  at  risk",  when  the  judge  has  decided  to  the
    contrary.

 8. Paragraph 4  of  the  grounds  elaborates  at  length  on  the  judge's
    observation that the appellant might take with her on return a copy  of
    her father's refugee status document.  I do find that an  odd  comment.
    I doubt if members of the Iranian authorities would be  much  mollified
    by the news that the  appellant's  father  has  been  recognised  as  a
    refugee in the UK.  However, Mr MacKay did not add to  this  ground  in
    submissions, and its sub-paragraphs (a) to (f) only add further  levels
    of conjecture to an incidental and hypothetical  remark.   The  judges'
    critical finding was that the authorities were not likely to target the
    daughter as a result of the warrant vindictively taken out against  her
    father.   This part of the grounds shows a degree of  speculation,  but
    not material error.

 9. Paragraphs 5 and 6 of the grounds say that the judge was wrong to  hold
    that the appellant's claim did not fall  into  the  Refugee  Convention
    category of particular social group.  The  point  might  be  debatable,
    although the grounds amount to insistence rather than  to  an  analysis
    showing that the judge erred in dissenting from TB (PSG -  women)  Iran
    UKIAT 00065.  Mrs O'Brien submitted that the judge was right,  for  the
    reasons he gave.  I tend to agree, but the issue is immaterial  in  the
    absence of any finding that the conclusions on  risk  fall  to  be  set
    aside, and so it need not be answered further.

10. Paragraph 7 of the grounds misrepresents the  effect  of  the  evidence
    before the judge.  The evidence to which he referred at  paragraphs  87
    and 88 did show that a woman's first marriage required the approval  of
    her father or paternal  grandfather,  or  the  approval  of  the  court
    granted on her application.  That plainly did tend against the  claimed
    risk of enforced marriage, particularly as her circumstances  were  the
    opposite of those individuals shown by the background  evidence  to  be
    liable to such coercion.

11. Paragraph 9 of the grounds argues that in light of finding in favour of
    the appellant's father the judge should  have  reconvened  for  further
    submissions on article 8 of the ECHR.  This is no more than asking  for
    a second bite at the  cherry.   The  case  was  there  to  be  made  on
    alternative outcomes.  There  has  been  no  unfairness.   The  grounds
    develop the case on the basis of family members "in  hiding"  in  Iran,
    but the determination rejects the alleged need to hide.  In any  event,
    as an adult, and having family in both Iraq and the UK, it is difficult
    to see that the appellant had any real prospect of constructing a  case
    for a right to remain under article 8, when no such case could be  made
    under the immigration rules.

12. There must be understandable family disappointment that  the  appellant
    failed while her father succeeded.  However, it was for  the  judge  to
    decide each case.  He  did  not  differentiate  lightly,  but  went  to
    considerable pains of analysis.  The grounds  do  not  show  any  error
    which materially affects the conclusions reached.

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           22 December 2015
