
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02887/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10th November 2016                      |On 7th December 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                    m s p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Paramjorthy, Counsel, Mansfield Chambers, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 6th October 1988.   She
    appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  11th  February
    2015 refusing her application for asylum, humanitarian  protection  and
    on human rights grounds.  Her appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Malcolm on 22nd June 2016 and dismissed on all grounds in
    a decision promulgated on 16th August 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 19th  October  2016.
    The permission states that it is arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge may have erred in law by failing to take  into  account  relevant
    evidence in assessing risk on return.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response dated 4th November 2016 which  states  that
    the judge has carried out a careful analysis on whether  the  Appellant
    is at risk on return at paragraphs 96 to 99 of the decision.  The judge
    finds that the Appellant's alleged relationship to  Colonel  Banu  does
    not place her at any risk and there is no evidence that  the  Appellant
    is involved in diaspora activities.  The judge has found that there are
    no reasons why the Appellant would be of interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities on return.

The Hearing

 4. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the First-tier Judge  accepted
    the core aspects of the Appellant's claim.  I was referred to Ground  2
    of the Grounds of Application.  The  judge  accepts  that  there  is  a
    family relationship to Colonel Banu and accepts that the Appellant  was
    arrested in 1999 and 2007.  She was then arrested in 2010  because  she
    failed to report. She was ill-treated and sexually  assaulted  on  this
    occasion and within the last year has received psychiatric care in  the
    United Kingdom.  Counsel  submitted  that  the  judge  ignored  crucial
    evidence about the authorities' ongoing interest in the  Appellant.   I
    was referred to the  statement  by  the  Appellant's  mother.   Counsel
    submitted that the  First-tier  Judge  did  not  challenge  this.   The
    Appellant's mother states that in autumn  2015  a  few  neighbours  had
    telephoned her as officers had been seen  at  her  home  in  Sri  Lanka
    looking for her and had mentioned the Appellant.  It  was  around  this
    time that the Appellant's mother made an application  to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom.

 5. Counsel referred to paragraph 89 onwards of the decision  which  relate
    to findings of fact.  He submitted that there is no  reference  to  the
    Appellant's mother's statement.  I was referred to paragraph 97 of  the
    decision in which the judge refers to GJ Sri Lanka  [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC).  The judge states that she has given consideration to this  case
    and accepts that the  appellant  may  be  asked  on  return  about  her
    family's LTTE connections.  The judge states that the mere fact of  the
    relationship to Colonel Banu does not mean that the appellant would  be
    of sufficient interest to the Sri Lankan authorities for her to  be  in
    danger on return and she states that there  is  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant has been involved in diaspora activities in Sri  Lanka.   The
    judge goes on to state that she can find no reason  for  the  Appellant
    being of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities on return  but  Counsel
    submitted that the judge makes no mention of the  authorities'  ongoing
    interest in the  Appellant,  which  is  referred  to  in  her  mother's
    statement.  Counsel submitted that this is a material error of law.  He
    submitted that it must be material when the country  guidance  case  is
    considered.

 6. I was then referred to the case of MP NT (Sri Lanka)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    829 and number six of the Grounds of Application.  I  was  referred  to
    Underhill LJ's judgment at paragraph 50.  This states that  a  returnee
    could still be at risk on return to Sri Lanka, even in the  absence  of
    sur place activism.  Counsel submitted that the judge  did  not  engage
    with this case law at all.  He submitted that clearly this Appellant is
    of adverse interest to the  authorities  and  although  the  First-tier
    Judge finds there is no evidence that the Appellant was on a stop  list
    that does not mean she is not  at  risk  on  return  in  light  of  the
    rationale of Underhill LJ.  Number seven of the grounds state that  the
    Appellant's mother was placed on reporting conditions.  The authorities
    came in  search  of  the  Appellant,  asked  questions  about  her  and
    perceived her as posing a threat to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a
    single state.

 7. Counsel then referred to the  Appellant's  mental  health  issues.   At
    paragraphs 100 and 101 the First-tier  Judge  states  that  her  mental
    health has no material effect on her asylum claim but Counsel submitted
    that it is clear that there is insufficient psychiatric  treatment  for
    the Appellant in  Sri  Lanka  based  on  the  case  law  and  objective
    evidence.  He submitted that the fact that the  First-tier  Judge  does
    not engage with this finding  is  a  material  error  of  law.   I  was
    referred to the evidence on file and the said case of GJ  which  states
    that there are only 25 working psychiatrists in the whole of Sri  Lanka
    and that any money spent on mental health  goes  to  the  large  mental
    health institutions in capital cities which may be inaccessible and  do
    not provide appropriate care for mentally ill people.

 8. I pointed out that in the Appellant's father's asylum decision  it  was
    accepted that Colonel Banu was his first cousin once removed  and  that
    her father's brother in 2004  left  Sri  Lanka  without  any  problems.
    Counsel submitted that there was a cease fire in 2004 until August 2005
    and that is why her father's brother was not at risk.

 9. Counsel submitted that if I  consider  the  Tamil  separatism  bulletin
    dated in August 2016 this makes it clear that people affiliated to  the
    LTTE are still at risk on return to Sri Lanka and cannot be removed  to
    Sri Lanka today.  I asked about the  Appellant  living  safely  in  Sri
    Lanka from 2000 until 2007, then from 2007 until 2010  and  only  being
    arrested in 2010 because she failed to report.  Counsel submitted  that
    not only was the Appellant reporting, her mother was also reporting.

10. I put to the Appellant's  representative  that  there  are  credibility
    issues based on Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration, (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc) Act 2004 but he submitted that the judge  has  accepted
    the core elements of this claim.

11. Counsel accepted that the Appellant has had medical treatment  for  her
    mental health and at present is not at risk of self-harming.

12. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is  relying  on  the  Rule  24
    response  dated  4th  November  2016.   He  submitted  that  the  judge
    considered all the evidence in the round. She has set out the facts  in
    paragraphs 14 to 24 and has then gone through the claim in detail.  The
    judge clearly was aware of the case of GJ and at paragraphs 42 to 46 it
    is clear that the judge was aware of the Appellant's father's  position
    which is that he applied for asylum but his asylum  claim  failed.   He
    submitted that the judge has noted that he now has British  citizenship
    although he was a failed asylum seeker and he has given  money  to  the
    Appellant to help with her studies.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that at paragraph  53  the  judge  has
    noted that the Appellant's boyfriend, who is also Sri  Lankan,  intends
    returning to Sri Lanka when his visa ends on 30th  October  2016.   Her
    boyfriend states that he is aware that he and the Appellant may require
    to return to Sri Lanka.  Her boyfriend states that he  does  not  think
    the Appellant can return safely as she  frequently  suffers  nightmares
    and suffered torture when she was there.  At paragraph  57  the  First-
    tier Judge refers to the Appellant and  her  mother  reporting  but  he
    submitted that her mother remained there after the Appellant  left  and
    has only now come to join her husband who has become a British citizen.



14. The Presenting Officer referred me to the head notes in the  said  case
    of GJ which detail the risk factors for people returning to Sri  Lanka.
    He submitted that the First-tier Judge applied the said case of GJ  and
    found that this Appellant would not be at  risk  on  return.   She  has
    taken part in no sur place  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Her
    father's asylum application failed and failed on  appeal.   Her  father
    was relying on the same issues as the Appellant and I was asked to note
    in particular what the case of GJ states is happening since  the  cease
    fire.  LTTE members are being  released.   The  judge  finds  that  the
    relationship with Colonel Banu is not relevant. This was found  in  her
    father's claim.  The Appellant left on her own passport.

15. With regard to the Appellant's mother's statement (she did  not  appear
    as a witness at  the  Appellant's  hearing)  this  is  referred  to  at
    paragraph 85 of the decision and is also referred to at paragraph 54 of
    the  decision.   The  Appellant's  mother  made  a  statement  and  the
    Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the  judge  has  considered  this
    properly.   He  submitted  that  there  is  nothing  to   support   the
    Appellant's mother's statement.

16. The Presenting Officer referred to paragraph 100 of the decision  which
    deals with the medical evidence and the Appellant's mental health.  The
    Appellant has had medical treatment and is not at  risk  of  self-harm.
    He submitted that the judge had no reason to go further relating to her
    mental health. There are mental health facilities in Sri Lanka which is
    all that is required based on the case of N [2005] UKHL.

17. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge  does  not  require  to
    refer every piece of evidence in her decision as long as she  considers
    all the evidence before her.  She makes reference  to  the  Appellant's
    mother's letter and she considers the evidence given by  the  witnesses
    at the hearing along with her mother's statement.   He  submitted  that
    the judge finds that in 2016 this Appellant can return, and will not be
    at risk.  She has relatives she can go to join in  Sri  Lanka  and  her
    fianc� is returning there.  He submitted that  the  judge  has  made  a
    careful analysis of this claim and there is no material error of law in
    her decision.

18. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that although the Appellant may not
    be on a stop list she is likely  to  be  on  a  watch  list.   This  is
    referred to in the said case of GJ and if you are on a watch  list  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka keep an eye on you when  you  are  there.   He
    submitted that clearly the authorities are interested in the  Appellant
    and her mother or they would not have  been  reporting.   He  submitted
    that the Appellant's mother came to the United Kingdom  at  around  the
    same time as the Appellant was being sought in Sri Lanka.  He submitted
    that the First-tier Judge has not engaged with strands of the  evidence
    or put them together.  He submitted that  at  paragraph  97  the  judge
    states that there is no evidence that the Appellant's name will be on a
    watch list and no evidence that she has undertaken  any  activities  in
    the United Kingdom which would bring her to the attention  of  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities.  He submitted that the judge was  not  entitled  to
    this finding when GJ is considered relating to watch lists.

19. He submitted that the judge  found  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant was involved in any diaspora activity but  the  judge  should
    have asked herself whether the evidence before her  indicated  that  in
    spite of the absence of diaspora activity, this Appellant would  be  at
    risk on return.  He submitted that the judge did not examine this issue
    and he submitted that had she done so her finding might  have  been  in
    favour of the Appellant.   He  submitted  that  although  there  is  no
    documentary evidence that the authorities have  been  looking  for  the
    Appellant, her mother's statement requires to be properly considered.

20. Counsel submitted that the core of the claim has been accepted  by  the
    judge and although the appellant left the United  Kingdom  on  her  own
    passport she did this with  the  assistance  of  an  agent  and  I  was
    referred to the said case of GJ  which  refers  to  corruption  at  the
    airport in Sri Lanka.  He submitted that it is possible to get  through
    the airport in Sri Lanka with an agent, undetected.   I  was  asked  to
    consider the Tamil separatist document and find there to be a  material
    error of law in the judge's decision.



Decision and Reasons

21. The judge has accepted many of the core  issues  in  this  claim.   The
    Appellant's mother did not attend the  hearing  of  this  appeal  as  a
    witness but she submitted a statement which it is clear the judge  took
    into account.  Her mother refers  to  problems  which  the  appellant's
    father had in Sri Lanka.  I have considered  the  Appellant's  father's
    asylum decision and have noted that his asylum claim failed.  Based  on
    this the Appellant's father can return to  Sri  Lanka  and  could  have
    returned to Sri Lanka in 2007.  His case was dismissed on 8th  February
    2007.  Instead he stayed in the United Kingdom and  has  now  become  a
    British citizen.  The appellant's claim is on the  same  basis  as  her
    father's claim.

22. The Appellant's mother states that she and the Appellant were placed on
    reporting conditions.  They stayed at their home  address  and  in  her
    statement the Appellant's mother states that the  police  and  the  CID
    continued to  look  for  her  husband.   In  the  appellant's  father's
    decision dated in 2007 he stated that he  had  lost  contact  with  his
    family in Sri Lanka, which seems strange as his family remained at  the
    family home.  In the Appellant's father's decision the  judge  accepted
    that he was connected familially to Colonel Banu but found that he  had
    exaggerated his claim about his friend Mr Sekaram.  The judge  accepted
    the Appellant's father's account of  his  arrest,  detention,  torture,
    hospital treatment, release and departure from Sri Lanka  and  that  he
    was never a member of the LTTE.  The judge refers to the  ill-treatment
    of the Appellant's father and notes that  at  that  time  matters  were
    critical in Sri Lanka.  At paragraph 26 of her  father's  decision  the
    judge states that the requirement for the Appellant's father to  report
    was simply standard practice.  Based on the objective evidence that  is
    still the situation and explains why the Appellant and her mother  were
    reporting.  At paragraph 28 of her father's decision  the  judge  finds
    that he will not be at real  risk  of  torture  on  return.   Like  the
    Appellant her father had no involvement with  the  LTTE  while  in  the
    United Kingdom.   He  had  no  communication  with  Colonel  Banu.   At
    paragraph 29 the judge found that the Appellant's father might well  be
    interviewed and questioned on return to Sri Lanka but  still  found  he
    would not be at risk of serious ill-treatment or  at  real  risk.   The
    Appellant's father's asylum appeal was therefore dismissed as  was  his
    humanitarian protection  appeal  and  his  human  rights  appeal.   The
    Appellant's father stated that he would have problems on return because
    he had failed to report and had gone overseas but  the  judge  in  that
    case found that that was not sufficient for success in his claim.    He
    also found that his relationship with Colonel Banu was not significant.



23. Like her father there is nothing to connect the Appellant personally to
    the LTTE.  The judge found her father to be credible but found he would
    not be at risk on return.  This was in 2007 and it is now  2016.   Risk
    on return for someone like the appellant is less likely than it was  in
    2007 based on the country evidence.

24. The Appellant's mother's statement supports the Appellant's  claim  and
    makes it clear that she and the Appellant remained in their  own  house
    in their home area after the appellant's  father  left.   In  2007  the
    Appellant and her mother were both detained for four days.   They  then
    continued to report until 2010.  It is clear that the only  reason  the
    Appellant was arrested and detained in 2010 was because she  failed  to
    report.  Again she and her mother were detained for  four  days.   They
    were then released. In her  mother's  statement  she  states  that  the
    Appellant left Sri Lanka with the help of an  agent.   The  Appellant's
    evidence is that she applied for a Tier 4 Student  visa  and  this  was
    granted on 13th September 2011 valid until 26th January 2015.  She made
    no attempt to claim asylum during that period. Her evidence now is that
    there is corruption at the airport and that is how she got through. The
    Appellant's mother lived  safely  at  the  family  home  and  continued
    reporting. The  Appellant  moved  to  stay  with  her  grandmother  and
    continued reporting apart from on one occasion and that is when she was
    detained.  In her statement she states that she was  detained  in  2010
    for four days and when the four days were up she was told to "just  go"
    but continue to report. This supports  the  judge's  statement  in  the
    Appellant's  father's  decision  that  the  requirement  to  report  is
    standard practice. The Appellant's evidence is that she managed to  get
    into the United Kingdom with the help of an agent but she came  to  the
    United Kingdom on her own passport with a student visa and  studied  at
    college in the United Kingdom.   Although the judge accepted  the  core
    of her account the only mention of the Appellant using an agent to come
    to the United Kingdom is at paragraph 58.   There  is  mention  of  the
    Appellant hoping to extend her visa. Not made  much  was  made  of  her
    using an agent to leave Sri Lanka in any of  the  evidence  before  the
    judge.

25. Counsel's position is that the judge did  not  take  into  account  the
    Appellant's mother's statement in which she states that in autumn  2015
    neighbours contacted her when she was in the United  Kingdom  and  that
    officers had been seen at her home in Sri Lanka.  They  had  asked  for
    her and for the Appellant and this made her think that neither she  nor
    the Appellant can return. When the Appellant failed to report  she  had
    not been staying at her mother's but at her grandmother's. At best  her
    mother's statement is based on hearsay evidence.  The judge has clearly
    noted the Appellant's mother's statement at paragraphs 54  and  93  and
    has given  it  sufficient  consideration.  The  judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant's evidence is that she was arrested  and  detained  in  1999,
    2007 and 2010. The judge noted that her father, in  his  asylum  claim,
    did not mention the Appellant's arrest in 1999.  The judge  noted  that
    from 2007 to 2010 the Appellant was reporting as was her  mother.   The
    authorities may well have been at the house of the  appellant's  mother
    but this would simply be because she was not reporting. Her mother left
    Sri Lanka legally to come to the United Kingdom and no mention has been
    made of her having problems when she left Sri Lanka  although  she  had
    been reporting. The fact that the appellant's mother has now  left  Sri
    Lanka to come  to  the  United  Kingdom  is  not  significant  in  this
    appellant's claim.  She has come to join her husband who has  now  been
    granted British citizenship. She did not leave for fear of persecution.



26. The judge has considered everything  that  was  before  her.   She  has
    accepted much of the Appellant's evidence  and  has  found  her  to  be
    credible but has found that she would not be at real risk on return  to
    Sri Lanka.  I do not find that there is an error of law because of  the
    terms of the Appellant's mother's statement.  The judge has taken  this
    into account and it forms part of the evidence on which she  has  based
    her decision.  There was  nothing  before  the  judge  to  support  the
    appellant's mother's statement.

27. The appellant has had  treatment  for  her  mental  health.   There  is
    treatment in Sri Lanka although it is not of the same standard as  that
    in the UK but based on the said Court of Justice case of N that is  all
    that is required. Her mental health issues  do  not  add  much  to  the
    appellant's claim.

28. The judge has applied the Devaseelan principle, considered her father's
    asylum application and appeal decision and has given  adequate  reasons
    for her findings throughout.  There is nothing in  the  decision  which
    suggests that she has not properly considered all the  evidence  before
    her.



Notice of Decision

29. There is no material error of law in the judge's  decision  on  asylum,
    humanitarian  protection  and  human   rights,   which   decision   was
    promulgated on 16th August 2016.  The decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Malcolm promulgated on 16th August 2016 must stand.

30. Anonymity has been directed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray         08th December 2016


































