
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03246/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th February 2016                         |On 7th April 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                               hamed alizadeh
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Samra of Harbans Singh Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who initially claimed  asylum
    in this country in 2008.  As he had travelled through various  European
    countries the Secretary of State proposed  to  remove  him  to  Greece,
    under the Dublin Regulations, and the Appellant absconded.  He  made  a
    subsequent claim in 2012, which was refused on 30th January 2015, and a
    decision made to remove him.  The essence of his claim was that he  had
    been involved in an illicit sexual relationship with a young woman  who
    was killed by her family  following  becoming  pregnant  and  that  the
    Appellant was being sought for revenge by members of  her  family,  who
    were persons in possession of power. The Appellant's appeal against the
    refusal of asylum and removal decision was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge M Swinnerton, who dismissed the appeal in a decision  promulgated
    on 28th May 2015.  The  Judge  at  first  instance  did  not  find  the
    Appellant to be a credible witness for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the
    decision.

 2. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  this  Tribunal.   In
    brief the Grounds of  Appeal  were  that  the  Judge  made  credibility
    findings on a failure to supply information in  response  to  questions
    which were never asked, and erred in relying on the fact  that  he  had
    not provided evidence  of  the  sexual  relationship,  beyond  his  own
    evidence, which it was said he could not be expected to  do,  and  also
    that in finding it significant that the Appellant's aunt had  not  been
    at risk and had  remained  in  Afghanistan  the  Judge  had  failed  to
    understand the cultural context of honour killings.

 3. The grounds continued  by  asserting  that  the  Judge  had  relied  on
    incorrect information in stating that the Appellant  had  claimed  that
    his family's property was burned down by the young woman's  father  and
    uncle after he had  left  Afghanistan  and  yet  had  made  no  earlier
    reference to this, whereas in fact it was referred to  in  his  initial
    representations made in 2012.  It was also said that the Judge erred in
    considering that the Appellant's evidence was inconsistent as  he  said
    that he sold his shop in Afghanistan to a third party before departing,
    no distinction being drawn  between  the  Appellant's  shop  and  other
    property.  It was said that the Judge had considered that there  was  a
    paucity of  evidence  concerning  the  young  woman's  family  but  the
    Appellant had been consistent concerning the names of  her  father  and
    uncle and evidence had been produced of her uncle's position.   Finally
    it was suggested that the Judge had failed to look at the  evidence  in
    the round and had set too high a  standard  of  proof.   Permission  to
    appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  N  Osborne   who
    considered the grounds arguable.

 4. At the commencement of the hearing before me Mr  Mills  accepted  there
    might be some validity to a criticism considering a failure  to  supply
    corroborative evidence but the point was  peripheral.   The  thrust  of
    what the Judge said was that there was no supporting evidence  and  the
    Appellant's case was generally vague.  He considered the decision to be
    sustainable.  Mr Samra for his part relied on the  Grounds  of  Appeal,
    which were detailed.  He pointed out that a date at paragraph 19 of the
    decision was incorrect as reference was made to the Appellant living in
    Iran in 2010 although he had arrived in the UK in 2008.   I  considered
    this to be a mere slip and to be of no  significance.   Mr  Samra  then
    expanded upon the grounds emphasising that the Appellant should not  be
    criticised for failure to deal with  specific questions that were never
    put to him.  As to the burning down of the family's property  this  had
    been specifically referred  to  in  the  initial  submissions  of  19th
    January 2012 and in the same representations mention had also been made
    of the sale of the shop.  He said the claimed inconsistency upon  which
    the Judge relied did not exist as it was  clear  that  there  were  two
    properties.  The Appellant had provided an internet  article  referring
    to the young woman's uncle and to the young woman's  father  being  the
    security chief of Parwan Province.  He questioned what further could be
    produced.   Finally,  he  said,  it  was  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant to produce evidence of the sexual  relationship,  beyond  his
    own evidence.

 5. In reply Mr Mills said although the Appellant  might  never  have  been
    asked for the address of the young woman it was the case that there was
    no evidence of a sexual relationship or even of the fact that the young
    woman existed.  He referred to paragraph 339L of the Immigration  Rules
    and the duty of an Appellant to substantiate a  claim.   The  Appellant
    had entered the United Kingdom in 2008 and the Secretary of  State  had
    intended to remove him to Greece, which at the time was regarded  as  a
    safe country.  The Appellant  had  not  stood  his  ground  and  argued
    against that case but had absconded.  As to  the  new  claim  different
    details were given as to his date  of  birth.   That  was  intended  to
    mislead.  The Appellant's general credibility was not  established  and
    that was the starting point.  In those circumstances he said it was not
    unreasonable to expect supporting evidence to be produced.

 6. With regard to the internet article concerning the claimed relatives of
    the young woman, in the context of the Appellant's general  credibility
    the Judge was  entitled  to  reject  that.   The  documents  were  only
    translated and matters of weight were for the judge.  As to the failure
    to distinguish between the shop and other property, which it  was  said
    had been burned down, whilst Mr Mills  accepted  that  these  had  been
    mentioned in the 2012 representations there had been  no  reference  to
    these two separate properties in the screening or asylum  interview  or
    in the Appellant's later statement.  His final point was  even  if  the
    credibility findings were unsafe that any error was not material.   The
    events complained of had occurred in 2006.  The  Appellant's  fear  was
    related to his home  province.   He  had  no  obvious  profile  and  he
    submitted that relocation to Kabul  would  have  been  available.   The
    Appellant was a grown man.  The point had not been  considered  in  the
    decision but if it had been he submitted that  the  appeal  would  have
    been dismissed on that basis.

 7. Finally  Mr  Samra  in  response  said  that  the  Judge's  conclusions
    concerning the significance of the property being burned  down  in  the
    context of the shop being sold were not reasonable in the light of  the
    evidence as  a  whole.   He  noted  that  the  judge  had  started  the
    credibility findings having regard to  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.   It  was  correct
    that he  had  passed  through  European  countries  en  route  but  the
    Secretary of State had intended to return him to Greece.  Although  the
    leading case of MSS v Belgium and Greece [2011] 53 EHRR 28 had not been
    decided at that time he submitted that a failure to return to Greece in
    the light of that subsequent judgment should not be  held  against  the
    Appellant.  His decision was reasonable  in  the  light  of  subsequent
    cases.  As to relocation to  Kabul  the  Judge  had  available  in  the
    documents the case of ZN  (warlords  -  CIPU  list  not  comprehensive)
    Afghanistan [2005] UKIAT 00096 from which it was reasonable to conclude
    that there was a risk of harm to the Appellant in Kabul.  It would  not
    be difficult for a powerful person to track him down as  on  relocation
    to Kabul checks would be made in his home area.

 8. Having heard those submissions I reserved my decision which I now give.
     I found that there were potentially material errors in the decision of
    the Judge at first instance sufficient to require the  decision  to  be
    set aside for re-determination.  The Appellant's case  is  not  without
    potential difficulties.  The point made concerning  Section  8  of  the
    2004 Act is of potential impact but has to be viewed in the context  of
    the evidence as a whole.  The significance of the  Appellant's  failure
    to comply with a direction to go to Greece and then to abscond has also
    to be viewed in the context of the  subsequent  cases  indicating  that
    Greece was not necessarily a safe country for those seeking asylum.

 9. The Judge made a point (at paragraph 21) that  the  Appellant  had  not
    provided any supporting evidence in  relation  to  his  claimed  sexual
    relationship but it is difficult to see what further evidence he  could
    have provided.  It is made clear in TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ
    40 as to the significance of supporting evidence.  At paragraph  16  of
    that judgment Lord Justice Thomas (as he then was) stated

         "Where evidence to support an account given by a party is or should
         readily be available, a Judge is, in my view, plainly  entitled  to
         take into account the failure to  provide  that  evidence  and  any
         explanations  for  that  failure.   This  may  be   a   factor   of
         considerable weight in relation  to  credibility  where  there  are
         doubts about the credibility of a party for other reasons ...".

    It is clear from that judgment that  the  accessibility  of  supporting
    evidence is a highly relevant factor.  The Judge does not mention  what
    potential further evidence, apart  from  his  own  oral  evidence,  the
    Appellant might have been able to supply.   The  Judge  also  commented
    adversely upon the  Appellant's  failure  to  give  the  young  woman's
    address or her full name but he does not appear to have been  asked  to
    provide these and in those circumstances the alleged failure to my mind
    has little significance.  I found there was also a potential weight  in
    the argument that the fact that the Appellant's aunt had been  able  to
    remain in Afghanistan without further difficulties  did  not  undermine
    his case.  He did provide some evidence as to the position of the young
    woman's uncle and father although it is the case that the article  does
    not refer to them as being related to her in that way.  That in  itself
    is not surprising.  I  find  there  were  real  difficulties  with  the
    approach of the Judge  to  the  claimed  significance  of  the  alleged
    inconsistency in the Appellant having sold his shop  and  his  family's
    property having been burned down.  The Judge clearly placed  weight  on
    this alleged inconsistency (at paragraph 24 of the decision) but having
    regard to the initial representations the alleged inconsistency was not
    apparent.  The Judge referred to the Appellant  having  mentioned  more
    than one property only in a further statement but in fact  he  referred
    to  them  in  his  initial  representations.   At  the  screening   and
    substantive interviews he was  not  asked  questions  concerning  these
    points.  The errors identified are of sufficient potential significance
    to undermine the findings reached.

10. Mr Mills made a final point to the  effect  that  even  if  there  were
    errors in the credibility findings there was no material error  of  law
    in the outcome  as  the  Appellant  could  safely  relocate  to  Kabul.
    Regrettably this was not an issue considered by the Judge  and  in  the
    absence of further evidence I did not feel that the point was made out.

11. I was not in a position to re-decide the appeal  both  for  reasons  of
    shortage of  time  and  the  fact  that  a  Dari  interpreter  was  not
    available.  Mr Samra urged me to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as fresh  credibility  findings  needed  to  be  made.   I  am
    persuaded that that is the correct course.  In the light  of  statement
    7(2)(b) of the Tribunals Judiciary Practice Statements  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with  the  directions
    which appear below.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of  law
and is set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
accordance with the directions below for reconsideration.

No application was made for an anonymity order. No such order had been  made
by the First-tier Tribunal and I make no order now.



Signed                              Dated: 09 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French



