

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03126/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 5th May 2015                               |On 7th May 2015              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     N G
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Martin instructed by CK Law Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Smart - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Davey promulgated on the 29th  December  2014  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appeal against the  removal  direction  to  Sri
        Lanka that accompanied the refusal of the application for leave  to
        remain on the basis of a need for international protection.



Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 2nd October  1984.
        The Judge considered the evidence made available and  set  out  his
        findings from paragraph  11  of  the  determination  which  can  be
        summarised as follows:


         . The purchase of mobile phone SIM cards was a matter of  interest
           to the Sri Lankan authorities and that if an identity  card  was
           required to make such a purchase very great care would be  taken
           to avoid the identity of  the  purchaser  being  discovered  and
           investigated [11].
         . It was surprising many engines [from boats  used  by  the  LTTE]
           were coming and going for repair over a sustained period yet  no
           interest was taken in the Appellants activities by the  security
           forces at any time. It was  found  unlikely  the  Appellant  was
           repairing engines at his home as claimed [12].
         . The Appellant claimed he stopped working on engines in 2008  and
           until he left in 2009 no  action  was  taken  against  him.  The
           Applicant claimed the garage was  searched  and  SIM  cards  and
           medical and other material taken leading to the  arrest  of  the
           garage owner,  but  no  steps  were  taken  to  investigate  the
           Appellant working there or at home [13].
         . It is surprising when the Appellants parents remain in Sri Lanka
           that there is no evidence from them concerning the activities of
           the Appellant in repairing numerous engines on their property or
           indeed their lack of knowledge as to why he was doing it to  the
           extent he was [14].
         . There is no evidence from the Appellants father  concerning  the
           steps he took to secure the Appellants release from detention in
           2013. The Appellant claims  his  parents  were  unaware  of  his
           activities at the material time and that his father  refused  to
           tell him such details [15].
         . No credible reason had been given as to why it was possible  for
           the Appellant to have acted  as  he  claimed  over  a  sustained
           period and yet leave his parents in ignorance of his activities,
           especially when engine repairs were taking place in or on  their
           own land. It was not  accepted  that  the  claim  to  have  been
           repairing all the engines as claimed was credibly  explained  as
           being a part of an apprenticeship [16].
         . No documentary or other evidence of detention had been  provided
           bar two documents: (i) a complaint made by the Appellants father
           to the police station at Kalpittya  on  24th  June  2013  citing
           event on 23rd June when it was said the Appellant had been taken
           away and his parents were unaware of his  whereabouts  [17]  and
           (ii) a letter from an Attorney dated 10th June 2014 which states
           the Appellants father had made representations to the police  to
           stop harassment,  particularly  of  his  wife,  in  his  absence
           allegedly looking  for  the  Appellant  who  had  "escaped  from
           custody of the authorities and therefore there is an outstanding
           warrant for his release. Hence the authorities are  looking  for
           him".  Concerns  are  recorded  about  the  reliability  of  the
           information and the concluding paragraph of the letter was found
           to suggest an adverse view of the Government but which does  not
           explain why the Appellant's life will be in danger let alone the
           basis of adverse interest in  him.  It  was  accepted  there  is
           evidence of the author of the letter being a Member of  the  Bar
           Association of Sri Lanka but it was found the letter raised more
           question than answers for why  there  would  be  any  continuing
           interest in the Appellant [18].
         . The submissions made by Mr Martin in  relation  PJ  (Sri  Lanka)
           [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 were considered [19].
         . The Appellants account of his release is entirely his alone.  It
           was open to the Appellant to adduce  evidence  from  friends  or
           family concerning arrest, detention and involvement in  securing
           his release and detention. There are  significant  omissions  in
           the  evidence  which  substantially   damaged   the   Appellants
           credibility [20].
         . The  Appellant  was  able  to  leave  passing  through  multiple
           positions of checks being made upon his  identity  by  different
           forces and able to do so without the presence of an agent. Given
           the number of checkpoints it makes "no sense" that the Appellant
           had through an agent  bribed  individuals  in  advance  at  each
           checkpoint [21].
         . The evidence was considered in the round and as a whole  and  no
           document excluded from consideration [21].
         . There is no evidence  from  Sri  Lanka  or  the  UK  of  medical
           treatment or the provision of herbal remedies [22].
         . No photographs or medical  evidence  relating  to  the  injuries
           claimed to have been sustained has been provided or in  relation
           to the possible cause [23].
         . It is material the Appellant failed to seek  medical  assistance
           in the UK when he was not at risk. The claim he was so disturbed
           that he could not bring himself to obtain such assistance is not
           accepted [24].
         . Neither the Appellants  father's  statement  to  the  police  or
           lawyers letter assert detention, torture or release or the basis
           of adverse interest continuing [25].
         . There may be some basis, although reasons are not provided as to
           why the SLA forces might take an interest in the Appellant,  and
           it is inappropriate to speculate.  The Appellant has  not  shown
           he was detained for  the  period  claimed  and  ill-treated  and
           tortured. He may have been detained for a short period  but  not
           in the circumstances claimed.  The circumstances do not indicate
           that the Appellant is perceived as a threat to the integrity  of
           the Sri Lankan single state or as having such a role  during  or
           post Tamil conflict [26].
         . The evidence does  not  show  the  Appellants  name  is  on  the
           computerised stop list. This is consistent  with  the  Appellant
           being of no interest when returned. Mr  Sabri  Mohamed's  letter
           was not found sufficient to support any adverse interest  in  or
           risk to the Appellant [27].
         . The Appellant claimed to be with friends at a tea-shop  when  he
           was 'picked-up' in 2013 yet there is no  evidence  from  any  of
           them of his abduction or removal in June 2013 [28].
         . The UK based activities are very  limited.  Considering  GJ  and
           Others the Appellant has  not  come  to  the  attention  of  the
           authorities nor is likely to as being involved in either the Sri
           Lanka Diaspora or in political opposition to the  current  state
           authorities. The Appellant is not a refugee sur place [29].
         . No real likelihood on return  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment
           contrary to the Refugee convention, Qualification  Directive  or
           Articles 2 and 3 ECHR has been proved [30].



Discussion



     3. A number of issues arose during the course of  the  hearing.  These
        included the assertion the findings in relation to the boat engines
        was irrational  as  the  Appellant  worked  at  a  boat  yard.  His
        apprenticeship is  not  disputed  but  the  findings  are  arguably
        sustainable even though the Appellant worked at a  boat  yard.  The
        Judge records that it was claimed that for a three year period 2006
        -2009 the Appellant repaired engines for  the  LTTE  but  that  his
        evidence was not convincing. The Appellant had claimed he  repaired
        as many as 900 engines between April 2006 and  October  2009  which
        was changed to the fact that two named LTTE members  attended  with
        engines, possible ten to fifteen, some of which  were  repaired  at
        the garage in which he worked although the majority  were  repaired
        at his family home. Paragraphs 5-8  and  12  of  the  determination
        refer.
     4. In granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge  Landes  commented
        that it may be arguable that the Judge ignored what was said in the
        country guidance case of GJ and Others (post-civil war:  returnees)
        Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)  and  others  about   an
        appellant's ability to leave the country.  At paragraph 170  of  GJ
        and others the respondent conceded  that  "having  left  Sri  Lanka
        without difficulty was not probative of a lack of adverse interest"
        - a point endorsed at paragraph 167 of  the  determination.  It  is
        accepted that some of adverse interest may be  able  to  leave  Sri
        Lanka without difficulty but this is  not  the  Judges  point.  The
        finding is that as the Appellant travelled through many checkpoints
        manned by officials from different agencies and it was not accepted
        that the agent would have bribed each and every official in advance
        at each checkpoint, as such the fact he was able  to  pass  without
        incident is strongly indicative of his not being of interest.  This
        has not been shown to be a  finding  outside  the  range  of  those
        available to the Judge.
     5. It is also said the Judge erred in paragraph 25 as the letter  from
        the lawyer in Sri Lanka, Mr Sabri Mohammed, asserted detention  and
        ongoing adverse interest.  This letter forms the basis of the  main
        head of challenge to the determination  which  is  based  upon  the
        decision of the Court of Appeal of PJ v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  1011
        in which Mr Martin represented the appellant.
     6. The first thread of argument was that as the Respondent  was  given
        the opportunity to undertake checks in relation to the  lawyer  and
        information to be found in the letter, yet failed to do so, she  is
        prevented from raising any objection to the same. Mr Martin  places
        reliance upon paragraph 31 of PJ in which the Court said:


              31. In my  view,  the  consequence  of  a  decision  that  the
   national authorities are                  in breach of their  obligations
   to undertake a proper process of verification                    is  that
   the Secretary  of  State  is  unable  thereafter  to  mount  an  argument
     challenging the authenticity of the relevant documents unless and until
   the                 breach is rectified by a proper enquiry.  It  follows
   that  if  a  decision  of  the                  Secretary  of  State   is
   overturned   on   appeal   on   this    basis,    absent    a    suitable
   investigation it will not open to her to suggest  that  the  document  or
              documents are forged or otherwise are not authentic.


     7. Mr Smart was  able  to  advise  the  Tribunal  that  following  the
        adjournment enquires were made of the BHC in Colombo who  indicated
        it was a pointless exercise due to the high incidence of  fraud  in
        Sri Lanka regarding documentation and the  fact  the  only  way  to
        corroborate the claim of adverse interest was  to  check  with  the
        authorities directly which was not  an  option  available.   It  is
        therefore arguable that the Respondent  did  commence  the  enquiry
        process in a case in which it transpired no further progress  could
        be made. As such the Respondent is not excluded from suggesting the
        documents are forged or otherwise not authentic.
     8. Such a blanket prohibition may  also  arguably  fall  foul  of  the
        Respondents right to a fair hearing and ability to  put  her  case.
        There may be cases in which checks cannot be made  for  operational
        reasons during the timescale provided. It appears the need for such
        flexibility may have been recognised by  the  Court  in  the  above
        paragraph where it refers to the undertaking of a  'proper  process
        of verification'. What is 'proper process' is must depend upon  the
        relevant facts of a case as it may  vary  from  case  to  case  and
        country to country. It also cannot be the case that the failure  of
        the Respondent to undertake checks prevents a judge from  assessing
        the evidence and deciding what weight her or she should  attach  to
        the same.
     9. In any event, this  is  not  a  case  in  which  the  view  of  the
        Respondent is the relevant issue at this time. The challenge before
        the Upper Tribunal is to the  determination  of  Judge  Davey.  The
        Judge did not find the lawyer in Sri Lanka did not  exist  or  that
        the letter did not emanate from this source. The Judge specifically
        stated that no evidence was excluded from consideration. The  Judge
        was not convinced, however, that the weight he was invited to place
        upon this evidence was as Mr Martin invited him to do.
    10. In relation to the issue of weight it is a settled  principle  that
        on the whole the weight to be given to the evidence is a matter for
        a judge. In this case Judge Davey clearly considered  the  evidence
        with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate
        reasons for the findings made. As such the weight to be given was a
        mater for him - SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  155  refers.
        Mr Martin argues that this may ordinarily be the case but  that  PJ
        provides authority to support his submission  that  the  Judge  was
        incorrect in law.
    11. It is important to refer to the terms of PJ in which the  Court  of
        Appeal held that both the First-tier Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal
        were wrong in law to reject the probative  value  of  the  evidence
        obtained by two layers in Sri Lanka.  It was held  that  in  asylum
        claims, where local lawyers obtained documents from courts  in  the
        home country, that did not create a rebuttable presumption that the
        documents were reliable. On the facts,  however,  although  it  was
        undoubtedly the case that false documents were widely available  in
        Sri Lanka, where it had been  established  that  the  documents  in
        question originated from a court  and  had  been  obtained  by  two
        independent lawyers on two separate occasions it was  difficult  to
        see how the  claimant  could  have  falsified  a  letter  from  the
        magistrate of the relevant court and placed it in the court records
        to be later retrieved in  this  way  and  at  the  very  least  the
        evidence required detailed analysis and explanation. The  case  was
        remitted.
    12. The nature of the evidence considered in PJ and that  available  to
        Judge Davey is materially different.  In PJ official  documentation
        from a reputable source was obtained by two separate  lawyers.   It
        had not been shown how the appellant could have falsified the  same
        even with the problem of forged  documents  in  Sri  Lanka.  Before
        Judge Davey was a letter from a lawyer recording what he claims  to
        have been told.  Such evidence is admissible, the issue  being  the
        weight to be attached to the same.
    13. It is not the case that because the letter has been produced  by  a
        lawyer it must be accepted as being credible without more.  Such  a
        suggestion was rejected by the Court of Appeal at paragraph  29  of
        PJ in the following terms:


          29. In my  judgment,  there  is  no  basis  in  domestic  or  ECHR
   jurisprudence  for  the             general  approach  that   Mr   Martin
   submitted ought to be adopted  whenever  local            lawyers  obtain
   relevant   documents   from   a   domestic    court,    and    thereafter
   transmit them directly to lawyers in the United Kingdom. The  involvement
   of             lawyers does not create the  rebuttable  presumption  that
   the documents they           produce  in  this  situation  are  reliable.
   Instead, the jurisprudence referred to above           does no more  than
   indicate   that   the   circumstances    of    particular    cases    may
   exceptionally necessitate an element of  investigation  by  the  national
   authorities,            in order to provide effective protection  against
   mistreatment under  article  3               ECHR.  It  is  important  to
   stress,   however,   that   this   step   will    frequently    not    be
   feasible or it may be unjustified or disproportionate. In  Tanveer  Ahmed
   the court           highlighted the cost and logistical difficulties that
   may be involved,  for  instance              because  of  the  number  of
   documents submitted by some asylum claimants. The           enquiries may
   put the applicant or his family  at  risk,  they  may  be  impossible  to
   undertake because of the prevailing local situation or they may place the
   United              Kingdom authorities  in  the  difficult  position  of
   making covert local enquiries             without the permission  of  the
   relevant authorities. Furthermore, given the                uncertainties
   that frequently remain following attempts to  establish  the  reliability
      of  documents,  if  the  outcome  of  any  enquiry  is  likely  to  be
   inconclusive this is a           highly relevant factor. As the court  in
   Tanveer Ahmed observed, documents                  should not  be  viewed
   in  isolation  and  the  evidence  needs  to   be   considered   in   its
   entirety.


    14. In this case Judge Davey considered the evidence  as  a  whole  and
        having done so found the Appellant  had  failed  to  discharge  the
        burden upon him to prove to even the lower standard applicable that
        he will face a credible real risk of persecution or  ill  treatment
        on return to Sri Lanka for the reasons  claimed  or  to  warrant  a
        grant of international protection for any proven reason.
    15. Mr Smart also submitted it relevant that  the  Appellant  had  been
        able to pass through the airport when he  returned  in  2013  which
        supports the claim his name is not on a wanted list and that  there
        is no warrant for his arrest as otherwise it  is  likely  he  would
        have been detained.
    16. Having considered the decision, available evidence,  pleadings  and
        oral submissions, I find no legal error material to the decision to
        dismiss the appeal established.


Decision

    17. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    18. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 6th May 2015












