

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: AA/03055/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 October 2014                            |On 27 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between
                                     KG
                         ANONYMITY DIRECTION IS MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:         Ms A Radford of Counsel instructed by Simman
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Alice Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a minor and a citizen of Albania. He was born  in  May
    1996. He was refused asylum and leave to remain on  humanitarian  basis
    by the respondent on 6 May 2014, having arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    on 28 February and having claimed asylum on 1 March 2012. He  had  been
    granted discretionary leave to remain  until  25  November  2013.   His
    application for further leave to remain was refused for  reasons  given
    by the respondent in her letter 6 May 2014. The  appellant's  claim  is
    that he has a well founded fear of persecution in Albania on account of
    a blood feud and as part of a particular social group he is  vulnerable
    as  there  is  no  sufficiency  of  protection  for  persons   in   his
    circumstances in Albania. His appeal was  heard  on  13  June  2014  at
    Taylor House by Judge D P  Herbert  OBE  a  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal.
 2. Judge D P Herbert dismissed the appeal and gave  his  reasons  for  the
    decision in his determination dated 13 June 2014.


 3. The appellant sought and obtained permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 4. In granting permission Judge Kelly, a First Tier tribunal Judge said, "
    It is arguable that in the light of the  Tribunal's  finding  that  the
    appellant's core account lacked "plausibility  [paragraph  66]  it  was
    incumbent upon the Tribunal to provide cogent reasons for rejecting the
    contrary view that had been put forward by a country expert in a report
    that he had prepared on behalf of the appellant. Simply to say that the
    expert's  opinion  was  based  upon  an  "assumption"  of  plausibility
    [paragraph 77] is arguably to ignore his expertise in the assessment of
    plausibility by reference to the  social  and  cultural  norms  of  the
    appellant's country of origin. The other grounds for  disbelieving  the
    appellant are also arguable."

 5. At the  hearing  before  me  Mrs  Holmes  did  not  argue  against  the
    appellant's long grounds  of  appeal  and  in  particular  against  the
    decision granting permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Ms
    Radford asked that material error be found and that the matter be  sent
    to the First Tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  on  all  issues.  Mrs
    Holmes agreed with that and so did I.

 6. This appeal is allowed to the limited extent that the decision of Judge
    D P Herbert is set aside and it is directed that the  appeal  is  heard
    afresh at the First Tier by a Judge other than Judge D P Herbert,


K Drabu
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
23 October 2014


ANONYMITY DIRECTION
An order for anonymity is made due to the nature of the claim and the age
of the appellant. This means that unless and until a tribunal or court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No report of these
proceedings shall directly of indirectly identify him or any member of
their family. This direction applies to both to the Appellant and to the
Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of
Court proceedings."








