
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03347/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 18th November 2015               |On: 30th November 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                  Abu Miah
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Timson, Counsel instructed by Arshad & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on the 8th  March  1957.
    He appeals with permission[1] the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Lloyd-Smith) to dismiss  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. That decision followed  the  rejection
    of the Appellant's claim to asylum.

 2. The Appellant claimed asylum on  the  23rd  September  2014.  Over  the
    course of two interviews he advanced a claim of feared persecution  for
    reasons of his political opinion. He claimed to be an active  supporter
    of the Bangladesh National Party who had suffered  threats,  extortion,
    attack, arrest and torture by, inter alia, police acting at the  behest
    of the Awami League. He stated  that  the  police  in  Bangladesh  have
    lodged a murder case against him which is ill-founded  and  politically
    motivated.

 3. The Respondent rejected the Appellant's  claim  as  not  credible.  The
    'reasons for refusal' letter identifies  a  number  of  inconsistencies
    between the Appellant's own evidence and the  documentary  evidence  he
    submitted in support of his claim.

 4. Following the refusal the Appellant lodged a handwritten 'statement  of
    additional grounds'  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    He  instructed
    representatives who prepared a witness statement on  his  behalf.  Thus
    when the matter came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant's
    evidence was to  be  found  in  four  documents:  the  records  of  the
    screening and substantive asylum interview, the statement of additional
    grounds, and his witness statement.  In addition he gave oral  evidence
    before the Tribunal.

 5. In dismissing his appeal, the Tribunal found there to  be  ten  reasons
    why his evidence could not be accepted,  even  to  the  lower  standard
    applicable in asylum appeals.  These are set out at paragraph 14(i)-(x)
    of the determination.

 6. The Appellant now has permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  in
    reaching its findings on credibility the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
    number of mistakes of fact in its treatment of the evidence.    Further
    it is said  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to  have  any  regard  to  the
    Appellant's  evidence  that  he  did  not  regard  the  'statement   of
    additional grounds' as being a reliable record of his evidence. He  had
    explained in his witness statement [at paragraphs 28-29]  that  it  had
    been completed by a Bengali man whom the Appellant had met in a  hotel.
    He had not had an opportunity to check its contents (not being able  to
    understand English) and he had only latterly come  to  understand  that
    the statement was, in some respects,  inaccurate.    Alternatively,  Mr
    Timson argued, the explanation had  been  noted  by  the  Tribunal  [at
    14(i)] but rejected without reason. This, he submitted, was a  discrete
    error of law.

 7. Mr Harrison opposed the appeal on all grounds. He  submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had clearly had regard to all of the evidence,  and
    had reached findings  open  to  it  on  the  evidence  before  it.  The
    determination contained numerous  adverse  credibility  findings  which
    would stand even if one or more of the grounds were made out.

    Error of Law

 8. Paragraph 14(i) of the determination reads as follows:

         "There is a large  disparity  between  the  account  given  in  his
         interviews and contained in the additional grounds. The appellant's
         explanation for this was unconvincing. He claimed that he was  told
         that he had to submit additional grounds within 7 days but couldn't
         initially find anyone who spoke Bengali so he then asked a  Bengali
         man he met in his hotel whose name he does not know and who he  had
         only ever met on that one occasion. I do not accept  this  account.
         The differences within the additional grounds are numerous..."

 9. I am satisfied that the  Tribunal  was  here  directly  addressing  the
    evidence that the Appellant  gave  in  respect  of  his  'statement  of
    additional grounds'. It cannot be said that the Tribunal failed to have
    regard to his explanation as to why that statement was  not  consistent
    with evidence given elsewhere.

10. Mr Timson argues that the statement "I  do  not  accept  this  account"
    reveals an error of law in that no  reason  is  given  as  to  why  the
    explanation was rejected. Reasons must be given so  that  a  party  can
    understand why he lost. Although paragraph 14(i) does not  contain  the
    words "I do not accept this account because..." it  is  quite  apparent
    from a reading of the paragraph as a whole that the  account  given  is
    rejected as implausible. The Tribunal did not find it credible that the
    additional grounds were drafted by a man whom  the  Appellant  did  not
    know, had met only once, still cannot name and whose connection to  him
    is limited to him staying in the same hotel.

11. Even if I am wrong in this, Mr Harrison was quite right to point to the
    remaining findings. Contrary to the suggestion made by Mr Timson in his
    submissions, the remaining credibility findings were not  simply  based
    on any discrepancies, or errors of fact, arising between the additional
    grounds  and  the  remaining  evidence.   Sub-paragraphs  14   (ii)-(x)
    identify material inconsistencies  between  the  Appellant's  oral  and
    written evidence,  his evidence and the newspaper  articles  submitted,
    his screening and asylum interviews,  his  evidence  and  the  material
    purporting to emanate from the BNP.  The account is further  found  not
    to be consonant with the country background material, and a  number  of
    the  documents,  such  as  the  FIRs,  are  found  to   be   internally
    inconsistent. The Tribunal did not  accept  that  the  Appellant  would
    leave Bangladesh through normal channels if he was actually wanted  for
    murder, or that he would risk carrying the documents that he did if  he
    were actually in fear of apprehension by the  Bangladeshi  authorities.
    The letters said to be from the BNP are found to be not genuine and the
    fact that there was a delay in claiming asylum  further  detracts  from
    the Appellant's credibility.

12. This was a  comprehensive  and  detailed  determination.  Even  if  the
    alleged errors of fact mentioned in the grounds were made out, and  the
    matters arising from the 'statement of additional grounds' were  to  be
    set aside, this is still an appeal that was bound to fail for  lack  of
    credibility. The Appellant fell so far short of discharging the  burden
    of proof that any remedy of the defects alleged in  the  grounds  would
    not tip the balance in his favour, even to the lower standard of proof.



    Decisions

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law and it
    is upheld.

14. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and in the circumstances
    I see no reason to do so.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                                          19th November 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on the 16th June
2015

