

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03507/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6th January 2015                           |On 13th January 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                        MR SYED ZEESHAN HAIDER ZAIDI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


         Representation:
         For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale (instructed by HK Solicitors)
         For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
         Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.   This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with permission,  by  the
         Appellant, a Pakistani national against a decision  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal (Judge Osborne) in which  she  dismissed  his  appeal
         against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse him asylum  and
         to remove him to Pakistan.


    2.   Permission to appeal was granted by  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal on 5th August 2014. In granting permission to  appeal  the
         Judge said:-


              a.  It is arguable that in regard to the issues of sufficiency
             of protection and likelihood of harm to  a  Shia  Muslim,  the
             judge failed to engage properly with  the  background  country
             information adumbrated in ground one seeking permission;


              b.   It is arguable that in regard  to  risk  on  return,  the
             Judge erred in regard to the nature of the evidence  given  by
             the Appellant regarding attacks on his family at paragraph  43
             of the determination


              c.   The  Gulshan  /Nagre  approach  to  Article  8  impliedly
             adopted by the Judge at paragraph 45 is arguably wrong in  the
             light of MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985 paragraph 128.


    3.   Permission having being granted the  matter  came  before  me.  My
         first task is to decide whether the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
         error of law and if so whether and  to  what  extent  the  decision
         should be set aside.


    4.   Mr Neale relied upon and expanded upon the  grounds  and  skeleton
         argument.


    5.   The facts of this case are that the Appellant was born in  Karachi
         in 1976 and is a practising Shia Muslim. He first entered the UK in
         June 1993 with a visit visa and then returned to Pakistan.  He came
         again to the UK in June 1994 when he was given leave as  a  working
         holidaymaker until 1996. He claimed  that  during  that  period  he
         returned to Pakistan where he experienced problems  with  anti-Shia
         elements. He returned again to the UK in October 1996  and  claimed
         asylum. That was refused and he returned to Pakistan.


    6.   The Appellant  then  claimed  to  experience  three  incidents  of
         violence in Pakistan. On the first  occasion  he  was  shot  at  by
         unidentified gunmen outside his mosque. He says he made a complaint
         to the police but no action was taken. There  was  then  a  similar
         incident in June 1997 when he was again shot at  when  leaving  the
         mosque and then again in 1998 he was shot at outside his  home.  He
         decided to leave Pakistan  and  entered  the  UK  clandestinely  in
         February 1998.


    7.   The Appellant remained unlawfully in the UK. He  was  arrested  in
         December 2003 and  served  with  from  IS.151A.   He  lied  to  the
         authorities saying that  he  had  arrived  in  September  2003.  He
         claimed asylum which was  refused  in  January  2004.  Although  he
         lodged a notice of appeal he did not progress it.  He absconded and
         the appeal was dismissed in his absence.


    8.   He then travelled to Ireland and claimed asylum there. However, he
         was returned to the UK under the Dublin II agreement in March 2004.
         He then became appeal rights exhausted.   He  remained  in  the  UK
         unlawfully.


    9.   The Appellant claims that an uncle of his,  who  was  a  prominent
         member of the Shia community, was killed by militants in March 2013
         in Karachi. The Appellant claimed asylum  again  in  December  2013
         claiming that he was at risk of persecution from non state  agents.
         That was treated as a fresh claim and refused on 17 April 2014.  It
         was his appeal  against  that  decision  which  came  before  Judge
         Osborne in June 2014.


    10.  In his skeleton argument Mr Neale sets out his submissions  as  to
         why he says the Judge made errors of law.


    11.  The first ground is an assertion that the  Judge  failed  to  take
         into account relevant evidence or to give reasons for  findings  of
         fact that she made.


    12.  The ground refers to paragraph 39 of the determination  where  the
         judge found:-


             "In general terms I am satisfied that the police do take  such
             matters seriously and had they done so in the Appellant's case
             they would have issued a First Information Report (FIR)".


         The judge then on that basis found that the first incident in  1997
         did not happen and the Appellant had not reported anything  to  the
         police. She did so on the basis that if the Appellant had  reported
         such a matter to the police a FIR would have  been  issued.  It  is
         asserted that in making that finding the Judge made no reference to
         the substantial amount of country information that was  before  her
         which indicated that the police in Pakistan frequently did not take
         sectarian violence against Shia Muslims  seriously.  It  is  argued
         that while she was entitled to form a view as to the weight  to  be
         given  to  that  evidence,  she  was  not  entitled  to  ignore  it
         altogether. If she was  going  to  attach  little  weight  to  that
         evidence she should have given her reasons for doing so.


    13.  The skeleton argument sets out some of that country evidence.  The
         Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada  is  quoted  as  saying  in
         January 2014 that several sources stated that government efforts to
         address violence against Shia have not been sufficient. That refers
         in particular to Lahore and Multan.


    14.  The skeleton then goes on with  another  quote  that  several  top
         sources stated that  militants  targeting  Shia  Muslims  act  with
         impunity according to the Human Rights Watch Report from  2012.  It
         is said  that  the  government  provided  safe  shelters  to  Sunni
         militant groups and the ruling party made alliances with members of
         the ASWJ party. It is said that  although  the  government  of  the
         Punjab province promises religious harmony, it effectively  shields
         the culprits. It also said that the army, which is responsible  for
         leading counter-terrorism efforts, maintains a "hands  off"  policy
         towards sectarian conflicts.


    15.  It goes on to record that several sources indicated  that  no  one
         has been  punished  for  violent  attacks  against  Shia  and  that
         although a handful of suspects have been charged,  none  have  been
         punished. Further quotes are set out from the country  information,
         in particular Human Rights Watch World Report 2014, which is quoted
         as saying that Sunni militant groups such as the ostensibly  banned
         Lashkar-e Jhangvi, an Al Qaeda  affiliate,  operates  with  virtual
         impunity across Pakistan and law enforcement officials either  turn
         a blind eye or appear helpless to prevent attacks.


    16.   Thus  the  skeleton  argument  argues  that  the  Government  and
         authorities in Pakistan are both unwilling and unable  to  offer  a
         sufficiency of protection to Shia Muslims. It is argued  that  this
         lends support to the credibility of the Appellant's account, in  so
         far as it was plausible  and  consistent  with  country  background
         evidence that the police  would  not  necessarily  have  taken  any
         action in response to the attack on the  Appellant.  It  is  argued
         that the Judge did not refer to any of that  evidence  in  reaching
         her conclusions at paragraph  39  and  40  and  that  there  is  no
         indication in the text of the determination that she had  taken  it
         into account. She should have given  clear  reasons  for  rejecting
         that evidence or attaching little weight to it and did not do so.


    17.  The skeleton argument goes on to submit that at paragraph  40  the
         Judge relied on the  fact  that,  according  to  the  news  article
         submitted on the Appellant's behalf, the police had carried out  an
         investigation into the shooting of the Appellant's uncle.  However,
         it is submitted, it does not  follow  from  that  that  the  police
         generally provide an adequate response to anti-Shia violence in the
         bulk of cases and repeats that the Judge did not  engage  with  the
         volume of countervailing objective  evidence  indicating  that  the
         police do not in general take adequate action to protect Shia  from
         sectarian violence. It is submitted  that  was  a  highly  material
         error of law as it  was  of  critical  importance  to  the  Judge's
         findings on the plausibility and  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
         account.


    18.  Secondly, it is argued that the evidence that the  Judge  did  not
         take into account was also relevant  to  the  question  of  whether
         there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection  in  Pakistan.   It   is
         acknowledged  that  the  Judge  briefly  mentioned  the   objective
         evidence regarding the scale of  anti-Shia  sectarian  violence  at
         paragraph 34 of the determination when she concluded that there  is
         nothing to indicate that the level  of  violence  has  reached  the
         proportions  of  making  it  appropriate  to   grant   humanitarian
         protection as a result. It is argued however that the Appellant had
         not suggested that the level of indiscriminate violence in Pakistan
         is such that he should qualify  for  Article  15C  protection.  The
         submission made on his behalf was that he  was  at  risk  of  being
         targeted by non state actors for a Convention  reason,  namely  his
         religion as a Shia Muslim and the Pakistani authorities  would  not
         afford a sufficiency protection to the  Horvath  standard.   It  is
         submitted that the Judge did not consider adequately  the  question
         of sufficiency of protection in light of the country information.


    19.  The second ground asserts that the Judge erred by making a finding
         that was not based on evidence. The submission is that at paragraph
         43 of the determination the judge misstated  the  Appellant's  oral
         evidence.  She  said  that  the  Appellant's  parents  and  brother
         continue to live in Karachi and had not been involved  directly  in
         any violent incidents, when that was not his evidence. He had  said
         that they had remained in Karachi but their house had been shot  at
         and they had moved. It is argued that this was an error of law that
         was highly material  to  the  Judge's  conclusions  about  risk  on
         return.


    20.  Before turning to the third ground which relates  to  the  Judge's
         assessment of Article 8 I will deal with the first 2 grounds.


    21.  Despite the assertions in the skeleton arguments  and  Mr  Neale's
         submissions to the contrary, what this  Appellant  is  claiming  in
         essence is that he is at risk  because  he  is  a  practising  Shia
         Muslim in Pakistan who is a high-profile member of his  mosque.  He
         has been shot at on three occasions in the past and an uncle of his
         has been killed.


    22.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge set  out  the  Appellant's  case  in
         paragraph 9 of the  determination  noting  that  he  was  born  and
         brought up in the city of Karachi and had been educated  to  degree
         level. She noted his claim to be a regular worshipper at the mosque
         and he helped organise meetings and distributed leaflets. She  then
         set out the three incidents when he claims he was shot at and  that
         the police failed to take any action. She  noted  at  paragraph  15
         that when asked why he believed he was being specifically targeted,
         he said it was because he was an activist at the mosque. The  Judge
         then, from paragraph 23, set out the Secretary of State's  case  as
         contained in the refusal letter. Her findings begin at paragraph 25
         where she first sets out the law and submissions made  to  her.  In
         particular, at paragraph 32 the Judge referred to  AW  (Sufficiency
         of  Protection)  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT  (IAC)  which  specifically
         referred  to  sufficiency  of  protection  and   earlier   in   the
         determination [24(vii) and (ix)] she set out a  quote  from  AW  in
         which  Lord  Bannatyne  said  that  there   was   not   a   general
         insufficiency of protection in  Pakistan  and  that  an  individual
         would have to demonstrate characteristics that put him specifically
         at risk. The Judge then went on to note that the issue for her  was
         whether this Appellant could demonstrate  individual  circumstances
         which make him a particular target  for  individual  attention.  In
         that she was correct.


    23.  The Judge at paragraph 34 did refer to the background  information
         and correctly interpreted that as meaning that there  had  been  an
         increase in violence against Shia in recent times.  While  she  has
         dealt with the country information briefly, she has  summarised  it
         accurately.


    24.  The Judge then goes on  at  paragraph  35  to  consider  why  this
         Appellant thinks that he would be singled out  in  particular  over
         and above other Shia Muslims and notes his claim is that  he  is  a
         high-profile member of his mosque and identified as such. She noted
         at paragraph 36 that in fact 25% of the population in Pakistan  are
         Shia Muslims and that apart from helping to organise  meetings  and
         distributing leaflets there  was  nothing  else  in  his  claim  to
         suggest that he had a high profile or had come to the attention  of
         any militant group. The fact that he had been shot at (but not hit)
         does not demonstrate that he was more than a random target  because
         of his religion - not that he was singled out. The fact that he  is
         a practising Shia Muslim, does not raise him  above  the  ordinary.
         The Judge also noted that there was no evidence  from  Pakistan  or
         from the mosque in Pakistan to help his case even though he was  in
         regular contact with his family in Karachi.


    25.  At paragraph 37 the judge noted, as indeed she was required to  do
         by s.8 Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act
         2004, that there were other matters which adversely  affected  this
         Appellant's credibility. The first of these the Judge noted was his
         demonstrated willingness to deceive the authorities in the UK as to
         the length of time he has been here.  She  particularly  took  into
         account the fact that he came to the UK in 1998,  on  his  evidence
         fleeing persecution, yet did nothing until he was arrested in 2003.
         She  did  not  accept  his  explanation  that  he  was   "confused"
         particularly as he had previously claimed asylum in 1996.  She  did
         not accept that he was ignorant of how to go about claiming asylum.


    26.  At paragraph 38 the Judge dealt  with  the  Appellant's  claim  of
         return to Pakistan and the incidents when he said he was  shot  at.
         At paragraph 39 the Judge makes her  adverse  credibility  findings
         based on the lack of a FIR. That is challenged in the  grounds  and
         skeleton argument on the basis of the background  information  that
         the police are unwilling or unable  to  assist  in  such  sectarian
         violence. Being unwilling to punish the offenders or  being  unable
         to keep control of sectarian violence is  not  the  same  thing  as
         refusing to record a complaint by issuing a FIR.  The  evidence  in
         the country information and indeed set out in the skeleton argument
         does not indicate that the police do nothing but rather  they  have
         little enthusiasm for taking meaningful action.  The evidence talks
         about a number of people being charged albeit not punished  and  as
         the judge correctly pointed out she was provided with evidence that
         the Appellant's uncle's murder was  investigated.  The  Judge  also
         attached weight to the fact that despite apparently being  shot  at
         on three occasions by more than one assailant at close range he was
         unhurt. Her findings are sustainable and based on the evidence  and
         are not contradicted by the country information relied upon by  the
         Appellant.


    27.  It is clear from paragraph 41 where the Judge sets out her overall
         conclusions that she was singularly unimpressed by this  Appellant.
         He had an extremely poor immigration history, had deceived and lied
         to the UK authorities, he failed to seek to regularise his position
         until he was arrested and his claim as to what had taken  place  in
         Pakistan did not have credibility. Those findings on the  facts  of
         this case and with this Appellant's background  are  findings  that
         the Judge was entitled to make.


    28.  However, even putting this Appellant's case at its highest; if the
         Judge had accepted his claim as credible, he could not  have  hoped
         to succeed. Even if the Appellant arranged meetings and distributed
         leaflets for his mosque and even  if  he  had  been  shot  at  when
         leaving the mosque he would still not be entitled to  asylum  as  a
         Shia Muslim from Pakistan. He is not a preacher  and  there  is  no
         supporting evidence that even if he was he would be at risk. He  is
         a practising Shia Muslim and no more. The population of Pakistan is
         in the region of 150 million people  of  whom  between  20  and  25
         million are Shia Muslims. There is sectarian violence in  Pakistan.
         However, whilst there is undoubtedly such violence,  as  the  Judge
         pointed out and as was accepted on the Appellant's behalf,  it  has
         not reached  the  level  to  justify  humanitarian  protection  and
         therefore unless there is  something  very  particular  about  this
         Appellant, he could not  possibly  succeed  on  the  basis  of  his
         religion.


    29.  There is nothing particular about this Appellant even  taking  his
         case at its highest.


    30.  It is pertinent at this point to  compare  the  position  of  this
         Appellant with the position of Christians in Pakistan. They are far
         fewer in number and there have been highly  publicised  attacks  on
         them. That notwithstanding, there has been a  very  recent  country
         guidance case, AK & SK (Christians: risk)  Pakistan  CG  [2014]  UK
         UT569 (IAC) where it was held that while Christians are a religious
         minority who in general suffer discrimination it is not  sufficient
         to amount to a real risk of  persecution.  They  are  permitted  to
         practice their  faith  (as  are  Shia  Muslims).   That  case  also
         suggests that  people  may  be  at  greater  risk  of  e.g.  facing
         blasphemy charges if they are marginalised and  occupy  low  social
         standing. That does not  apply  to  this  Appellant  who  lived  in
         Karachi and is educated to degree level. Christians,  unless  there
         is something specific about a particular Appellant to  be  assessed
         on a case-by-case basis, are not entitled to asylum. That being the
         case there cannot conceivably be justification for finding  that  a
         Shia Muslim would be at risk of persecution and entitled to asylum.




    31.  This Appellant's asylum claim was quite frankly doomed to  failure
         and the Judge did not make findings based on no evidence  or  leave
         out significant evidence. True it is that  the  oral  evidence,  as
         confirmed by the Judge's record of proceedings, was that his family
         had suffered violence, but the fact remains that it  has  not  been
         sufficient for them to leave Karachi.  If  they  did  not  deem  it
         necessary even to leave Karachi, let alone Pakistan  there  is  and
         was no reason why this Appellant could not have done likewise.  The
         fact that the Judge has said that  his  family  have  not  suffered
         violence is thus immaterial to the decision.


    32.  Finally, the third  ground  criticises  the  Judge's  approach  to
         Article 8 suggesting that Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct
         approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC)  is no longer good law  and  that
         the Judge  was required to  carry  out  a  far  more  thorough  and
         detailed consideration of Article 8 under the ECHR than she did.


    33.  Article 8 case law and the relationship  between  the  Immigration
         Rules and ECHR has been dipping  and  swaying  over  recent  months
         about the necessity to carry out a proportionality assessment under
         the ECHR if an Appellant  does  not  come  within  the  Immigration
         Rules. The position we are in at present is  that  which  ever  way
         Article 8 is approached the end result should be  the  same.  Where
         the Immigration Rules are a complete code (as in deportation) there
         is no justification for an additional consideration under the ECHR.
         Where they are not there may  be  a  need  to  consider  Article  8
         outside the Immigration Rules if there is something in the  factual
         matrix of the case not anticipated by or covered by the Immigration
         Rules.


    34.  In this  case  there  is  nothing  in  the  facts  concerning  the
         Appellant's family or  private  life  to  justify  a  consideration
         outside the Immigration Rules and he does not  come  within  either
         Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE. The only matters that he can  rely
         upon is the length of time that he has been in the UK, and most  of
         that  was  unlawful  and  his  claimed  relationship  with  another
         gentleman of Pakistani origin who it is claimed is  dependent  upon
         him. He did not attend the First-tier Tribunal. There is nothing to
         merit a detailed  consideration  under  the  ECHR.  The  Judge  was
         entitled to shortcut the procedure when it  was  a  hopeless  case.
         Had she taken four pages to set out Appendix FM,  paragraph  276ADE
         then set out the five steps in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and considered
         proportionality, the only sustainable  conclusion  that  she  could
         have reached  on  the  facts  of  this  case  is  that  removal  is
         proportionate. While she has dealt with Article 8  briefly,  it  is
         not an error of law as the end result was inevitable.


    35.  For the above reasons I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         did not make a material error of law and  her  determination  shall
         stand.


    36.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.






         Signed        Dated 9th January 2015


         Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
