
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03080/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Determination Promulgated            |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 24 September 2015                 |On 30 October 2015                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                                     S M
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Pennington, Counsel, instructed by Pride,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, whose  date  of  birth  is  28
       September 1966, appeals against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Jerromes who heard, and dismissed on all  grounds,  his  appeal
       against the decision of the Respondent to remove  him  to  Sri  Lanka
       after refusing him refugee status, humanitarian protection and  leave
       to remain in the UK on human rights grounds. Unless otherwise stated,
       all  paragraph  references  in  my  determination   relate   to   the
       determination of Judge Jerromes, promulgated on 10 October 2013.

    2. Although in the grounds at paras 3 - 5 it was submitted on behalf  of
       the Appellant that the Judge erred in his assessment  of  the  facts,
       Miss  Pennington  accepted  that  these  submissions  were  simply  a
       disagreement with the findings of the Judge and,  in  line  with  the
       basis on which permission was granted, that she intended to focus her
       submissions on the Judge's assessment of risk on  the  basis  of  the
       following findings of fact made by the Judge:
        a. The Appellant is a Tamil and is married with two daughters;
        b. He supported the LTTE and agreed with their aims but was not  an
           LTTE member;
        c. His wife went missing in 2000 and that his explanation as to why
           he did not report her missing was credible;
        d. That the LTTE borrowed  his  truck  in  2004  and  that  he  was
           detained and ill treated and kept in detention for  a  month  by
           the authorities in September 2004; and
        e. That A's daughter went missing on 15 June 2012.

    3. She submitted that there were likely to be records held by the CID of
       his past detention, that he is therefore known  to  the  authorities,
       and it was acknowledged in MP (Sri Lanka),  NT  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
       [2014] EWCA  Civ  829  that  the  situation  had  changed  since  the
       Appellant arrived in  the  UK  and  the  issues  that  needed  to  be
       considered were whether  there  were  previous  links  to  the  LTTE,
       whether the Appellant supported a separatist  state  and  whether  he
       would seek to pose a threat to  the  integrity  of  Sri  Lanka  as  a
       unitary state. She further submitted that GJ and  others  (post-civil
       war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  at  para  308
       provided that during the re-documentation process or on return to Sri
       Lanka, the Appellant could expect to be asked questions regarding his
       own and his family's LTTE connections and sympathies. He could expect
       to be asked the questions referred to at para 7  of  the  submissions
       (in which paragraphs 4, 14 and 15 of Appendix C to GJ were set  out).
       He would also be asked for biographical details (including  those  of
       his family),  details  of  any  address  with  which  they  had  been
       associated, including their last address in Sri Lanka, their  address
       in the UK and where they intended to stay after leaving the  airport.
       She submitted that the CID were 'capable  of  connecting  the  dots',
       even if the Appellant's name did not appear on a 'stop list', and  he
       would be of further interest. If questioned he would state that he is
       a Tamil and supports a separatist state, which would put him at risk;
       he may not be at risk at the airport but there was likely  to  be  an
       investigation particularly because he was a Tamil. She submitted that
       risk would  arise  even  if  the  Appellant  was  not  involved  with
       campaigning in the UK; it would arise because of previous arrest  and
       because he was previously a supporter of the LTTE. He would be honest
       in his responses on return and could not be expected to lie.

    4. Mr Smart submitted that paragraph 308 of GJ must be seen in  context.
       Paragraphs 307 and 308 dealt with the re-documentation process.  Such
       questions as were referred to at paras 4, 14 and  15  of  Appendix  C
       were in relation to the re-documentation process. Although the  Judge
       did not make a finding of fact on whether or not the Appellant held a
       valid Sri Lankan passport, it is noted that he left his  passport  in
       Sri Lanka at [23], so there is some evidence as to him having held  a
       passport.

    5. As to Mr Lewis' evidence, as contained  in  Appendix  C  to  GJ,  his
       evidence was that questions 'might' be asked, at the airport if  they
       had not already been asked in  the  UK  during  the  re-documentation
       process. If the Appellant had his own passport, he would travel on  a
       scheduled flight. There was a difference in treatment  between  those
       who  returned  on  scheduled  flights  because  they  had  their  own
       passports and those who were returned on  chartered  flights  because
       they had an emergency travel document. There  were  no  repercussions
       for Sri Lankans  who  had  exited  without  a  visa  stamp  in  their
       passports as there were for those who had left other countries. If he
       was asked any questions either before or at the airport, he would not
       be telling the authorities anything they did not already  know;  that
       is that he was forced by the LTTE to allow them use of his truck.  He
       may also tell them he was detained and tortured in 2004;  they  would
       also already know that. Mr Smart submitted that it  was  accepted  in
       the head note to GJ that the authorities knew full well that a number
       of people provided some assistance to the LTTE. The Judge  stated  at
       [36.3] that he had considered the submission that the Appellant would
       not lie or hide his views  and  that  he  would  campaign  for  Tamil
       independence on return but had found that the Appellant would not  do
       so because he had not done so since 2004.

    6. Miss Pennington, in reply stated that at [36.3]  the  Judge  did  not
       consider the questions that could be put to the Appellant;  he  would
       have to respond truthfully and this would put  him  within  the  risk
       categories of GJ. He would be identified as someone who had  previous
       supported the LTTE and may engage in separatist activities; he  would
       be identified as a 'trouble-maker' due to previous links and  he  did
       not support a single state.

    7. Following submissions, I reserved my decision.  Both  representatives
       submitted that if I were to find a  material  error  of  law  in  the
       decision of Judge Chapman, I had sufficient  evidence  before  me  on
       which to reach a decision.

Decision and reasons

    8. Although the Judge did not  make  a  clear  finding  in  relation  to
       whether or  not  the  Appellant  had  ever  possessed  a  Sri  Lankan
       passport, I find that a failure to make  such  a  finding  is  not  a
       material error of law because no issues were raised before the  Judge
       in relation to the Appellant being without a  passport;  it  was  not
       submitted before him that  the  Appellant  was  likely  to  be  asked
       questions during the re-documentation  process.  Furthermore,  it  is
       clear that  very  early  on,  in  his  SI,  when  the  Appellant  was
       questioned about his Sri Lankan passport, he did not say that he  had
       never had a passport; he stated that he had left  it  in  Sri  Lanka.
       Bearing in mind that his mother and daughter are in Sri  Lanka,  this
       passport  would  not  be  inaccessible  to  him.   His   AWS   simply
       contradicted the evidence he had given himself at an earlier date and
       cannot be taken to be the truth, particularly  bearing  in  mind  the
       adverse credibility findings regarding his alleged arrest and torture
       in 2013 at [36.6].

    9. In any event, even if  the  Appellant  had  to  go  through  the  re-
       documentation process, as pointed out  by  Mr  Smart,  the  Appellant
       would not be telling the CID anything they did not already know. This
       Appellant had last been detained over 10 years ago; bearing  in  mind
       the adverse credibility findings at [36.6],  there  was  no  reliable
       evidence to suggest that he had  been  of  further  interest  to  the
       authorities since then. It is clear from  the  decision  at  [36.2  -
       36.3], that the Judge had regard to the risk categories  in  GJ  and,
       having given detailed consideration to the Appellant's claim, he  was
       not satisfied,  even  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  that  the
       authorities would have any interest in the Appellant or that  he  was
       likely to campaign or overtly advertise his support for a  separatist
       state on return to Sri Lanka given his lack of active  support  since
       2004. These findings were open to the Judge on  the  evidence  before
       him and the grounds are simply an attempt to re-argue the  merits  of
       the case.

Decision

   10. The determination of Judge Jerromes contains no  material  errors  of
       law and his decision must therefore stand.

   11. Anonymity was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  Pursuant  to  Rule
       14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  anonymity
       is continued. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,
       no report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify
       him or any member of his family. This direction applies both  to  the
       Appellant and the Respondent. Failure to comply with  this  direction
       could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.




       Signed Date


       M Robertson
       Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




       TO THE RESPONDENT
       FEE AWARD

       No fee has been paid or is payable and no fee award is made.




       Signed Date


       M Robertson
       Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
