
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03622/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 15 October 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

             THE PRESIDENT, THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                   Between

                                     CA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou, Counsel instructed by Trott &
Gentry LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the appellant  who  was  born  in  Turkey  on  12
    February 1977.  He arrived on what it is claimed was a  false  visa  in
    January 2009.  On 2 July 2009 he applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    businessman under the Ankara Agreement.  This application  was  refused
    on 16 July 2009.  He was detained on 8 March 2013 and he  then  claimed
    asylum.  This application was refused and the  appellant  appealed  the
    decision and this appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 15  May
    2013.

2.   The appellant's account was that he is a Turkish Kurd whose family  had
    suffered at the hands of the authorities in Turkey.  He and his  family
    had assisted the PKK.  He had been asked to provide boots and medicines
    for the PKK.  While transporting these goods he  was  detained  by  the
    police who ill-treated him and instructed him to poison the food  which
    he supplied to the PKK to send them to sleep.  The  appellant  said  he
    had told the PKK about this plan and as a result he went to the  police
    and applied for a passport to leave the country.  He was concerned that
    if the PKK found out that he had made an agreement with the police  his
    life would be in danger and he obtained a visa and travelled to the  UK
    without difficulty from Ankara.

3.   One of the issues before the First-tier Tribunal was  the  question  of
    delay.  In paragraph 36 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision reference
    is made to the appellant's witness statement where he said that he  had
    not applied for asylum until 2013 because he was afraid  that  once  he
    had applied for asylum he would be sent back to Turkey.  Previously  he
    had been in the UK in 1996 and in 1997 he  had  been  removed  back  to
    Turkey.  He then refers to the problems  that  he  had  experienced  in
    Turkey on return and says that when he came to the UK  for  the  second
    time he was afraid that if he applied for asylum he would be sent  back
    and  would  experience  on  return  to  Turkey  the  same  problems  as
    previously.

4.   The First-tier Tribunal considered the issue of delay in paragraphs  64
    to 65 of the determination finding that there  was  no  record  of  any
    earlier asylum claim and appeal by the  appellant.   The  Secretary  of
    State had no record of any  application  or  appeal  and  nor  did  the
    Tribunal.  The appellant had placed no evidence of any such application
    or appeal before the First-tier Judge.5. In paragraph 65 the First-tier
    Tribunal said as follows:

         "I find that it is not credible that the appellant could have  made
         an asylum claim and the Secretary of State not have any  record  of
         it.  Similarly it is not credible that the appellant could have had
         an asylum appeal determined and the Tribunal not have a  record  of
         it."


5.   It was also the appellant's case that he had been detained  and  placed
    in a cell overnight at Edmonton Police  Station  and  he  had  attended
    voluntarily.  The Judge did not accept that any police station  in  the
    UK would take someone into custody and not have a record.  Each  police
    station had a custody sergeant charged with recording  the  history  of
    every detainee in accordance with the Police and Criminal Evidence  Act
    1984.  The account of his detention  in  Edmonton  Police  Station  was
    considered by the Judge  to  be  another  example  of  the  appellant's
    failure to tell the truth and the lack of any evidence of  any  earlier
    asylum claim and appeal by the appellant undermined the credibility  of
    his claim to have made such an application and  to  have  appealed  its
    refusal.  The Judge found that the appellant had invented  the  claimed
    earlier asylum application and appeal to explain why he did  not  apply
    for asylum earlier than his apprehension on 8 March  2013.   The  Judge
    found that this invention fundamentally undermined the  credibility  of
    the appellant's claim as did his failure to  claim  asylum  before  his
    apprehension some four years after his arrival in the  UK.   The  Judge
    then sets out further reasons for finding that  the  appellant's  claim
    lacked credibility including the question  of  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's account.

6.   The Judge then turned to consider a document which had been put in,  in
    support of the appellant's account which was a record from a convicting
    court in Turkey of an offence of aiding  and  abetting  the  PKK.   The
    approach of the Judge to this document is the subject of criticism.  In
    paragraph 81 the Judge refers to the document naming the appellant  and
    it being an apprehension order.  In  the  following  sub-paragraph  the
    Judge refers to the well-known case of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439
    and reminds himself that it was for the  appellant  to  show  that  the
    document could be relied  upon,  that  he  must  consider  whether  the
    document is one on which  reliance  should  properly  be  placed  after
    looking at all the evidence in the round  and  that  documents  may  be
    unreliable even if it cannot be established to the  requisite  standard
    of proof that they are forgeries.  He adds that it was of course proper
    to consider whether unreliable documents may have been used to  support
    a genuine claim.

7.   In paragraph 82 the Judge states as follows:

         "I  have  found  the  appellant's  basic  account  to  be   lacking
         credibility.  It  follows  that  that  basic  account  cannot  lend
         veracity to the document.  I  do  not  find  this  document  to  be
         reliable.  There is  no  evidence  to  show  its  provenance.   The
         document is some sort of copy.  Clearly such a document is open  to
         material change being effected even if  it  started  as  a  genuine
         document.  During the copying process any and all material  entries
         may have been changed.  Such changes would not be  detectable.   It
         was the appellant's evidence that he was never arrested or charged.
          There is no explanation as to how such a document would come  into
         being.  The appellant's activities at their highest were such  that
         the police had no real interest in him and gave him a  passport  to
         leave.  He had not been charged.  He had not been  detained  as  he
         went through customs and passport control to board  his  aeroplane.
         He was of no interest to anyone.  It is not credible even if  which
         is not accepted they are true, that  such  minor  activities  would
         arouse the interest of anyone after he has departed when  no  legal
         proceedings had been put in motion such as his arrest, interview or
         charge."

     The Judge found there was no reliable evidence to support  the  claimed
    authenticity of  the  document  and  that  the  appellant  was  without
    credibility.

8.   The Judge then notes that the appellant had earned his living from  his
    apricot orchard which had been tended by his mother in his absence  and
    that she had moved to the local town which was nearby as she  continued
    to look after the orchard.  The Judge then refers  to  the  appellant's
    family who had a history of involvement with the PKK which had resulted
    in the ill-treatment of members of the family who had fled  to  the  UK
    and made claims which appear to have been successful.  The Judge refers
    to the determination in relation to a member of the appellant's  family
    and further notes that the appellant had not claimed any involvement in
    the activities of his siblings which had drawn them to the attention of
    the Turkish authorities and no mention had been made of  the  appellant
    in his sibling's appeal.  There was no reason in the view of the First-
    tier Judge whey he should not return  to  tend  his  orchard  with  his
    mother, he was of no interest to anyone when he left Turkey to come  to
    the UK and there was no reason why he should be of any interest on  his
    return. The Judge refers to the issue of internal  relocation  and  the
    case of Januzi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL
    5. In relation to Article 8 although it  is  not  the  subject  of  the
    appeal the Judge  does  refer  at  paragraph  102  to  the  appellant's
    siblings, not one of whom came to support the appellant at his  hearing
    and there was not a statement from any  one  of  them.   There  was  no
    evidence of any family life.

9.   There was an application for permission to appeal  settled  by  Counsel
    who appeared before us. The application was refused by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but renewed and Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on  7  August  2013
    granted permission on paragraphs 5 and 7 of these further grounds which
    read as follows:

         "5. In refusing permission to appeal the FTT Judge stated that "the
         fact that the Home Office had a record of  an  earlier  application
         for asylum does not affect the overall reasoning and findings":  it
         is  respectfully  submitted  that  such  a   finding   is   clearly
         unsustainable as the IJ expressly states that "such invention (of a
         previous asylum claim) fundamentally affects the credibility of  te
         appellant's claim". It  cannot  be  said  that  the  issue  of  the
         previous asylum application does not affect the overall findings of
         the IJ.


         ...

         7. In rejecting the reliability of a document produced  in  support
         of  the  applicant's  case,  the  IJ  states:  "I  have  found  the
         appellant's basic account to be lacking in credibility. It  follows
         that the basic account cannot lend veracity to the document.  I  do
         not find this document to be reliable." [para 82 determination]. It
         is submitted that such finding discloses a fundamentally  erroneous
         approach to the evidence.  Credibility  must  be  assessed  in  the
         round; in the instant case as illustrated by the above  finding  in
         para 82 the IJ reached his  findings  on  the  credibility  of  the
         applicant's account in isolation of  the  documentary  evidence  in
         support; this is respectfully a flawed  approach  which  materially
         impacts on the assessment of credibility as a whole."

10.  Paragraph 5 refers to the issue of whether there had  been  an  earlier
    application for asylum in 1996/1997.  The previous asylum claim, had it
    been shown to have been made, would have been a material matter as  the
    Judge had said that the invention of the previous  claim  fundamentally
    affected the credibility assessment.  Paragraph 5 does need to be  read
    with paragraph 4 where it is asserted that the Secretary of  State  had
    accepted that there was a previous  asylum  claim  and  was  unable  to
    locate a copy of the determination.  That assertion is not accepted  by
    Ms Martin and it is fair to say that there is nothing in the Record  of
    Proceedings before the First-tier Judge to indicate that any concession
    at all was made.  The Record of Proceedings before the First-tier Judge
    is entirely consistent with the determination.  It is  also  argued  in
    paragraph 4 of the grounds upon which  permission  to  appeal  was  not
    specifically given that there would  be  no  perceived  benefit  to  an
    applicant disclosing that he had previously made an asylum claim in the
    UK which had been refused and that he had been removed after exhausting
    his appeal rights.  The Judge does however find indeed that  there  was
    such a reason and that was to explain the delay  in  his  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom after the refusal of his  application  from  July  2009.
    The Judge found that he had invented the  earlier  claim  in  order  to
    explain that delay. We conclude that there was no error of law  in  the
    Judge's consideration and determination of this issue.

11.  A similar point was made in ground 6 of the  grounds,  again  on  which
    permission to appeal was not specifically given.  Reference is made  to
    the appellant's claim to have been detained at Edmonton Police Station.
     The Judge did not accept this and it is said  in  argument  before  us
    that the Judge had in  the  papers  before  him  the  letter  from  the
    Enforcement and Removals Section of the Home Office dated 7 March  2013
    requesting the appellant to attend an interview on 8 March.  It is said
    that  that  assists  the  appellant  in  his  claim  that  he  attended
    voluntarily and that the Judge's assessment of the facts was  perverse.
    We have to say we do not accept that the Judge was perverse in relation
    to this assessment of the facts.  He was entitled to take into  account
    that there would be a record of such matters.  The appellant  had  said
    apparently that his fingerprints and DNA samples  had  been  taken  and
    again there was no record of his detention at all.   The  letter  of  7
    March is somewhat inconsistent with the claim  to  have  been  detained
    since it refers to  the  inability  to  attend  the  interview  due  to
    illness.  It may be that  it  is  a  generic  letter  but  we  are  not
    satisfied that the Judge's decision  could  remotely  be  described  as
    perverse given the terms of this letter. Permission to appeal  was  not
    granted specifically in relation to this point although  we  have  gone
    into it de bene esse.  In the grounds it  was  said  that  it  was  the
    adequacy of the enquiries that were challenged.  There has  been  ample
    time to make further  enquiries.   Nothing  has  happened  and  we  can
    understand why Upper Tribunal Judge Allen did not grant  permission  on
    this particular aspect.

12.  Permission to appeal was  granted  as  we  have  noted  in  respect  of
    paragraph 7 of the renewed  grounds  of  appeal.  This  criticises  the
    Judge's assessment of the documentary evidence with reference  to  what
    he said in paragraph 82 of his determination  which  we  have  set  out
    above in particular the words  "I  have  found  the  appellant's  basic
    account to be lacking credibility.  It follows that that basic  account
    cannot lend veracity to the document.  I do not find this  document  to
    be reliable." In our view the Judge clearly had in mind the  well-known
    guidance set out in Tanveer  Ahmed  -  which,  as  we  have  noted,  he
    reminded himself of in the preceding paragraph. It is  said  the  Judge
    should have looked at the evidence in the round. It is quite clear that
    when the  Judge's  observations  are  set  in  their  context  and  the
    paragraph is read with what precedes it that he did exactly that. There
    is no flaw in the Judge's approach to the assessment of the documentary
    evidence. We find that there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    consideration and determination of this issue.

13.  In paragraph 9 of the renewed grounds reference  is  made  to  what  is
    said to be the failure of the Judge to take into account  the  risk  on
    return and in particular in failing to refer to  the  country  guidance
    case of IK [2004] UKIAT 00312. We remind  ourselves  that  paragraph  9
    does not fall within the grounds on  which  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted.  Counsel  refers  in  particular  to  paragraph  90   of   the
    determination which she submitted was the sum  of  the  extent  of  the
    Judge's assessment of the risks on return.  In that paragraph the Judge
    finds that the appellant was of no interest to anyone when he  left  to
    come to the UK and there was no reason why he should be of any interest
    upon his return.  As Ms Martin submits that does not do justice to  the
    Judge's assessment.  In the preceding paragraphs the  Judge  refers  to
    the appellant's mother and the tending of the orchard.   He  refers  to
    the appellant's family and their involvement with the PKK and  he  also
    notes that the events complained of arose through matters arising  some
    years previously and some of  the  family  were  granted  their  asylum
    status on the basis of events that had occurred many years in the past.
      It  was  also  the  position  that  the  appellant  had  not  claimed
    involvement in the activities of those family members and  as  we  have
    mentioned  they  were  not  called  as  witnesses  in  support  of  the
    appellant's case.  The Judge found in the circumstances  there  was  no
    reason why the appellant should not return to tend his orchard with his
    mother.  We find no flaw in the Judge's consideration and determination
    of this issue.

14.  There is criticism of the  reference  by  the  Judge  to  the  case  of
    Januzi.  We find this criticism is  misplaced.   The  country  guidance
    refers to the  question  of  relocation,  in  fact  Counsel's  skeleton
    argument which was before the Judge  also  referred  to  the  issue  of
    relocation.  What this point boils down to is that there was no express
    reference by the Judge to the case of IK.  The Judge does however refer
    in paragraph 17 of his decision  to  the  material  before  him.   This
    included more up to date material than the material before the Tribunal
    in IK.   It  also  included  the  appellant's  objective  bundle  which
    included the case of IK as well as the skeleton  argument  to  which  I
    have made reference.  It appears to us that the Judge had regard to the
    material before him.  He refers to the court proceedings.  He refers to
    the need to assess the evidence in the round in  paragraph  53  of  the
    decision.  He reminds himself that he had looked at all the evidence in
    the round before making any findings  including  credibility  findings.
    We find no flaw in the Judge's consideration and determination of  this
    issue.

15.  On the grounds on which permission was granted we find  that  no  error
    of law has been identified and we have  looked  further  at  the  other
    grounds but we do not  find  that  those  grounds  raise  any  arguable
    challenge to the determination which is  no  doubt  why  permission  to
    appeal was not granted on them. It does appear to us that  on  analysis
    the grounds do no more  than  express  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
    findings of fact which were open to him.  Accordingly we find that  the
    decision of the Judge was not flawed as claimed.  There is no  material
    error of law and the decision of the Judge must stand.




Signed                                  Date 23 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Warr



    ANONYMITY ORDER
    The anonymity order made by the First-tier Judge continues.
