
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA030342015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 June 2016                                |On 16 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                    [R K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision made by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  6
    February 2015 to refuse  his  application  for  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom and to remove him from the UK.  In a decision promulgated on 21
    March 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Adio  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds  and  the  Appellant  appeals
    with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the  Appellant  was  arrested  in
    Northampton on 26 July 2013 and claimed  asylum,  he  was  placed  with
    Social Services  and  recorded  as  absconded  on  29  July  2013.  His
    representatives contacted the Home Office on  9  October  2013  and  he
    attended a screening interview later  that  month.  The  basis  of  the
    Appellant's claim is that four years before  he  left  Afghanistan  his
    father was killed in a skirmish  between  the  Taliban  and  Government
    forces. He says that the Taliban wanted to recruit him  to  avenge  his
    father's death and came to his home in 2013 when he was not there as  a
    result of which he left Afghanistan.

 3. His appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse  his  claim  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  on  6  May  2015  but  the  Upper
    Tribunal subsequently found a material error of law  in  that  decision
    and the appeal was remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Adio heard the  appeal  afresh  on  25  January  and  25
    February 2016. In his decision promulgated on 21 March 2016  the  Judge
    found that the Appellant's date of birth was  2  May  1997  as  claimed
    which meant that he was 16 years old when he claimed asylum. The  Judge
    went on to consider the substance of the Appellant's  claim  and  found
    that there was a discrepancy in the Appellant's evidence as to where he
    lived in Afghanistan and that this undermined the  credibility  of  his
    account of the approach by the Taliban. He also did not accept that the
    Taliban would have delayed for four years before attempting to  recruit
    the Appellant. He did not accept the Appellant's claim that he had been
    unable to contact his family  in  Afghanistan.  Accordingly  the  Judge
    found that the Appellant could return  to  his  home  area.  The  Judge
    considered the Appellant's relationship with his partner in the UK  and
    found that his removal would not  breach  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 4. The Appellant advanced four grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The Judge granting permission to  appeal  considered  that  the  second
    ground, which alleged procedural unfairness in relation to the  Judge's
    approach to difficulties with the interpreter,  had  no  merit  and  Ms
    Radford did not pursue that ground before us.

 5. We start with consideration of the third ground, which alleges that the
    Judge made a mistake of fact, as  we  consider  that  our  decision  in
    relation to this ground determines the appeal.

 6. It is contended in the third ground of appeal that the Judge  erred  in
    his approach to the evidence as to where the  Appellant  was  born  and
    lived in Afghanistan.

 7. The Appellant has given a number of varying accounts as to his address.
    In his screening interview the  Appellant  gave  his  last  address  as
    Kakrak village, Khogiani District. In his Statement  of  Evidence  Form
    (SEF) he gave his last address as Kakrak village, Sukhrood District and
    in the accompanying statement dated 13 November 2013 he  said  that  he
    was born and lived in Kakrak village, Sukhrood District. However in his
    SEF asylum interview on 18 February 2014 he gave his  last  address  in
    Afghanistan as  Tatang  village,  Khogiani  District.  In  his  witness
    statement dated 23 March 2015 he  said  that  he  was  born  in  Kakrak
    village Surkrod District and that when he was young his family moved to
    Tatang village, Khogiani District.

 8. The Judge devoted a significant section of his reasoning to this issue.
    He notes at paragraph 79 that Ms Radford  (who  also  appeared  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal) submitted, relying  on  YL  (Rely  on  SEF)  China
    [2004] UKIAT 000145, that  the  Appellant's  answer  in  his  screening
    interview should be given less  weight  as  there  were  no  procedural
    safeguards in place at that interview.

 9. We note that YL was decided in 2004 and that some  of  the  terminology
    and names of the forms have changes since then  however  the  following
    guidance, set out at paragraphs 19 and  20  of  the  decision,  remains
    valid;

           "19. When a person seeks asylum in  the  United  Kingdom  he  is
           usually made the subject of  a  'screening  interview'  (called,
           perhaps rather confusingly a "Statement of Evidence Form  -  SEF
           Screening-). The purpose of that is  to  establish  the  general
           nature of the claimant's case so that the Home  Office  official
           can decide how best to process it.  It  is  concerned  with  the
           country of origin, means of travel, circumstances of arrival  in
           the United Kingdom, preferred language and  other  matters  that
           might help the Secretary of State understand  the  case.  Asylum
           seekers are still expected to tell the truth and  answers  given
           in screening interviews can  be  compared  fairly  with  answers
           given later. However, it has to be remembered that  a  screening
           interview is not done to  establish  in  detail  the  reasons  a
           person gives to support her  claim  for  asylum.  It  would  not
           normally be appropriate  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  ask
           supplementary questions or to entertain elaborate answers and an
           inaccurate summary by an  interviewing  officer  at  that  stage
           would be excusable. Further the screening interview may well  be
           conducted when the asylum seeker is tired after a long  journey.
           These things have to  be  considered  when  any  inconsistencies
           between  the  screening  interview  and  the  later   case   are
           evaluated.


           20. The Statement of Evidence Form -SEF Self  Completion-  (that
           is the "SEF" that the adjudicator  considered)  is  an  entirely
           different document. As has  been  explained  above,  it  is  the
           Appellant's opportunity to set out his case. The  asylum  seeker
           has to return the form by a  specified  date,  usually  about  a
           fortnight after the form is given to  him.  However  the  asylum
           seeker is allowed to choose his own interpreter and  obtain  all
           the assistance he wants in order to complete the form. He is  in
           control of how the form is answered. It is  hard  to  imagine  a
           fairer way to enable the claimant to  set  out  his  case.  That
           being so, the Secretary of State, and if it comes before him, an
           Adjudicator, is entitled to assume that it is right."


10. Therefore in YL the  Tribunal  highlighted  the  difference  between  a
    screening interview  when  briefer  details  are  requested  and  fewer
    procedural safeguards exist, and a SEF self-completion  form  where  an
    applicant has a proper opportunity to put his case.

11. As can be seen from paragraph 7 above, in this case, as  the  Appellant
    was treated as a child at the time of his application, he  completed  a
    screening interview, an SEF form and an SEF interview.

12. When considering Ms Radford's submission the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    referred to the SEF interview at paragraphs 79, 80 and 81.  Mr  Wilding
    submitted that the Judge meant screening interview when he referred  to
    SEF at paragraphs 79 and 81. However in our view it is clear  that  the
    submission made by Ms Radford set out at paragraph  79  refers  to  the
    screening interview whereas the Judge's analysis at paragraphs  80  and
    81 refers to the SEF interview.  We reach this conclusion  because  the
    extract from YL cited by the Judge at paragraph 80 was  from  paragraph
    24 which relates to the SEF and states;

           "24. I hope it is clear from the above that it is  the  view  of
           the Tribunal that forms SEF  must  be  completed  carefully  and
           accurately and the Secretary of State  and  the  Adjudicator  is
           entitled to assume that this has been done. If, for any  reason,
           it is not the case then it is incumbent upon the  asylum  seeker
           to give a full and proper explanation for any deficiency  at  an
           early stage. The case has been reported so that this can be made
           clear."

13. We conclude that the Judge's error is more than just an error as to the
    name of the interview being considered. It goes to  the  heart  of  his
    approach to the different interviews. It appears from paragraphs  79-81
    that the Judge misunderstood the guidance given in YL and applied it to
    the wrong interview (the SEF asylum interview instead of the  screening
    interview). We accept Ms Radford's submission that the Judge  therefore
    misdirected himself in law in relation to this issue.

14. We are satisfied that this is material error for two  reasons.  Firstly
    had the Judge properly applied the guidance  in  YL  to  the  screening
    interview he could have reached a different conclusion in  relation  to
    the weight to be attached to the evidence from the screening interview.
    Secondly, the Judge devoted a significant part of his reasoning to this
    issue which was the main basis for his adverse credibility finding.  Mr
    Wilding submitted that, even if the Judge  erred  in  relation  to  his
    assessment of this issue, his finding on credibility could still  stand
    on the basis of his finding that it is not plausible that  the  Taliban
    would have delayed for four years before looking for the Appellant.  We
    do not accept that submission. Given the significance of  this  finding
    in the judge's overall assessment of credibility and the brief focus on
    the delay issue we  cannot  conclude  that  he  would  inevitably  have
    reached the same conclusion  had  this  part  of  the  assessment  been
    approached differently. Accordingly we conclude that the Judge  made  a
    material error in the assessment of the evidence as to the  Appellant's
    address in Afghanistan and his credibility. We therefore set aside  the
    Judge's findings  of  fact  in  relation  to  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's claim as to risk on return from the Taliban.

15. We note that there has been no challenge by either party to the Judge's
    findings as to the Appellant's age.  There  was  no  challenge  in  the
    grounds of appeal, no cross appeal and there  were  no  submissions  on
    this  issue.  We  therefore  preserve  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant's date of birth is 2 May 1997.

16. The first ground of appeal alleges that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    erred in his application of the country  guidance  cases  and  that  he
    failed to consider  the  up-to-date  country  evidence  in  considering
    humanitarian protection. However as we have set aside his  findings  of
    fact and the decision is to be remade  we  are  satisfied  that  it  is
    appropriate to allow the First-tier Tribunal to apply  the  appropriate
    country guidance and consider any up-to-date country information in the
    light of the remade findings of fact.

17. The fourth ground of appeal alleges that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    failed to consider the Appellant's private life under paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules and in his assessment of Article  8.  In  this
    context we note that it is  not  clear  whether  paragraph  276ADE  was
    argued before the First-tier Tribunal Judge. In any event an assessment
    as to whether there are 'very significant obstacles' to the Appellant's
    reintegration in Afghanistan (within  paragraph  276ADE  (1)  (vi))  is
    dependant on the facts and the failure to consider this provision would
    not have been material on the facts found by the First-tier Tribunal in
    any event.

18. The parties were in agreement with our view that, in the circumstances,
    the nature and extent of the judicial fact finding which  is  necessary
    in order for the decision to be remade is such that (having  regard  to
    the overriding objective in Rule 2  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules 2008) it is appropriate to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The Judge made a material error on a point of law and the  determination  of
the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The findings of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the  Appellant's  age
are preserved.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.



Signed
       Date:     14 June 2016


A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


