
AA 03537 2013
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 5 September 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                 SIYAM OMER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Jegarajah, of counsel, instructed by LG Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 27 February  1976.  He
      arrived in the United Kingdom on  3  February  2013  and  applied  for
      asylum on 25th February 2013. The  application  was  refused  on  27th
      March 2013.

   2. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before a  First-tier  Judge
      on  14th  May  2013.  In  a  determination  signed  on  31st  May  and
      promulgated on 12 July 2013 the judge dismissed the appeal. The  judge
      did not accept key factors in the appellant's account  -  for  example
      she did not accept that he had lived in Sri Lanka as an adult and  she
      was not satisfied about his identity or age.

   3. The appellant appealed and the principal ground was that the judge had
      erred in failing to adjourn in the light of the report from  Professor
      Lingam on 10th May to the effect that he had been unable to  interview
      the  appellant  due  to  his  tearful  demeanour  and  requested   the
      appointment to be re-scheduled  to  30th  May  2013.  The  appellant's
      evidence should have been considered in the  light  of  a  psychiatric
      report.

   4. Once the application for the adjournment  had  been  refused,  counsel
      then instructed (not Miss Jegarajah) had withdrawn  as  she  had  only
      been instructed to request the adjournment.  The  appellant  had  then
      been unrepresented.

   5. Permission to appeal was granted on the point - which does not  appear
      to have been raised in the grounds - that the judge had erred  in  not
      following the country guidance case of  GJ  (Sri  Lanka)  [2013]  UKUT
      00319 which had been promulgated prior to the date of promulgation  on
      8 July 2013.

   6. At the hearing before us we put the case back to enable Mr  Walker  to
      have sight of the determination which was not in his bundle.

   7. Miss Jegarajah explained  that  the  appellant  had  been  seen  by  a
      forensic specialist who had needed to cancel the  appointment  and  it
      was quite clear on the face of the report that the appellant had  been
      a vulnerable person  who  fell  to  be  considered  within  the  Joint
      Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 and the evidence  should  have
      been considered in that context.

   8. The appellant had been since by a psychiatrist on 26th June  2013  and
      the report had been produced on 10 July 2013 so the delay  was  not  a
      long one.

   9. Mr Walker said he did not feel he could oppose the appeal in the light
      of the report before the First-tier Judge which had indicated that the
      appellant was under some form of mental stress.

  10. Although the Secretary of State had not initially accepted there was a
      material error of law - a response had been filed on 14th August -  it
      is clear that Mr Walker having given the matter further  consideration
      in the light of the submissions made by Miss Jegarajah was not  minded
      to argue that the judge's findings should be  upheld.  The  change  of
      position was understandable since  the  grounds  of  appeal  were  not
      ideally drafted and the grant of permission to appeal did  nothing  to
      assist. The point about the new country guidance was  not  pursued  by
      Miss Jegarajah. However, Miss  Jegarajah  formulated  the  grounds  by
      reference to the Guidance on vulnerable persons and we accept that  Mr
      Walker felt unable to support the  determination.  The  appellant  was
      left without a representative and  though  the  judge  refers  to  the
      appellant being composed throughout, in his  submissions  he  said  he
      suffered from forgetfulness and felt faint  on  occasions.  The  judge
      notes he appeared confused in cross-examination.

  11. The judge signed  the  determination  applying  the  country  guidance
      current at the time and was not to be  criticised  -  and  indeed  the
      grounds did not criticise - her failure to apply the new guidance.

  12. As we have concluded with the agreement of the parties that  that  the
      case must be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and  must be re-heard
      afresh it is of course the position that the appeal will be determined
      in the light of the prevailing country guidance of GJ (Sri Lanka).

  13. The determination was affected by a material error of law. We  set  it
      aside by agreement and remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      and direct a fresh hearing  de  novo  before  a  different  First-tier
      Judge.


Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               5 September 2013



