

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
AA/03241/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 12 February 2016                   |           On 29 February 2016        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     PK
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:         Ms B Asanovic, Counsel instructed by Caveat
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 14 August 1997 who arrived
   in the UK on 30 July 2014 and applied for asylum on 1 August 2014.
2. The appellant's claim, in summary, is that he has a well founded fear of
   persecution because of his family's involvement in a blood feud which
   began in 2009. He claims his uncle killed two members of another family
   (hereinafter referred to as "the opposing family") and was subsequently
   killed and that his father is in self-confinement. Before he turned 16 he
   went into self confinement before leaving Albania. He maintains that the
   opposing family have significant influence and he would be at risk
   wherever he lived in Albania.

3. The respondent refused the appellant's application on the basis that
   there would be sufficient protection for him in Albania and that he could
   relocate internally. It is not clear if the appellant's account of the
   blood feud was accepted in the respondent's refusal letter. The letter
   states, somewhat ambiguously, that the appellant was generally consistent
   in his core account but there were inconsistencies in his account.



4. The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
   ("FtT") Judge Hembrough who, in a decision promulgated on 15 October
   2015, dismissed the appeal.

5. The appeal was heard on 6 July 2015. During the course of the hearing,
   the FtT decided the matter should be adjourned. This followed the
   respondent seeking to challenge the appellant's credibility even though
   the reasons for refusal letter did not make explicit that credibility was
   at issue. At paragraph [19] the FtT explained why it was adjourning the
   hearing as follows:


         "In the interests of fairness I decided that the appropriate course
         was to adjourn the hearing to give the Appellant the opportunity to
         take further advice as to his position and consider whether it was
         possible to bring forward some supporting evidence for his claim.
         Whilst noting that there is no requirement for corroboration in
         asylum claims I observed that given his claim that three people
         have been killed in the course of the blood feud, that his uncle's
         killer was in custody and that reports in relation to his killing
         had appeared on the TV news it may be possible for him to obtain
         some supporting documentary evidence which might be of assistance
         to him."

6. The hearing resumed on 28 September 2015. At the outset of the hearing
   the appellant applied for an adjournment in order to obtain supporting
   evidence from the appellant's parents in Albania. At paragraph [21] the
   FtT stated that the appellant's representative told the tribunal that the
   appellant and his parents had mistakenly thought that only evidence taken
   in front of a notary would be sufficient and because of his father's
   confinement this was not possible. The application was refused on the
   basis that the appellant had had nearly three months to obtain further
   information and was legally represented by an accredited solicitor. The
   FtT also stated that a statement from the appellant's father was unlikely
   to add significant weight to the claim in the absence of documentary
   evidence from an official source.

7. The FtT did not accept there was a blood feud involving the appellant's
   family. It described the appellant's account as lacking in significant
   detail and found that he had not taken reasonable steps to substantiate
   it.
8. At paragraph [44] the FtT stated that although corroboration is not
   required in asylum claims, the appellant had left Albania at the time of
   his choosing and had regular contact with his family there. The FtT went
   on to find that there was no supporting evidence to substantiate there
   being a blood feud. Moreover, the FtT found, in the alternative, that the
   appellant would in any event be able to access protection from the
   Albanian police and could relocate within Albania.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

9. There are four grounds of appeal:


         . Firstly, that the FtT unfairly and improperly relied on the
           absence of documentation that was not readily available or
           directly relevant.
         . Secondly, that the hearing on 6 July 2015 should not have been
           adjourned.
         . Thirdly, that the FtT failed to properly apply Country Guidance
           regarding the sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.
         . Fourthly, that it was unfair to refuse to adjourn the hearing on
           28 September 2015 to enable a statement to be obtained from the
           appellant's father.


10. In addition to the grounds, Ms Asanovic, who also represented the
   appellant before the FtT, submitted a witness statement concerning the
   FtT proceedings. In this statement she stated, inter alia, that Judge
   Hembrough set out the nature of specific documents that one would expect
   to see in the circumstances, such as death certificates. She recounts
   having objected to the adjournment on the basis, inter alia, that the
   appellant had no reason to believe any further documents could be
   obtained that could demonstrate the existence of a blood feud and that
   the judge could place little weight on the objections relevant to
   credibility when no such objections were raised in the reasons for
   refusal letter.


11. Before me, Ms Asanovic argued that the FtT erred by basing its
   credibility finding on the absence of documents that the appellant could
   not in fact have obtained. Ms Asanovic went through each of the documents
   the FtT appears to have expected to see and gave reasons why such
   evidence would not be available to the appellant or his family.

12. Ms Asanovic also argued that the FtT erred when considering the claim
   in the alternative. If the appellant's account is accepted and taken at
   its highest then, following EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348
   (IAC), he would be at risk even after internally relocating given the
   opposing family's government and police connections.

13. Mr Whitwell's response was that the FtT had properly dealt with the
   evidence. The appellant had no first hand knowledge of the blood feud and
   was relying on what others, particularly his father, had told him. The
   burden was on him and in the absence of corroboration it would be very
   difficult for him to discharge that burden.



14. He also argued that the appellant's claim that evidence was not
   obtainable is undermined by his request, at the hearing on 28 September
   2015, for an adjournment, which indicates further evidence was
   obtainable.



15. Mr Whitwell drew my attention to TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40 and
   argued that the FtT's approach to corroboration of evidence was
   consistent with that adopted by the Court of Appeal in that case.

Consideration

It is clear from the decision that the FtT, in rejecting the appellant's
account of there being a blood feud involving his family, has placed
significant weight on the absence of corroborating documentary evidence
that it expected to see. This included, as set out in paragraphs [46] and
[47] of the decision:

    . Evidence from the police concerning the murders and any arrests;
    . Evidence from the Albanian Committee of Nationwide Reconciliation;
    . Evidence from village elders who were said to have attempted mediation
    . Evidence of the deaths;
    . Evidence of ownership of the land in dispute or of the land dispute;
      and
    . Evidence of the opposing family's influence.

16. Ms Asanavic gave an explanation, in respect of each of the specific
   items of expected corroborative evidence identified by the FtT, as to why
   the appellant and his family were unable, and could not reasonable be
   expected, to obtain them. She argued, inter alia, that the death
   certificates necessary to demonstrate the various deaths in the feud
   would not be available to the appellant or his family. In respect of the
   land dispute, she argued that it is unlikely there would be documentary
   evidence of the dispute and in any event documents merely showing
   possession of the land would add little to the claim. She stressed how
   unrealistic it is to expect that the appellant would be able to uncover
   documents confirming the influence of the opposing family or that he
   would be able to access police records.


17. Ms Asanavic's submissions are consistent with the appellant's
   explanation as to why he was unable to obtain supportive documents as set
   out in his supplemental witness statement dated 24 September 2015. In
   this statement the appellant commented on his mother being told by the
   local government that it could not issue any documents without contacting
   the embassy where he had claimed asylum. He says his parents did not want
   to disclose where he had claimed asylum in order to avoid alerting the
   opposing family. He also stated that his father had not prepared a
   witness statement because he could not leave the home to visit a notary
   due to his self confinement.  He also claimed his father was told he
   would need to attend in person to obtain information about the land in
   dispute and could not do so due to his self confinement. He further said
   he could not find relevant information on the internet.

18. It is not an error of law, when assessing an appellant's credibility,
   to take into account the absence of supporting corroborative evidence if
   (a) the availability of such evidence could reasonably be expected and
   (b) no credible account for the absence of such corroborative evidence
   has been given by the appellant.


19. This was explained by the Upper Tribunal in ST (Corroboration - Kasolo)
   Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119:

         "The fact that corroboration is not required does not mean that an
         Adjudicator is required to leave out of account the absence of
         documentary evidence which might reasonably be expected. An appeal
         must be determined on the basis of the evidence produced but the
         weight to be attached to oral evidence may be affected by a failure
         to produce other evidence in support. The Adjudicator was entitled
         to comment that it would not have been difficult for the Appellant
         to provide a death certificate concerning his brother or some
         evidence to support his contention that he had received hospital
         treatment. These were issues of fact for the Adjudicator to assess.
         When the Adjudicator says in paragraph 35 that there is no evidence
         to support his assertions, it is clear, and both representatives
         accept, that the Adjudicator is referring to evidence which
         supports or corroborates the oral evidence of the Appellant."


20. A similar point is made in TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40 in which the
   Court of Appeal stated

         "Where evidence to support an account given by a party is or should
         be readily available, a Judge is, in my view, plainly entitled to
         take into account the failure to provide that evidence and any
         explanations for that failure"

21. The FtT has explained why it considered that evidence to corroborate
   the claim could reasonably be expected given that the appellant left
   Albania at a time of his choosing and that since leaving he has been in
   regular contact with his family. At paragraph [48] the FtT considered the
   appellant's explanation of why his family were unable to assist him in
   obtaining supporting evidence. It noted that even if the appellant's
   father's self confinement prevented him from helping there were other
   family members including the appellant's maternal uncle who could have
   assisted with enquires. The FtT also commented that the appellant had
   solicitors who could have made enquiries.


22. I do not accept that the FtT erred by improperly relying on the absence
   of supportive documents. Having considered - and rejected - the
   appellant's explanation as to why he was unable to obtain documents
   where, in its view, such documents could reasonably be expected, and
   having also found that the appellant's account lacked significant detail
   (see paragraph [43] of the decision), that he lacked first hand knowledge
   of the blood feud (see paragraph [25] of the decision) and that he was
   not from a region of Albania where, according to the relevant Country
   Guidance, active blood feuds are commonplace, it was open to the FtT, for
   the reasons it gave, to not accept the existence of a blood feud.

23. The second ground argues that the hearing on 6 July 2015 should not
   have been adjourned. I do not accept that this argument has any merit.
   The FtT was, in the circumstances of this case and as explained above,
   entitled to take into account the absence of supportive evidence and in
   these circumstances it was entirely proper for it to give the appellant
   further time, by way of adjourning the hearing, to obtain such evidence.

24. The third ground of appeal relates to the FtT's finding in the
   alternative that, even taken at its highest, the appellant's claim should
   not succeed because he would be able to benefit from the protection of
   the Albanian police and/or  relocate internally. I agree with Ms Asanavic
   that this finding is not consistent with the extant Country Guidance  EH
   (Blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC), given the appellant's
   evidence about the reach and influence of the opposing family.  However,
   the error is not material given my finding in respect of the first ground
   of appeal.



25. The fourth ground of appeal has no merit. The appellant had been given
   sufficient time to obtain further evidence and the FtT was entitled to
   refuse a further adjournment. As stated by the FtT at paragraph [22], the
   appellant was legally represented and if the appellant and his family
   misunderstood what was necessary in respect of his father providing a
   statement that was a matter with which his solicitors could have
   assisted.

26. For the aforementioned reasons, I find that the FtT has not made a
   material error of law and that its decision shall stand.

    Decision

    a. The appeal is dismissed.

    b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of a material error of law and shall stand.

    c. An anonymity direction is made.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 24 February 2016              |

