
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03214/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2015                       |On 6 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     E K
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A de Ruano, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Miss E Savage of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The appellant

 1. The appellant is an Albanian born in 1996.  On 18 July 2013 he  arrived
    in the United Kingdom as a minor and on the  next  day  claimed  asylum
    based on his fear to return because of his family's  involvement  in  a
    blood feud.

The Decision of 30 April 2014

 2. On 30 April 2014 the respondent refused the appellant's claim and  made
    directions for his removal to Albania.  After taking into  account  the
    appellant's youth, the respondent concluded that he had not established
    the basis for his claim. Even if the basis of his claim was true  which
    the respondent did not accept, she considered there was  a  sufficiency
    of protection available to the appellant from the Albanian  authorities
    and he could relocate in Albania without undue hardship.

 3. On 20 May 2014 the appellant lodged notice of appeal under  Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).   The  grounds  are  formulaic  and  refer  to  the  Refugee
    Convention and Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European Convention.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 4. By a decision promulgated on 29 October 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Nicholls found the appellant  had  not  established  that  his
    family was in a blood feud and that he would be at risk  on  return  to
    Albania.  He noted that even if the appellant's claim was true  on  his
    own evidence there had been no incident since 1992.  He  dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal and on 26 November 2014 Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Pooler refused permission.  The  application
    was renewed to the Upper Tribunal on the same grounds.  and on 27 March
    2015 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman granted permission  to  appeal
    on the following grounds:-

         (i)  in rejecting the documents from the commune of (the Appellant)
             as not being genuine, given  that  the  information  contained
             therein  was  consistent  with  the  Appellant's  account  and
             capable of corroborating it;

         (ii) in making contradictory  findings:  at  18  finding  that  the
             Appellant had not established that there was ever a blood feud
             or a killing in 1992 but accepting that the Appellant's family
             moved from ... to ...  and  that  there  had  been  no  actual
             incident since 1992;

         (iii)    given that the Appellant was a child at all material times
             in Albania until 9 August 2014, in relying on an  absence  of
             corroborative evidence viz an explanation from the Appellant's
             mother any documentation from the police  or  statements  from
             his parents concerning attempts at  reconciliation  the  judge
             may  have  imposed  too  high  a  burden  of  proof  upon  the
             appellant;

         (iv) in failing to make clear and consistent findings in  light  of
             the country guidance case  of  EH  (blood  feuds)  Albania  CG
             [2012] UKUT 348 (IAC).

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 6. The appellant did not attend the hearing.  Mr de Ruano  relied  on  the
    grounds for appeal to the Upper Tribunal and the grant of permission to
    appeal.   Further,  he  said  that  new  evidence  have  come  to   the
    appellant's attention since the last hearing which  had  not  yet  been
    received from Albania and on receipt would require translation.

 7. The Judge had erred in law  and  the  appeal  should  be  remitted  for
    hearing afresh when the new evidence would be available.

 8. Ms Savage relied  on  the  respondent's  response  of  May  2015  under
    Procedure Rule 24 that the Judge had made a mixed finding on the  blood
    feud at para.18 of his  decision.   Whether  expressed  as  a  complete
    rejection of the evidence or a refusal to accept that the feud had been
    re-ignited the Judge had made proper findings  with  reference  to  the
    appropriate standard and burden of proof.  Further, he was entitled  to
    conclude it would be reasonable for  particular  documents  or  further
    evidence to be provided.  Although the appellant arrived in the  United
    Kingdom as a minor he had been legally represented  and  there  was  no
    barrier to the Judge expressing doubt about documents and giving little
    weight to them as expressed at para.16 of his decision.

 9. At paras.13 and 16 the Judge had given cogent  reasons  to  reject  the
    appellant's claim and it was properly open  to  him  to  attach  little
    weight to the document from the appellant's commune.  Having found  the
    appellant had not established his claim the Judge was entitled to  give
    little weight to the documents from the  appellant's  commune  in  line
    with the principles established in Tanveer Ahmed starred  [2002]  UKIAT
    00439.  She also referred to paras.20-21 of TK (Burundi) v SSHD  [2009]
    EWCA Civ. 40 which address the desirability of supporting evidence,  if
    readily obtainable, being provided and that the failure to produce such
    evidence without a credible explanation for such failure  could  be  "a
    very strong pointer that the account being given is not  credible".   I
    noted that TK (Burundi)  involved  a  claim  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention and not an asylum claim.

10. Ms Savage continued that the Judge had given good reasons to reject the
    appellant's  account  without  requiring  corroborative  evidence.   At
    para.18 he had made mixed findings but there was no material  error  of
    law.  The grounds for appeal amounted to no more  than  a  disagreement
    with the Judge.

11. The Judge had taken the country  guidance  in  EH  (blood  feuds)  into
    account as was clearly evident at para.12 of his decision.  The Judge's
    findings were consistent with  country  guidance:  in  particular,  the
    guidance that active blood feuds in Albania were  few  and  decreasing,
    that there was a small number of deaths  annually  arising  from  those
    feuds and a  small  number  of  adults  and  children  lived  in  self-
    confinement for protection. There were government programmes to educate
    self-confined children although very few were involved in them and  the
    factors enumerated in para.6 of the headnote to  EH  (Blood  feuds)  to
    determine whether an active blood feud existed.

12. The Judge had considered these factors at parag.15 of his decision  and
    with the additional evidence was entitled to conclude that if there was
    a blood feud it was no longer active. The decision did  not  contain  a
    material error of law.

13. In response Mr de Ruano submitted the decision was vague and lacking in
    detail which in itself was insufficient basis for the Judge rely on the
    jurisprudence in Tanveer Ahmed.   The  finding  that  further  evidence
    should have been available  did  not  impugn  the  evidence  which  was
    available.  The decision contained an error of law and  should  be  set
    aside.

Findings and Consideration

14. The Judge gave reasons for coming to the conclusion that the  appellant
    had not shown the letters from his commune were genuine and that in any
    event they added little of  any  significant  weight  to  his  personal
    account because of the various omissions and lack  of  explanation  for
    them which he had previously detailed.  At para.17 he referred to other
    available sources of information identified by the appellant  but  from
    which he had not produced any evidence.   The  Judge  was  entitled  to
    attach weight to the absence of  any  statement  from  the  appellant's
    parents and especially his mother  with  whom  the  appellant  said  he
    remained in contact.  There was no evidence other than the  appellant's
    assertion of any attempts at reconciliation.  There was no letter  from
    any institution in Albania involved  in  attempting  reconciliation  in
    blood feuds.  Such letters are regularly produced in blood feud  cases,
    notwithstanding  the  comments  in  EH  (blood  feuds)   about   "false
    attestation letters".

15. At para.18 of his decision the Judge was  careful  not  to  reject  the
    appellant's claim of a blood feud but simply to assert he had failed to
    discharge the burden of proof to show that there was a blood feud.  The
    Judge had set out at length the burden and standard of proof at paras.6-
    7 of his  decision  and  reiterated  it  in  shorthand  in  para.18  by
    referring to "the required standard of a real likelihood".   There  may
    have been many reasons why the appellant's family had moved in 1998  to
    a different place and the Judge was entitled on the evidence, or rather
    the lack of  evidence,  before  him  to  find  the  appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof to show the move was a  consequence  and
    for the avoidance of the blood feud.

16. The appellant's evidence that there had been no actual  incident  since
    1992 was accepted by the Judge. He did not expressly state  whether  he
    took this to indicate that he found there was a blood  feud  but  since
    1992 it had not been actively pursued or that there had  never  been  a
    blood feud.  I doubt that in reality whether there was never a feud  or
    there had been no incident for some 22 years  makes  for  any  material
    difference. There was no evidence that  there  had  been  no  potential
    victims in either family throughout that time until the appellant would
    have reached the minimum requisite age. The Judge might have  expressed
    the ante-penultimate sentence of para.18 more clearly but I do not find
    that it amounts to a finding so in contradiction of any other  material
    finding as to amount to a material error of law.

17. The appellant may have arrived in the United Kingdom as  a  minor.   He
    had benefit of legal advice at least  from  the  time  the  appeal  was
    lodged in May 2014.  The Judge was entitled  to  place  weight  on  the
    absence of  any  statement  from  either  of  the  appellant's  parents
    although he said that he was in contact with  his  mother.   His  legal
    advisors will have been aware of the  country  guidance  in  EH  (blood
    feuds).  It gives clear guidance as  to  what  sort  of  documents  the
    Tribunal would expect to see and the legal advisor would be aware  that
    in the absence of such documentation it would be  likely  the  Tribunal
    would be looking for an explanation.

18. The expert evidence available would have been taken into account by the
    Upper Tribunal in coming to its country  guidance.   The  relevance  of
    such  expert  evidence  will  depend  in  any  individual  case  to   a
    substantial degree on whether the applicant's claim to be involved in a
    blood feud is accepted.  In this appeal, the Judge did not  accept  the
    claim to be involved in a blood feud or at least one  which  was  other
    than  entirely  historic.  He  was  clearly  aware  of   the   relevant
    considerations as evidenced by para.12 of his decision.

19. The reference in the grounds to giving the appellant the benefit of the
    doubt fails to reflect the meaning of that expression as  explained  in
    KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 00552 (IAC).

20. The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain a material error of
    law and it shall stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain an error of law and
    shall stand.

    Anonymity order made.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 31. vii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

