
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03183/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th June 2016                             |On 11th July 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     KT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit of Counsel instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Coates of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 7th April 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a female Sri Lankan citizen born [ ] 1985 who  claimed
    asylum on 27th February 2013.

 3. The application was refused on 6th  February  2015  and  the  Appellant
    appealed to the FTT.

 4. The appeal was heard on 1st April 2016.  The FTT  heard  evidence  from
    the Appellant and her husband.  The FTT found neither  to  be  credible
    witnesses.  The FTT noted that the Appellant had left Sri Lanka without
    any difficulty, travelling on her own passport, and that she  had  been
    granted a visa to study in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant  did  not
    claim asylum on arrival in the United Kingdom  and  waited  over  three
    years before making a claim, and her asylum claim was only  made  after
    her application for a Tier 1 visa was refused.

 5. The FTT considered the medical report prepared by Mr Mason, dated  18th
    June 2015.  Mr Mason found scars on the  Appellant's  left  thigh  were
    diagnostic of scars that would result from burns inflicted deliberately
    as a result of torture.  The FTT noted that  the  scars  could  not  be
    accurately dated and there was no evidence, except for the  Appellant's
    own testimony, to show when or how the injuries  were  inflicted.   The
    FTT noted that the report did not  mention  the  possibility  of  self-
    infliction by proxy.   The  FTT  found  that  the  medical  report  was
    outweighed by all the other evidence in the case, which undermined  the
    Appellant's credibility.

 6. The FTT considered the Appellant's sur place activities,  finding  that
    these were "nothing more than a cynical attempt to provide her  with  a
    reason for claiming asylum."

 7. The FTT found that the Appellant did not come within any  of  the  risk
    categories identified in the current country guidance.  The appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The Appellant contended that the FTT decision contained six  errors  of
    law, one of which was the consideration  by  the  FTT  of  the  medical
    report, and another related to the FTT finding that the Appellant's sur
    place activities were a cynical  attempt  to  assist  her  in  claiming
    asylum.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Kelly who stated;

         "It is arguable, as asserted in the first ground, that it  was  not
         reasonably open to the Tribunal (i.e. it was perverse) to find that
         mature scarring, which in the opinion of an expert  was  diagnostic
         of torture and would have resulted in  the  Appellant  experiencing
         severe pain, might conceivably have been inflicted by proxy  whilst
         the Appellant was either  anaesthetised  or  otherwise  unconscious
         [paragraph 27].  It is further arguable, as asserted in  the  fifth
         ground, that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  treating  as  relevant  the
         Appellant's motives for engaging in sur  place  activities  and  in
         failing to consider whether those activities  might  place  her  at
         risk on return to Sri Lanka (paragraph 38).  Permission  to  appeal
         is accordingly  granted  on  those  grounds.   The  other  grounds,
         however, are simply a quarrel with reasoning that it was reasonably
         open to the Tribunal to adopt.  Permission to argue  those  grounds
         at an error of law hearing is accordingly refused."

10. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 stating  that  the  Respondent  accepted  that  the  FTT  decision
    contained material errors of law which were referred to in the grant of
    permission, and which related to scarring  and  sur  place  activities.
    The Respondent's view was that the decision  should  be  re-made  at  a
    fresh oral hearing.

11. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

Oral Submissions

12. Mr McVeety confirmed the rule 24 response represented the  Respondent's
    position.

13. Mr Muquit submitted that the appropriate course would be to  remit  the
    appeal back to the FTT, as the Appellant's solicitors wished to  submit
    further evidence in relation to the Appellant's sur place activities.

14. Mr McVeety agreed that a remittal to the FTT would be appropriate.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. As conceded by the Respondent, the  FTT  materially  erred  in  law  in
    consideration of the medical report, for the reasons given in the grant
    of permission.

16. The FTT also materially erred in consideration of the  Appellant's  sur
    place activities by taking the view that these were a  cynical  attempt
    to provide her with a reason for claiming  asylum.   That  is  not  the
    correct test.  The correct test to be applied was explained in Danian v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [1999]  EWCA  Civ  3000  in
    which Brook LJ stated;

         "For all these reasons I do not accept  the  Tribunal's  conclusion
         that a refugee sur place who has acted in bad faith  falls  outwith
         the Geneva Convention and can  be  deported  to  his  home  country
         notwithstanding that he has a  genuine  and  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution for a Convention reason and there is a real  risk  that
         such persecution may  take  place.   Although  his  credibility  is
         likely to be low and his claim must be rigorously  scrutinised,  he
         is still entitled to the protection of  the  Convention,  and  this
         country  is  not  entitled  to  disregard  the  provisions  of  the
         Convention by which it is bound, if it should turn out that he does
         indeed qualify for protection against refoulement at the  time  his
         application is considered."

17. I have decided that it is appropriate to remit this appeal back to  the
    FTT, having considered paragraph 7 of the Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements which is set out below;

         "7.1 Where under section 12(1) of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in
             accordance with relevant Practice Directions) to  re-make  the
             decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii).
         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;
             (a)  the effect of the error has to be deprive a party  before
                  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision and the  appeal  to
                  be re-made is such that, having regard to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.
         7.3  Re-making rather than remitting will  nevertheless  constitute
             the normal approach to determining appeals where an  error  of
             law is found, even if some further fact-finding is necessary."

18. Although permission to appeal was granted  on  only  two  grounds,  the
    consideration of the medical report may mean that a different  view  is
    taken in relation to the Appellant's credibility.  In my view it is not
    appropriate to preserve any findings made by the FTT, and therefore the
    appeal is remitted to the FTT to be heard afresh, with no  findings  of
    fact preserved.  It is appropriate to remit, in my view, because of the
    nature and extent of the judicial fact-finding which will be necessary.
     Such fact-finding is more appropriately carried out in the FTT, rather
    than the Upper Tribunal.

19. The appeal will be heard by the FTT at the Bennett House, Stoke hearing
    centre and the parties will be advised of the  time  and  date  in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FTT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Coates.

20. If either party seeks to  submit  further  documentary  evidence,  such
    evidence must be served upon the FTT and the other party no later  than
    fourteen calendar days before  the  next  hearing  date.   If  skeleton
    arguments are to be produced, they must  be  submitted  no  later  than
    seven calendar days before the FTT hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

As this is an asylum claim, I have decided it  is  appropriate  to  make  an
anonymity order pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules  2008.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             5th July 2016




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to be considered by the FTT.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             5th July 2016

