
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03932/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 April 2014                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                     d a

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams instructed by Kilby Jones Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a national of Albania born 1986 appeals with  permission
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Whalan  who  dismissed  the
    appeal against the decision dated 10 April 2013 to  remove  her  as  an
    illegal entrant for reasons given in a determination  that  followed  a
    hearing on 24 May 2013.

 2. An anonymity order made by the first-tier tribunal judge  is  continued
    in the Upper Tribunal and I direct that no report or other  publication
    of the proceedings or any part or parts of them shall name or  directly
    or indirectly identify her.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  23  February  2013  and
    claimed asylum two days later having travelled in a lorry from  Albania
    which she left on 20 February.  She was screened about her claim on  11
    March and a substantive asylum interview took place on 25 March.

 4. The appellant's claim is that she had been forced into  trafficking  in
    Albania and elsewhere in Europe including Italy between  November  2009
    and February 2013 when she escaped.  With the assistance  of  an  agent
    who has retained her passport, she made her way to the United  Kingdom.
    The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  the  appellant  had   been
    trafficked.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and took account also of  a
    statement from a Ms  Warda  who  has  provided  accommodation  for  the
    appellant since shortly after arrival.  He  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant was credible about having been trafficked in Albania and that
    she had been subjected to three years and more  of  captivity  enforced
    into prostitution.

 6. The renewed grounds of application to the Upper Tribunal challenge  the
    credibility findings in a number of  respects  including  the  argument
    that the judge had failed to make any findings on the risk faced by the
    appellant who was by the time of the hearing three months pregnant  and
    had been disowned by her family.  Mr Lams clarified  that  this  ground
    was to be understood to mean that in the event that error was found  in
    the judge's determination and the appellant was subsequently  found  to
    have been trafficked, her pregnancy and disownment by the  family  were
    factors relevant to risk assessment.

 7. At the outset of the hearing I observed to the parties my concern  that
    the judge had not reached any findings on the claim that the  appellant
    had been disowned by her family.  I was not persuaded that this  aspect
    had been accepted by the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  question  was
    whether this failure had the  effect  of  undermining  the  credibility
    findings. Following detailed submissions I gave my  decision  that  the
    determination was infected by error of law such that it required to  be
    set aside and remade.

 8. I gave short reasons at the hearing for this  conclusion  which  I  now
    develop more fully.

 9. The appellant's claim is that her father is a lieutenant colonel in the
    army and that she is  from  a  family  of  social  standing.   She  was
    educated to university degree standard in business administration which
    she completed between 2004 and 2008.  In 2007 she became engaged to  an
    individual who became abusive and  following  a  period  of  separation
    reconciled before final separation in December 2008.  These events  led
    the appellant's father to disown her as his daughter.

10. Thereafter the appellant moved in with a university  friend  with  whom
    she remained until March 2009.  That friend helped her find a place  to
    rent.  The appellant found a job as a sales  assistant  at  a  BMW  car
    showroom.  She supplemented her inadequate income by modelling.  In mid
    May 2009 she met Erjon Haxhiu.  Their relationship developed.   He  was
    aware that the appellant's family did not want to have anything  to  do
    with her.  He duped her into moving to a location from  where  she  was
    required to work as a prostitute.  She was unable to escape.   She  was
    also taken to different countries including a visit to Italy in October
    2012 where she was caught with a false ID card and where she  was  held
    for about one hour.  Whilst Erjon Haxhiu was away in January  2013  the
    appellant  affected  to  have  appendicitis.   She  was   hospitalised.
    Although  accompanied  by  two  members  of  Haxhiu's  gang   she   was
    nevertheless able to escape as they were not  permitted  to  enter  the
    doctor's  accommodation.   The  appellant  sought   refuge   with   the
    university friend she had been with previously.  Ejon Haxhiu  had  made
    contact with that friend.  The arrangements were then put in place  for
    the appellant to leave the country with funds that she had  saved  from
    tips.

11. On arrival in the United Kingdom the  appellant  was  taken  in  by  Ms
    Warda.  She has met someone with whom she became pregnant in March 2013
    but when he discovered  her  past,  he  no  longer  wished  to  have  a
    relationship with her.

12. The judge commenced his findings of fact with this opening paragraph at
    [25]:

         "I  have  considered  the  entire  appellant's  oral,  written  and
         documentary evidence  carefully,  subject  to  the  relatively  low
         standard of proof applicable  to  asylum  claim.   I  have  to  say
         regrettably that I do not find her  to  be  wholly  accurate  or  a
         credible witness.  Much of the background facts are true, as  these
         are objectively  uncontentious.   Insofar  as  her  core  claim  is
         concerned, however, namely the assertion that she was a "trafficked
         woman" in Albania, a woman subject to 3+  years  of  captivity  and
         forced prostitution I do not find her to be credible."

    The judge then noted counsel's submissions that with reference to AM  &
    BM (trafficked woman) Albania CG [2010] UKUT  80  (IAC)  there  was  no
    typical profile of a trafficked woman and that the appellant had  given
    her evidence in  considerable  written  and  oral  detail  without  any
    notable contradictions.  He  also  noted  that  there  was  some  basic
    corroboration  from  Ms  Warda  untested   in   cross-examination   but
    nevertheless concluded that the account did not stand up to scrutiny.

13. The judge then gave his reasons as follows:

      i) having regard to her circumstances she was at the less  likely  end
         of the spectrum of a typical profile of a trafficked woman;

     ii) the appellant was not duped into prostitution by a false job  offer
         or false promise of marriage but the promise of a surprise  on  her
         alleged boyfriend's birthday;

    iii) the apparent ease of her escape (from a hospital) in 2013  was  not
         "really consistent" but the  allegation  of  three  years  plus  of
         enforced captivity;

     iv) the appellant's failure to seek help from the  Italian  authorities
         during her arrest in October 2012 was inexplicable in  the  context
         of her core allegation;

      v) the judge was "simply  not  persuaded"  that  having  escaped  from
         hospital the appellant was taken in by Aida a friend whom  she  had
         not seen for over three years who then had a  coincidental  meeting
         with her abductor in the street;

     vi) the judge was not able to accept as credible that within minutes of
         being left at the station in the United Kingdom the  appellant  had
         bumped into Ms Warda who in the  absence  of  any  common  language
         immediately offered her three plus months  free  accommodation  and
         food and who, within a day  or  two,  introduced  her  to  Albanian
         friends one of whom formed an immediate  sexual  relationship  with
         her.  The judge concluded that the appellant's account of her first
         few weeks in the United Kingdom fell "a very long way short of  the
         whole truth".

14. Mr Lams and Mr Melvin helpfully prepared skeleton arguments which  they
    supplemented with vigorous submissions.

15. The renewed grounds of application rely on those submitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal after commentary on the reasons why permission was  first
    refused.  The first ground is that the judge had misdirected himself as
    to the evidence and it is asserted that the appellant had stated in her
    evidence she was unable to alert the Italian authorities as she was  at
    all times accompanied by a colleague of her trafficker during her brief
    detention.  Counsel's note of the procedures read with the judge's  own
    record and inspected by the parties indicates that cross-examination on
    this point was short.  The appellant  was  asked  why  she  had  sought
    (help) from the authorities and she responded that she  was  under  the
    control of Erjon and that somebody else was around.  As conceded by  Mr
    Melvin, this point had not been raised as a challenge  in  the  refusal
    letter and I do  think  it  is  questionable  whether  without  further
    exploration and evidence the judge was correct to note at [14]  of  his
    determination  that  the  appellant  was   alone   with   the   Italian
    authorities.

16. The second point on this ground argues the judge had failed to  provide
    any reason why he was not  persuaded  that  the  appellant  had  sought
    refuge with Aida.  Bearing in mind that the  appellant  had  previously
    lived with Aida, it  was  unobjectionable  that  she  should  seek  her
    assistance when she escaped.  I have to say  there  is  an  absence  of
    clear  reasoning  by  the  judge  why  he  was  not  persuaded  by  the
    appellant's claim that she had gone to this friend.  As to the  meeting
    between Aida and the appellant's abductor it is argued that the meeting
    was not coincidental.  The appellant's written evidence refers at  [55]
    to her stay at Aida's accommodation until 15 February and that  two  or
    three days before she left her house she  was  informed  Aida  had  met
    Erjon in the street.  It appears that there was  a  coincidence  and  I
    consider the judge was entitled to question the  plausibility  of  this
    having occurred.

17. Finally as to the appellant's escape, the grounds argue that no reasons
    were given for the  finding  that  the  ease  of  the  escape  was  not
    "consistent".   Mr  Melvin  argued  I  should  not  be  concerned  with
    semantics however if what the judge had in mind was that the escape was
    implausible it was open to  him  to  say  so.   The  use  of  the  term
    "consistent" is puzzling.

18. The second substantive ground refers to the judge's conclusions on  the
    profile of a trafficked woman.  It was argued  that  the  fact  of  the
    appellant having been disowned by her family was not in dispute and had
    been accepted by the judge.  Mr Melvin accepted however that the  judge
    had made no findings on this aspect. It is not evident from the refusal
    letter that this aspect had been  accepted  except  on  a  hypothetical
    basis when considering the option of  internal  flight.   I  accept  Mr
    Lams' submissions that a finding on this aspect was  important  in  the
    overall assessment of the appellant's credibility and it would also  be
    a relevant factor had the appellant found to be  truthful.   I  am  not
    persuaded that the judge proceeded on the basis that this aspect of the
    account being true.   It  is  unclear  what  the  judge  meant  by  his
    reference  to  facts  being  "objectively  uncontentious".   Given  the
    relevance of the appellant's circumstances leading up  to  her  meeting
    with her abductor, I accept Mr Lams' argument that  this  aspect  could
    not be screened off from the rest of the account. It is not possible to
    discern from the determination whether the judge factored in  the  pre-
    abduction events.  If he did so, it is not apparent what regard he  had
    to them in his conclusion that the appellant's claim was not credible.

19. The third grant relates to post-arrival events.  It has to be said that
    the appellant's claim does test the limits of plausibility in part  and
    I conclude the judge was entitled to question the  appellant's  account
    of events after reaching  the  United  Kingdom.   He  was  entitled  to
    question the usefulness of the evidence of Ms Warda who was not  called
    and I do not consider the judge erred in expressing the doubts  he  did
    about what has happened post arrival.

20. The fourth ground refers to the appellant being pregnant and  that  she
    had been disowned by her family.  As I  have  observed  above  Mr  Lams
    accepted that if the appellant had not been kidnapped as claimed,  this
    would not be a risk factor.

21. By way of conclusion although the  judge  was  entitled  to  doubt  the
    evidence on parts of the appellant's claim, in some respects  there  is
    an absence of adequate reasoning  and most significantly  there  was  a
    failure to reach a conclusion on the whole story.  I think that failure
    is fatal to the determination which I therefore set aside.  As  to  the
    remaking, given the substantial credibility challenge by the  Secretary
    of State and the need for a hearing afresh, the appropriate  course  is
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal will be heard
    on 19 September.

22. I make no further directions.  That will be for the First-tier Tribunal
    should it decide to hold a Case Management Review.  It will be for  the
    respondent to decide whether she wishes  to  undertake  further  checks
    regarding  the  appellant's  account  of  having  been   detained   and
    fingerprinted in Italy. It will be for the appellant to decide  whether
    to call Ms Warda to get evidence on her behalf.

23. Accordingly the appeal in the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The  decision
    is set aside and the case remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  pursuant
    to s.12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.






Signed                                  Date 15 May 2014
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


