
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03029/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2019                   |On 12 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     NJM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Capel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 23 November  2017,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Taylor found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  such  that
    its decision fell to be set aside. Her reasons for so finding  were  as
    follows:

         "2.  The appellant is a citizen of Egypt born on 7th November 1995.
          He arrived in the UK on 17th January 2015 and  claimed  asylum  on
         the same day.  He was refused on 16th February 2015 and  placed  in
         the detained fast track.  His subsequent appeal was  dismissed  but
         that decision was subsequently set aside by the  President  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal on 6th October  2015.   The  appeal  then  came
         before Judge Batiste.

         3.   The basis of the appellant's claim was the risk which he  said
         that he faced on return to Egypt of unlawful  killing.   The  judge
         accepted that there had been a blood  feud,  and  indeed  that  the
         appellant had been ill-treated by the police as  a  consequence  of
         being caught up in the feud  as  he  claimed.   He  also  found  it
         credible that in 2011 there may have been attempts to exact further
         revenge on the  appellant's  family,  either  by  shooting  at  the
         household or by attempting kidnaps. However he rejected  the  claim
         that the  feud  had  continued  since  2011  and  consequently  was
         satisfied that the appellant was not at risk on return due  to  any
         form of blood feud.

         4.   The judge recorded that the second  limb  of  the  appellant's
         claim was that he faces an Article 3 risk due  to  his  failure  to
         conduct military service.  He claimed that he  had  left  Egypt  in
         June 2014 and was due to carry out military service on  1st  August
         2014.  The judge said that he had not been provided with  any  copy
         of the letter setting out that requirement,  evidence  which  could
         have been made available.

         5.   He then wrote as follows:-

             "37. I note that conscription usually takes place when someone
             is 18 years of age but people can enlist from the age  of  16.
             While it is possible for a delay for people studying, for  the
             reasons I have indicated, I  do  not  accept  the  appellant's
             account that he was studying on an internet  course  from  his
             home between 2011 and 2014.  As such I am not satisfied on the
             evidence that the appellant  has  not  already  completed  his
             military service.   This  view  is  supported  by  my  general
             credibility issues with the appellant's account.  As a  result
             I am not satisfied that the  appellant  will  be  at  risk  of
             imprisonment  on  return  due  to  his  failure  to  undertake
             military service.

             38.  As such the issue of treatment in prison does not  arise.
             However I have considered the good deal of  material  relating
             to the treatment people receive in Egyptian prisons.  This  is
             both on video and in other  background  materials.   I  accept
             that these illustrate that the conditions in Egyptian  prisons
             leave a great deal to be desired.  It is clear that  there  is
             overcrowding, on occasion severe ill-treatment and there  have
             been deaths in custody.  However I  do  not  accept  that  the
             general treatment that someone  would  face  for  evading  the
             draft (given  the  relatively  short  sentence  likely  to  be
             imposed) reaches the threshold necessary to engage Article  3.
             As a result even if the appellant did demonstrate that he  was
             a draft evader (which he has  not)  Article  3  would  not  be
             engaged."

         6.   On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

         The Grounds of Application

         7.   The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
         the judge had reached a conclusion that the appellant  had  already
         completed his military service in a manner which  was  procedurally
         unfair.

         8.   It had never been a part of the  respondent's  case  that  the
         appellant had completed his  military  service  and/or  voluntarily
         enlisted.  He had given evidence that he had studied at home during
         the relevant period, but at no stage was it put  to  him  that  the
         evidence was relevant to his claim not to have  undergone  military
         service.  The questions relating to what he was doing at that  time
         were asked in the context of how  he  had  managed  to  avoid  harm
         emanating from the blood feud.   Moreover,  the  questions  put  in
         cross-examination implicitly accepted that the  appellant  had  not
         undergone military service, for example asking whether it would  be
         open to him to pay a fine in order to avoid prison for evasion.

         9.   Accordingly, the appellant was given no opportunity to address
         the issue.  Whilst it is for the appellant to prove his case he was
         entitled to know what the case against him was, either as  set  out
         in the refusal letter or in cross-examination or,  if  it  has  not
         been dealt with there, by being raised by the judge.

         10.  The error was material because his findings  with  respect  to
         prison conditions were insufficiently reasoned given the  objective
         evidence before him.

         11.  Permission to appeal was  initially  refused  but  granted  by
         Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor on 13th September 2017.

         Consideration of whether there is an Error of Law

         12.  Mr Diwyncz accepted that this  case  needs  to  be  looked  at
         again.

         13.  First, the appellant was not on notice of the  fact  that  the
         judge might conclude that he had  already  completed  his  military
         service because it was never put  to  him  either  in  the  refusal
         letter or under cross-examination or by the judge himself.

         14.  Second, this is not a case where the appellant's  account  has
         been rejected in its entirety.  Indeed  the  basis  of  his  claim,
         namely the blood feud and the ill-treatment which  he  suffered  in
         consequence, was accepted.  This decision cannot therefore be saved
         on the basis that the judge had disbelieved the entire account  and
         was therefore entitled to reach the view that his claim to fear the
         Egyptian authorities on return as a draft evader should be rejected
         on the grounds that he was a person who was generally untruthful.

         15.  The error is material because, both in general terms,  caution
         should  be  exercised  in  concluding  that   such   a   procedural
         irregularity would have made no difference, and  more  importantly,
         the judge did not consider the case law which was put  before  him,
         particularly Mursic v Croatia [2016] ECHR which held:-

             "137.    When the personal space available to a detainee falls
             below  3  sq.  m   of   floor   surface   in   multi-occupancy
             accommodation in  prisons,  the  lack  of  personal  space  is
             considered so severe that a strong presumption of a  violation
             of Article 3 arises. The burden of proof is on the  respondent
             government which could, however,  rebut  that  presumption  by
             demonstrating that there were factors  capable  of  adequately
             compensating for the scarce allocation of personal space".

         16.  There was evidence of severe overcrowding in Egyptian  prisons
         with which the judge did not engage.

         Decision

         17.  The original judge erred in law.  His decision is set aside.







         Directions

         18.  It was agreed between the parties that the case should  remain
         in the Upper Tribunal.

         19.  No challenge has been made to the judge's findings of fact  in
         relation to the blood feud.

         20.  At the next hearing findings  of  fact  will  be  made  as  to
         whether the appellant has already completed  his  military  service
         and whether, if he has not, he would be perceived as a draft evader
         on return to Egypt.  If he was so considered, it will  have  to  be
         decided what the consequences for him will be.

         21.  The parties are directed to adduce  all  evidence  upon  which
         they seek to rely seven days before the hearing  to  be  served  on
         both the Tribunal and the other party.

 2. Following the making of a  transfer  order,  I  conducted  the  resumed
    hearing at Bradford on 29 January 2019.

 3. At the resumed hearing, the appellant gave evidence in Arabic with  the
    assistance of an interpreter. He was cross-examined by  Mrs  Pettersen,
    who appeared for the Secretary of State. I heard  submissions  by  both
    representatives; Ms Capel of counsel  appeared  for  the  appellant.  I
    reserved my decision.

 4. The issues remaining to be determined  in  this  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal are limited. The First-tier Tribunal's  findings  regarding  a
    claimed blood feud were ordered  to  stand  by  Judge  Taylor.  I  have
    considered whether the  appellant  left  Egypt  legally  or  illegally,
    whether he would be prosecuted and imprisoned as a  draft  evader  upon
    return to Egypt and whether the conditions which he would encounter  on
    prison and in Egypt would constitute a breach of Article 3 ECHR.

 5. Dealing with the last question first, Mrs Pettersen told  me  that  the
    Secretary of State agreed that, if he is imprisoned for draft  evasion,
    the appellant will be subjected to conditions in breach  of  Article  3
    ECHR.

 6. Secondly, having considered the submissions very carefully  and  having
    also examined in detail the evidence upon which the  appellant  relies,
    including the  expert  evidence,  I  find  that,  whether  or  not  the
    appellant left Egypt legally will have  no  material  impact  upon  the
    likelihood that he will be perceived as a draft evader  and  prosecuted
    as such on return. Much of the cross-examination of  the  appellant  at
    the resumed hearing was taken up with a discussion of his passport. The
    appellant claims to have lost the original passport  en  route  to  the
    United Kingdom but he  had  retained  a  photocopy.  As  Mrs  Pettersen
    pointed out, the photocopy indicates that the  passport  remains  valid
    until 2020. This raises the question as to whether the appellant needed
    to leave Egypt illegally given that he had a valid passport at the time
    of his departure. The appellant claims that he had to apply for an exit
    visa and that this had been denied  by  the  military  authorities.  He
    therefore had to leave illegally.

 7. Whatever the truth, it would appear from the expert evidence  that  the
    crucial question as regards the likelihood that the appellant  will  be
    prosecuted on return is whether he had finished his studies rather than
    whether he left Egypt legally or illegally. The expert witness evidence
    indicates that the appellant will be perceived as a draft evader in any
    event. I do not consider that it is necessary,  therefore,  to  make  a
    formal finding as to whether the appellant left legally or illegally.

 8. The appellant relies upon an expert report prepared by Mr Karim  Medhat
    Ennarah of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, Cairo which  is
    dated 25 May 2018. The expert acknowledges that he had  not  previously
    examined graduation certificates issued by the  particular  educational
    division with which the appellant claims he undertook his  studies  and
    achieved graduation specialising in carpentry and furniture making.  He
    has, however, examined other graduation  certificates  and  is  of  the
    opinion that the appellant's certificate  is  authentic.  There  is  no
    evidence to suggest that the expert's assessment may be inaccurate  and
    I accept it. The expert went on to say [15];

         "The college certificate states that the appellant has  passed  his
         exams in the regular term (spring) 2014. According to his claim, he
         left Egypt through regular channels in June 2014  for  the  college
         certificate was even issued. As a graduate  of  a  technical  three
         year college and, unless he subsequently enrolled into a university
         or unless one of the exceptional circumstances qualify an  Egyptian
         mail between the ages of 18 - 34 exemption from service apply,  the
         appellant would  have  had  to  serve  at  least  18  months  after
         graduation as an army conscript... It  is  unlikely  the  appellant
         would have been able to leave Egypt through regular channels before
         2016 or even  2017  because  of  the  mandatory  draft  and  it  is
         impossible that he would have  managed  to  complete  his  military
         service before 2016 or even 2017. It is therefore very likely  that
         he has evaded military draft as stated in his claim"

 9. Mr Ennarah went on to conclude:

         "As the appellant is in his early 20s (within the age  of  military
         fitness) and following my assessment that is claimed to be a  draft
         evader is plausible (upon examination  of  the  documents  and  his
         testimony) it is not unlikely he will be detected at the checkpoint
         in Egypt. But as a draft evader returning to a deportation process,
         you will automatically  be  detected  port  of  entry,  taken  into
         tension and put on military trial unlikely sentenced to prison  and
         an extended term of military service as  further  punishment  after
         release in addition to serving his original literary service  term.
         This appears to be the most probable - if not the only  probable  -
         scenario for any draft evader returned to the  country  within  the
         age bracket of military fitness."

10. As I have stated above, I am satisfied that, if  the  appellant  is  at
    risk of prosecution as a draft evader, it is likely the risk will arise
    irrespective of how he left Egypt. Mr Ennarah  is  an  Egyptian  expert
    operating out of Cairo; I am not aware  that  he  has  provided  expert
    evidence in other appeals before the IAC nor am  I  able  to  check  is
    qualifications. However, I find his expert testimony to be  both  lucid
    and compelling. Ultimately, unless he has  obtained  special  exemption
    (of which there  is  no  evidence)  the  evidence  indicates  that  the
    appellant will be required  to  explain  why  he  has  evaded  military
    service at the very age when  he  would  have  been  expected  to  have
    completed it and instead travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  claim
    asylum. Only if the military authorities are satisfied that he has  yet
    to complete his college studies is he  likely  to  be  able  to  escape
    punishment which will necessarily involve him spending time  in  prison
    where he will be exposed to Article 3 ECHR ill-treatment. I am reminded
    that I need to consider the evidence by reference to  the  standard  of
    reasonable likelihood. Whilst I agree with Mrs Pettersen that  some  of
    the appellant's evidence left questions  begging,  his  claim  to  have
    completed his studies, evidenced  by  documentation  which  the  expert
    witness in Cairo considers to be authentic, would seem to be  accurate.
    I find as a fact that  the  appellant  has  sought  to  evade  military
    service by leaving Egypt, whether legally or illegally, that he remains
    eligible to carry out that service and that  it  is  reasonably  likely
    that he will face prosecution and imprisonment  upon  conviction  draft
    evasion. It follows from those findings  that  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to deny him  international  protection  should  be
    allowed.

Notice of Decision

11. This appellant's appeal  is  allowed  on  asylum  and  Article  3  ECHR
    grounds.


Signed   Date 2 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

