
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number :AA/03074/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field   House                                        Decision   &
                                             Reasons promulgated
On 11 November  2014                                      On  17  June  2015



                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                            Nirushan Thiventhiram
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:      Mr  W  Rees  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  L  G  Law
                       Chambers.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This is an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  Designated  First-tier
      Tribunal Manuell promulgated  on  11  September  2014  dismissing  the
      Appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  27
      April 2014 to remove  him  from  the  UK  consequent  to  refusing  an
      application for asylum.




Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 24 September 1990. He
      entered the UK on 18 August  2011  pursuant  to  a  Tier  4  (General)
      Student visa with leave valid until 31 May 2014. On 19 October 2012 he
      applied for asylum. The application was refused for reasons set out in
      a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 27  April  2014,  and  a
      removal decision was made on the same date in consequence.


   3. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


   4. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the Appellant's appeal  for  reasons
      set out in its determination.


   5. The Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
      Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge MacDonald on 1 October 2014.


Consideration

   6. It was a feature of the Appellant's case that he was detained  in  Sri
      Lanka between 23 June 2010 and 21 October 2010, during which  time  he
      was subjected to ill-treatment and torture. He claimed that  he  still
      bore the  physical  scars  of  his  experiences.  The  Respondent,  at
      paragraph 28 of  the  RFRL,  whilst  noting  that  the  Appellant  had
      provided photographs of his  scars,  also  noted  that  there  was  no
      supporting medical report. Overall, the Respondent accepted  the  fact
      of the scars but did not accept that they had been  sustained  in  the
      circumstances claimed.


   7. On appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant relied, in part, on
      a medical report prepared by Professor S Lingam dated  8  August  2014
      (based on an examination on 22 May 2014).


   8. Complaint is made in the grounds in support  of  the  application  for
      permission to appeal that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  according
      no weight to the medical report. Although other matters were raised in
      the Grounds, it was in  respect  of  the  medical  report  that  Judge
      MacDonald granted permission to appeal. In this context  I  also  note
      that Mr Rees acknowledged that the only 'real point' was in respect of
      the medical report.


   9. In his determination Judge Manuell  indicates  that  he  has  directed
      himself to applicable law (paragraphs 4-7), before setting out in some
      detail the  evidence  that  was  before  him  (paragraphs  8-18),  and
      summarising the parties' submissions  (paragraphs  19-20).  The  Judge
      then sets out at some length and in some detail his evaluation of  the
      evidence,  his  findings,  and  conclusions  (paragraphs  21-42).  The
      medical report was but one feature of this 'in the round' evaluation.


  10. The Judge expressly addresses the medical report at paragraphs 27  and
      30. However, it must be borne in mind that his  observations  in  this
      regard are  only  one  factor  in  an  overall  consideration  of  the
      Appellant's  narrative  account,  testimony,  and   other   supporting
      evidence. Accordingly, paragraph 27 commences with an  observation  in
      respect  of  the  Appellant's   testimony,   before   turning   to   a
      consideration  of  the   supporting   medical   evidence.   Similarly,
      paragraphs 28 and 29 make further comment and observation  in  respect
      of the Appellant's account  of  having  been  detained  and  tortured,
      before returning to the specifics of the medical report  at  paragraph
      30.


  11. Bearing in mind, then, that they are not  to  be  read  in  isolation,
      nonetheless paragraphs 27 and 30 are in the following terms:

"27. The Appellant's claim that he had  been  tortured  by  the  Sri  Lankan
      authorities made little sense. Professor Lingam in his  report  states
      that the scars he noted were "diagnostic" of the causes attributed  by
      the Appellant, but obviously the report could do no more than rule out
      accidental causes. The report could  not  identify  the  perpetrators.
      Professor Lingam stated that the scars were "certainly over two  years
      in age" but he was in the tribunal's  view  unable  to  find  anything
      better than his opinion that the scars  were  consistent  with  having
      been caused "circa four years ago". He identified no source  for  that
      opinion other than what the Appellant had told him."

"30. Strangely, when asked at his asylum interview about  medical  attention
      for his injuries... the Appellant's response was vague. He  said  that
      he had seen a GP "within [the] last two months", i.e., of  his  asylum
      interview. The Appellant was unable to say how and when and by whom he
      had been treated in Sri Lanka, or how otherwise he had been helped  to
      recover from what [on] his account was a terrifying ordeal.  Professor
      Lingam records no enquiry  on  his  part  in  his  report  on  medical
      treatment  obtained  by  the  appellant  and  its  effectiveness.  The
      tribunal gives no weight to the medical report, which is superficial."


  12. I pause to note that it does seem  to  me  to  be  a  matter  of  some
      significance that no apparent enquiry was made  of  the  Appellant  by
      Professor Lingam as to any treatment he  had  received  following  his
      release from detention: even if such an enquiry was made,  the  report
      is silent on the matter. Necessarily, the nature of any treatment  may
      be relevant to the healing of injuries, which in turn may be  relevant
      both to the appearance and, more particularly  in  this  context,  the
      ageing of any scars. Indeed, the report itself is overt on the  point:
      "In diagnosing and dating the age of a cigarette burn, one has  to  be
      aware that the distinction  between  a  second  degree  burn  possibly
      caused accidentally and a third  degree  burn  (with  subsequent  scar
      formation) can only be made on the basis of the healing process" (page
      6 of the report). The omission of any enquiry, therefore, seems to  me
      effectively to disregard relevant matters that should properly  inform
      the medical opinion. Depending upon facts, any such omission might not
      only undermine the value of any report  on  the  specific  issue,  but
      might also devalue the opinion of the particular expert more generally
      as not having had a due and proper regard to all relevant matters.  In
      the context of this particular case it seems  to  me  plain  that  the
      Judge had it in mind that the omission of such an enquiry or reference
      to  post-injury  treatment  justified  characterising  the  report  as
      'superficial'.


  13. Be that as it may, Mr Duffy acknowledged in the course of  submissions
      that  neither  such  a  circumstance  nor   anything   else   in   the
      Determination  warranted  a  conclusion  that  'no  weight'  could  be
      accorded  to  the  medical  report.  The  report  was  not,  he  said,
      completely without value -  even  if  that  value  was  limited  to  a
      'superficial' confirmation of the existence of scars  consistent  with
      the account of how they had been inflicted. However, Mr Duffy urged me
      not merely to focus on the words at the end of paragraph  30,  but  to
      consider the Judge's other observations and comments in respect of the
      report: the Judge have had regard  to  the  report,  and  had  reached
      findings and conclusions in the appeal that were open  to  him  on  an
      overall 'in the round' evaluation.


  14. I accept Mr Duffy's submission. This is not  a  case  where  it  could
      reasonably be said that the Judge did not have regard to  the  report:
      he clearly considered its contents and commented upon  those  contents
      in the passages set out above. There is nothing in those comments that
      it was not reasonably open to the Judge to state. It is clear that the
      Judge considered that there was nothing of sufficient substance in the
      report that in  effect  remedied  those  aspects  of  the  Appellant's
      account and testimony that the Judge found undermined the  credibility
      of his account.


  15. Even if it were otherwise, the Appellant would not have  succeeded  on
      his appeal. The Judge considers matters in the alternative - including
      in the event that he were to be wrong in respect  of  the  Appellant's
      claimed detention. In this context it is to be noted that in terms  of
      claiming current risk factors in the event of a return  to  Sri  Lanka
      the Appellant  was  primarily  concerned  to  establish  that  he  had
      previously been detained - rather than specifically that he  had  been
      tortured. Given that the background evidence demonstrates that  during
      the relevant period in Sri Lanka it was reasonably likely that a Tamil
      detainee would have been subjected to  ill-treatment  and/or  torture,
      necessarily therefore the primary significance of the medical evidence
      was the extent to which it corroborated the Appellant's claim to  have
      been detained via its possible corroboration of  his  ill-treatment  /
      torture. Although he rejected  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been
      detained, in the alternative the Judge had regard to the risk  to  the
      Appellant in the event that he had been detained - but was  still  not
      satisfied that he would be at risk.


  16. Paragraph 39  provides  a  clear  and  unambiguous  rejection  of  the
      Appellant's claim in all material respects. Below I  have  underscored
      the passage in which the Judge considers the risk in  the  event  that
      the Appellant had been detained. There is nothing in this  alternative
      assessment  that  has  been  challenged  in  the  grounds  or  in  the
      submissions of Mr Rees.

"It would be possible to examine the Appellant's claims further but  in  the
      tribunal's view his  credibility  when  assessed  in  the  round  with
      anxious scrutiny is so manifestly deficient that it is unnecessary  to
      do so. The Tribunal finds that the Appellant is a  Sri  Lankan  Tamil,
      originally from the north. He is not  an  LTTE  member.  The  tribunal
      rejects his evidence that his father was prominent  in  the  LTTE  and
      that the Appellant's brother is in prison in Sri Lanka because of  his
      LTTE activities. The Appellant has never been charged with any offence
      in Sri Lanka, on his own account. The  Appellant  was  issued  with  a
      valid Sri Lankan passport through the usual channels. His behaviour on
      arrival in the United Kingdom or subsequently was not that of a person
      fleeing in fear of persecution. Even if (which is  not  accepted)  the
      Tribunal were wrong about events in 2010 when the Appellant claims  to
      have been detained following denunciation by an informer, any  records
      of the Appellant  which  are  accessible  will  show  that  there  was
      insufficient evidence to charge him with  any  terrorist  offence,  as
      shown by his unhindered departure from Sri Lanka. That falls short  of
      showing  that  he  will  face  ill-treatment  reaching  the  level  of
      persecution  for  any  Refugee  Convention  reason  on   return.   The
      Appellant's time in London has all been post  the  LTTE's  defeat  and
      will not be of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities who monitor such
      activity. The Appellant claimed no continuing interest in the LTTE  or
      in Tamil secession,  indeed  no  political  inclination  at  all.  The
      Appellant's scars do not show that he was ever on active  service  and
      are not visible in normal clothing."


  17. In  all  such  circumstances,  and  notwithstanding  the  Respondent's
      acceptance that the medical report could not properly be characterised
      as being of no value to the Appellant's case, I find no material error
      of law in the approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

  18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error of
      law, and accordingly the decision stands.


  19. The appeal is dismissed.


  20. No anonymity order is sought or made.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     12 June 2015
