
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03273/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 January 2016                   |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         LORRAINE RUMBIDZAI MUCHEMWA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Manning (counsel) instructed by French &
                    Company, solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge A M S Green,  promulgated  on  20  May
2015, which allowed the Appellant's appeal on  asylum  and  article  8  ECHR
grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 23 September  1968  and  is  a  national  of
Zimbabwe. The appellant entered the UK in August 2000. On 22 April 2002  the
appellant applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a  student.  The
respondent granted that application and subsequently granted  further  leave
to remain until 7 March 2006. On 8 November 2005 the appellant  applied  for
indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.   The  respondent  refused  that
application on 19 May 2006. On  29  September  2009  the  appellant  claimed
asylum. The respondent refused the appellant's  application  on  22  October
2009. The appellant unsuccessfully appealed that refusal of asylum, and  her
appeal rights became exhausted on 15 March 2010.

4.    On 19 January 2011 the appellant lodged further representations  which
were  rejected  by  the  respondent.  The  appellant  again  lodged  further
representations and, on 30 November  2012,  the  respondent  rejected  those
further representations. The appellant  did  not  have  a  right  of  appeal
against either rejections of further representations.

5.    The appellant lodged representations for a third time  of  9  December
2014. The respondent rejected those further representations on  11  February
2015, and on that occasion served the appellant with a decision  giving  her
a right of appeal.

The Judge's Decision

6.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge A M S Green ("the Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

7.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 10 June 2015  Judge  Fisher  gave
permission to appeal stating
    "2.    The grounds seeking permission assert that the  Judge  erred  in
    law by failing to  follow  the  country  guidance  in  CM  (EM  country
    guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC)
    3.     In his decision the Judge  attached  considerable  weight  to  a
    country experts report from Dr Laurel Birch  de  Aguilar.  In  CM,  the
    tribunal has the  advantage  of  hearing  evidence  from  a  number  of
    witnesses. It is arguable that the Judge erred in  law,  on  the  basis
    that the material before him did not justify  his  departure  from  the
    existing country guidance"

The Hearing

8.    Ms Johnstone, for the respondent, moved the  grounds  of  appeal,  and
referred me to CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013]  UKUT
00059 (IAC).  She told me that there was no adequate reason  for  the  judge
to prefer the expert  report  from  Dr  Birch  to  the  established  country
guidance. Ms Johnstone was critical of the content  of  Dr  Birch's  report,
arguing that although Dr Birch responded directly to the questions  she  was
asked, her focus was entirely on risk in Harare, and her  answers  proceeded
on the erroneous basis that the appellant had attended school in Harare.  Ms
Johnstone told me that the Judge's findings at [23] were unsafe, and  argued
that there was inadequate reason  for  the  Judge  to  depart  from  country
guidance. Ms Johnstone argued that the Judge has not  adequately  considered
the history of applications made by the appellant and makes no reference  to
the earlier decision refusing the appellant's original claim for  asylum  on
18 January 2010 (AA/13798/2009). Ms  Johnstone  said  that  the  appellant's
article 8 ECHR claim should have been considered in terms of  paragraph  276
ADE of the rules, and that the question which should  have  been  asked  was
whether or not there were very significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  in
Zimbabwe; that was not the test applied by the Judge. Ms Johnstone asked  me
to find that the decision is tainted by a material error of law, to set  the
decision aside, and then to remake the decision in accordance  with  country
guidance case law.

9     (a)   Ms Manning, for the appellant, told me that  the  decision  does
not contain any errors of law, material or otherwise. She adopted the  terms
of the skeleton argument produced for  this  appeal,  and  argued  that  the
focus is on Harare, because it is  to  there  rather  than  the  appellant's
hometown (Makoni) to which the appellant will be returned.  She  invited  me
to consider the terms of the expert report & to find that  the  expert  does
not suggest that the appellant went to  school  in  Harare,  but  does  take
account of the appellant's years at  university  there  and  her  employment
there. She told me that the only conclusion that  can  be  reached  is  that
there are many people in Harare who know the appellant.  The  appellant  has
been in the UK for 15 years, so that (it was argued) she will inevitably  be
asked questions.

    (b)    Ms Manning took me to the decision and invited me  to  read  the
decision as a whole. She told me that in the decision  the  Judge  sets  out
very carefully why he preferred the expert's report to the existing  country
guidance. She told me that Dr Birch  wrote  a  carefully  considered  report
based on her experience and referred me to Dr Birch's CV. She told  me  that
Dr Birch's report was not an exercise in speculation, but  was  an  accurate
reflection of the situation in Zimbabwe.

    (c)    Mrs Manning argues that the appellant's leg injury (which causes
significant mobility problems) is a factor which must be taken  account  of,
& which creates a significant disadvantage  to  the  appellant.  She  argued
that it is not possible for the appellant to  find  employment  in  Zimbabwe
and that all of these were factors which the  Judge  took  into  account  in
finding that it would be unduly harsh the appellant to return  to  Zimbabwe.
She told me that all of the medical evidence was accepted by the  Judge  and
not challenged by the respondent. She told me that the decision is one  that
has been carefully made on the specific facts of this case.   She  urged  me
to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

10.   In R and Others v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982  the  Court  of  Appeal
endorsed Practice Direction 18.4 which states that any failure to  follow  a
clear, apparently applicable country guidance case or to show  why  it  does
not apply to the case in question is likely to be regarded as a  ground  for
review or appeal on a point of law.   The  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  it
represented a failure to take a material matter into account.

11.   Country guidance is a starting point from which the Judge is  entitled
to depart if the evidence the parties choose to put forward  justifies  such
departure. Absent that, like cases should be treated alike, informed by  the
country guidance, as is  made  clear  by  the  Senior  President's  Practice
Direction:
    "12.2  A reported determination of the Tribunal, the  AIT  or  the  IAT
    bearing the letters "CG" shall be treated as an  authoritative  finding
    on the country guidance issue identified in  the  determination,  based
    upon the evidence before the members of the Tribunal, the  AIT  or  the
    IAT that determine  the  appeal.  As  a  result,  unless  it  has  been
    expressly superseded or replaced by any later "CG" determination, or is
    inconsistent with other authority that is binding on the Tribunal, such
    a country guidance case is authoritative in any subsequent  appeal,  so
    far as that appeal:-
    (a) relates to the country guidance issue in question; and
    (b) depends upon the same or similar evidence.
    12.3   ...
    12.4   Because of the principle that like cases should  be  treated  in
    like manner, any failure  to  follow  a  clear,  apparently  applicable
    country guidance case or to show why it does not apply to the  case  in
    question is likely to be regarded as grounds for appeal on a  point  of
    law."

12.   The respondent's position is that the country guidance case of  CM  is
cast in stone, but that  is  an  incorrect  interpretation  of  the  country
guidance system and the practice direction quoted above.

13.   At [14] &  [15]  the  Judge  and  not  only  makes  reference  to  the
dismissal  of  the  appellant's  earlier  claim  claimant  2010,  he  quotes
directly from it. At [16] he  correctly  takes  that  determination  as  his
starting point. The respondent's criticism that the guidance set out in  the
case of Devaseelan has not been followed is entirely without merit.

14.   At [18] the Judge quite clearly considers the case of CM. At  [18(ii)]
the Judge sets out the appellant's undisputed profile as  a  person  without
Zanu PF connections returning to a rural area of Zimbabwe after 15 years  in
the UK.

15.   At [20] the judge observed that "CM is authority for  the  proposition
that it would be safe for the appellant to return to Harare or  Bulawayo  as
she would be unlikely to face a loyalty test. However  Dr  Birch  takes  the
opposite view ..." He then sets out Dr Birch's opposite  view.  At  [21]  he
acknowledges that the contrast between CM and Dr Birch must be resolved  and
quotes [238] of CM taking the guidance that if  the  conditions  deteriorate
after the promulgation of the country guidance case a  First-tier  Judge  is
able to act on the fresh evidence.

16.   What the Judge has done in this case is take guidance from the  extant
country guidance case of CM, and then consider an expert report which  deals
specifically with the facts and circumstances applicable to this  individual
appellant. The Judge has flawlessly followed the guidance at  [238]  of  CM.
He has considered the risk categories set out in the case  of  CM  and  then
found that country guidance "... Is not a  straitjacket".  The  Judge  found
that the expert report of Dr Birch is a report which can be relied  on,  and
he factored Dr Birch's conclusions into  his  own  assessment  of  potential
risk to the appellant on return. In doing so he  correctly  reminds  himself
of both the burden and standard of proof.

17.   If the Judge had simply ignored the expert report,  or  if  the  Judge
had simply found that  the  expert  report  was  irrelevant  and  should  be
discarded because it didn't fit squarely into the  ratio  of  CM,  then  the
case  would  be  tainted  by  material  error  of  law.  Instead  the  Judge
considered country guidance  and  considered  the  facts  and  circumstances
applicable  to  the  appellant  and  then  set  out   cogent   reasons   for
distinguishing this individual appellant's case  from  the  risk  categories
set out in CM. The conclusion might surprise the respondent,  but  there  is
nothing wrong with the Judge's fact finding exercise and  he  has  correctly
considered country guidance before reaching this conclusion.

18.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

19.   I heard submissions from Ms Johnstone in relation to  whether  or  not
the correct  test  was  applied  in  terms  of  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
immigration rules. Submissions were also made in relation to whether or  not
the correct approach  was  taken  to  the  medical  evidence  and  how  that
evidence engages article 3 ECHR. These are entirely new matters about  which
the appellant was not given fair notice. Permission  to  appeal  was  sought
solely on the question of the conflict between the expert's report  and  the
country guidance case. In any  event  at  [29]  the  Judge  finds  that  the
medical evidence is not sufficient  to  engage  article  3  ECHR.  I  cannot
competently consider the  submissions  in  relation  to  paragraph  276  ADE
because permission has not been sought to appeal on the ground.

20.   At [30] the Judge finds that the appellant succeeds on asylum  grounds
and humanitarian protection grounds. Although no submissions  were  made  in
relation to those findings, it is pars judicis to  collect  obvious  errors.
Humanitarian  protection  can  only  competently   be   considered   as   an
alternative to a grant of asylum. As asylum  was  granted,  the  appellant's
claim on humanitarian protection grounds must be refused.

21.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

22.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

23.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 22 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
