
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03589/2013
                                                               AA/03590/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 6th December 2013                          |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SIA
                                     NI
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs Brakaj of Iris Law Firm (Gateshead).
For the Respondent: Mrs Rackstraw - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. Following a hearing at North Shields on 13th  August  2013  it  was
        found First-tier Tribunal Judge Trotter had erred  in  law  in  his
        determinations promulgated on the 22nd  May  2013  which  were  set
        aside. There are a number of preserved findings which can be  found
        in paragraphs 23 to 28 of the determination of NI and paragraphs 18
        to 21 of that relating to SIA. I  have  considered  in  detail  the
        evidence provided and further submissions made by the advocates.



Discussion



     2. Guidance on the approach to  be  adopted  in  a  case  involving  a
        claimant who claims to be at risk as  a  result  of  following  his
        faith as an Ahmadi is provided by  MN and others (Ahmadis - country
        conditions - risk) Pakistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00389(IAC)  and,  in
        relation to the weight to be given to evidence from  the  Ahmadiyya
        Association, in AB (Ahmadiyya  Association  UK:  letters)  Pakistan
        [2013] UKUT 00511 (IAC) it which it was held  that  in  deciding  a
        claim to international protection based on a person's Ahmadi  faith
        where credibility was in issue, the more that  a  letter  from  the
        Ahmadiyya Association UK contained specific information as  to  the
        claimant's activities in the United Kingdom, the  more  likely  the
        letter was to be given weight.


     3. There is ample evidence from the  Association  to  corroborate  the
        activities of the Appellants both in Pakistan and in the UK.


     4. It is not claimed that all Ahmadi are at risk in Pakistan  or  that
        they are not able to follow their faith if  they  wish  to  do  so,
        provided they do so discreetly.  The  difficulties  they  face  are
        summarised in the case law and  paragraph  23  of  Judge  Trotter's
        determination for NI in  which  he  refers  to  the  way  in  which
        legislation in Pakistan restricts the way in which the  Ahmadi  are
        able to openly practice  their  faith.  They  are  prohibited  from
        preaching  and  proselytising   and   severely   discouraged   from
        manifesting  their  beliefs  even  by  open  discussion.  Sanctions
        against breaches include the issue of a FIR, sometimes coupled with
        detention, and prosecution for blasphemy which can carry the  death
        penalty.


     5. It is a preserved finding that prior to coming to the UK NI did not
        openly proselytise in Pakistan.  There is  no  adverse  credibility
        finding in relation to the claim to have provided  funding  to  the
        Ahmadi organisation and to have worked in a youth  organisation  or
        that one of his uncles is a prominent  Ahmadi.  It  is  noted  that
        despite this NI did not claim to have received any threats [25].


     6. Judge Trotter found on the evidence that NI undertook activities at
        a low level, did not openly pursue his faith and did not  have  the
        profile of a person who faced a real risk of persecution on return.
        I note the continuation of activities in the UK,  including  public
        demonstrations of his support for his faith,  as  recorded  in  the
        evidence. These activities are not disputed. Had this been the  end
        of the assessment there would have  been  no  legal  error  in  the
        conclusions of Judge Trotter for, as recognised in MN, Ahmadis  who
        are not able to show that they practiced  their  faith  at  all  in
        Pakistan or that they did so on anything other than the  restricted
        basis, are in general unlikely  to  be  able  to  show  that  their
        genuine intentions or wishes are to  practice  and  manifest  their
        faith openly on return. Judge Trotter, however, went on to  make  a
        further finding in paragraph 25 in which he found  in  relation  to
        NI:


              "He claims to have converted two  individuals  to  the  Ahmadi
   sect  and  that            he  no  longer  carried  out   preaching   and
   proselytizing work from  2005               because  of  threats  to  the
   community"


     7. Judge Trotter noted the claim NI's uncle had been  the  subject  of
        threats of violence and had shots fired at him. Judge Trotter  also
        recognised that NI is genuinely fearful of return  to  Pakistan  in
        the honest belief that by reason of a  combination  of  his  Ahmadi
        faith and his association with his father, grandfather and uncle he
        will be at risk [26].


     8. It is the nature of the conduct on return  that  creates  the  real
        risk and in relation to such behaviour it was found in MN that "the
        burden is on the claimant to demonstrate that any intention or wish
        to practice and manifest aspects of the faith openly that  are  not
        permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) is genuinely held and of
        particular importance to  the  claimant  to  preserve  his  or  her
        religious identity.  The decision maker needs to evaluate all  the
        evidence. Behaviour since arrival in the UK may also be relevant.
        If the claimant discharges this burden he is likely to be  in  need
        of protection". It is therefore necessary to consider the reasons a
        person who appears to have been active and to have converted others
        and to have openly declared his faith and who has acted  to  inform
        others of his faith in the UK did not do so as  openly  after  2005
        and is not prepared to do so on return. The answer is  provided  by
        the country information and the preserved finding of Judge  Trotter
        that it is as a result of threats  to  the  community.  This  is  a
        finding that it  is  the  fear  of  persecution  arising  from  his
        religious identity that is the reason for NI's behavior.


     9. There was a need in this case to consider the guidance provided  by
        the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
        Department [2010] UKSC 31.  The principles set out by the Court  in
        that case apply to any person who  has  religious  beliefs  and  is
        obliged to conceal them in order to avoid the persecution  that  he
        would suffer if he were to reveal them.  The right  to  freedom  of
        thought, opinion and expression protects non-believers as  well  as
        believers and extends to the freedom not to hold and not to have to
        express opinions. If the reasons a person changed  his  pattern  of
        behaviour  in  relation  to  his  or  her  belief  was   to   avoid
        persecution, in this case as  a  result  of  a  fear  arising  from
        threats made to the community, and  he  will  not  return  to  such
        conduct as a result of such an ongoing fear, it must  be  the  case
        that he or she is entitled to succeed as a result of  the  findings
        in HJ (Iran).


    10. In relation to SIA, he is the older of the two  appellants,  having
        been born in 1933. His case is based upon a claim that some  months
        before he left to come to the UK he had been accosted by an unknown
        person who threatened him if he did not leave the Ahmadi faith  and
        convert to Islam. In relation  to  the  core  of  his  claim  Judge
        Trotter was satisfied SIA is an Ahmadi and the brother of the local
        Amir and that  he  has  been  active  until  his  latter  years  in
        "propagating the Ahmadi faith" mostly by speaking to  people  on  a
        one to one basis. He has not claimed  to  convert  anyone.  In  his
        determination for SIA promulgated on 22nd May  2013  Judge  Trotter
        found:


              19. I think it highly likely that this Appellant was  afforded
   a threat by a                single individual  in  the  manner  that  he
   claims.  I note that there has                been no "follow up" to  the
   threat, I am content even on the lower                 standard of  proof
   to accept that this was little other than an  incident                 of
   hooliganism (although it took place  I  am  satisfied),  there  has  been
     no result thereafter, this Appellant cannot be a high  profile  Ahmadi,
          he has no profile in the community, he lives with a small group of
                  Ahmadis, he has been safe to do so  over  many  years  and
   even                    though I accept that he is related to the Amir of
   the local Ahmadi                 community I cannot find  he  is  at  any
   risk either by  way  of  his                      relationship  with  his
   brother nor by way of threats that were                      afforded  to
   him.


              20. To the extent that the Appellant claims to  have  preached
   the faith  it                  seems  to  me  he  has  only  done  so  by
   chattering in the barber's shop or                 the other shops  which
   he visits, none of this has caused him any                   problems  in
   the   past,   under   these   circumstances,    therefore,    I    cannot
   find that either by reason of his  Ahmadi  faith  or  by  reason  of  his
     relationship to the local Amir or by reason of his talking in the local
                  shops that he visits or even by the one  confrontation  to
   which he                refers he is at risk of persecutory treatment.


              21. It follows, therefore, that in my view this appeal must be
   dismissed.                    I  dismiss  it   with   some   considerable
   reluctance since this Appellant                struck  me  as  an  honest
   witness genuinely afraid of  the  situation  in                 which  he
   finds  himself   although   that   genuine   fear   is,   in   my   view,
   misplaced.


    11. In relation to SIA I have been provided  with  a  letter  from  the
        Associated dated 21st November 2013 which refers to this activities
        in the UK as being:


              i.  Attending congregational prayers, Friday  prayers/sermons,
   annual                  convention of the community, annual gathering  of
   Majlis                           Ansarullah ( The group of  people   over
   40 years) an branch' general                  meetings;


              ii.  Participating  in  preaching  programmes  of  the  branch
   including                    Quran Exhibition, peace conference,  Tabligh
   training  classes,  one   to                    one   Tabligh   sittings,
   question/answer sessions with non-Ahmadi               friends.


    12. In relation to  his  activities  in  Pakistan  a  letter  from  the
        Association dated 15th April 2013 confirms  he,  his  parents,  and
        family are very well known to the Community but this  was  included
        in the original appeal bundle at pages 20 - 21 and  was  considered
        by Judge Trotter,


    13. The correspondence from the Association does not  support  a  claim
        have had involvement in activities in Pakistan such as to create  a
        real risk on return or of a person who  wished  to  undertake  such
        activities based upon his sur place undertakings.  The evidence  is
        suggestive of a person who  falls  within  the  category  of  those
        adherents to the faith who practice their  faith  on  a  restricted
        basis either in private or in  the  community  with  other  Ahmadis
        without  infringing  domestic  law.   There  is  evidence  of  work
        obligations constraining SIA in the past from  activities  and  the
        effect  of  old  age  restricting  his  mobility  now.   There   is
        insufficient evidence or preserved findings  of  Judge  Trotter  to
        show this appellant has modified his behavior as a result of a fear
        of persecution, unlike in the case of NI.  It is a case of any such
        modification being as a result of the fact it suited  his  personal
        circumstances and no more.


    14. Mrs. Brakaj referred to the positive credibility  finding  made  in
        relation to SIA and whist this is an element in his favor I do  not
        find he has substantiated his claim to have  a  profile  that  will
        expose him to a credible real risk on return or that  it  has  been
        shown SAI is entitled to succeed on  the  basis  of  an  HJ  (Iran)
        argument. No basis for finding he is entitled to any form of  leave
        has been established on the facts.


    15. In light of the preserved findings, the acceptance NI is a  genuine
        Ahmadi who has practiced his faith in contravention of the laws  of
        Pakistan prior to 2005, the finding  he  changed  their  method  of
        expressing/manifesting their beliefs after this date as a result of
        threats made by third parties, the evidence of open expressions  of
        his faith since arriving in the UK, the letters from the  Ahmadiyya
        Muslim Association UK in the file, the current  country  conditions
        and case law, I find the appellant NI has discharged the burden  of
        proof upon him to the lower standard applicable to this  appeal  to
        show he is entitled to be recognised as refugees on  the  basis  of
        there being a credible  real  risk  of  persecution  on  return  to
        Pakistan if he manifests his faith openly, which it is accepted  he
        would do but for the risk of persecution. His wife  and  child  are
        dependants upon his claim and are entitled to a grant of protection
        in line with NI.


Decision

    16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decisions as
        follows. This appeal of NI is allowed. The appeal of SAI is
        dismissed.










   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I
        continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27th January 2014












