



The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03463/2014
     AA/03464/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 January 2015                           |On 4 February 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    N. F.
                                    M. N.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by Luqmani Thompson
                    & Partners, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellants are mother and daughter, and citizens  of  Afghanistan.
      The Appellants sought, and were refused entry clearance on 3  February
      2012 as dependent parent and dependent sibling respectively [ApB pB100-
      ]. The relatives they sought to join were two adult sons of the  First
      Appellant, settled in the UK, who  were  said  to  be  supporting  the
      Appellants financially.  These  sponsors  were  not  as  a  result  of
      successful claims to asylum, and it is accepted that  their  passports
      record that both have separately, and recently, travelled  by  air  to
      and from Afghanistan.
   2. The appeals of the Appellants against the refusal of  entry  clearance
      to them were dismissed by  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  in  a  Decision
      promulgated by Judge Nightingale on 20 September 2012 [ApB pB103-] The
      Appellants each had of  course  produced  their  own  lawfully  issued
      Afghan  passports  when  they  made  those  applications   for   entry
      clearance.
   3. Following exhaustion of their appeal rights the Appellants entered the
      UK illegally, separately, by air on 18  May  2013  and  21  June  2013
      respectively. Each claimed asylum upon arrival and failed  to  produce
      the travel documents used to board the flights they had used, claiming
      to have destroyed them.
   4. The Appellants' case was that as women who were without  male  support
      in Afghanistan they each faced a general risk of harm from  non  state
      agents in the event of a return  to  Afghanistan,  against  which  the
      authorities would be unable or unwilling to provide protection.  As  a
      specific risk of harm they said they each faced  threats  of  violence
      from the circle of a man who had expressed the intention of taking the
      Second Appellant as his wife against  her  will;  so  that  she  faced
      abduction and rape, and her mother faced  violence  if  she  tried  to
      prevent that.
   5. The asylum claims were refused on 2 May 2014, when the Respondent made
      removal decisions to Afghanistan in relation  to  both  women  on  the
      basis that they were illegal entrants. The Appellants' appeals against
      those removal decisions were heard and dismissed by Judge SJ Clarke in
      a Decision he promulgated on 19 October 2014.
   6. In the course of that Determination the Judge made a series of adverse
      findings to the effect that elements of the Appellants' accounts  were
      implausible,  ultimately  rejecting  as  incredible  the   Appellants'
      account of their experiences.
   7. First Tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted the  Appellants  permission  to
      appeal that decision on 9 December 2014 in relation to  the  challenge
      advanced to the Judge's approach to the Article 8  appeals.  Since  it
      was not entirely clear from that decision whether he had  granted,  or
      had refused, permission  to  appeal  in  relation  to  the  challenges
      advanced to the Judge's approach to the asylum and Article 3 appeals -
      although his decision could be read as  a  refusal  -  the  Appellants
      renewed their applications for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal. On 21  January  2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker  granted
      permission on all of the grounds.
   8. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice on  18  December  2014,  stating
      that she opposed the appeal on the basis there was no error of law  in
      the Judge's approach  to  the  evidence,  but  could  say  nothing  of
      substance because she had mislaid her files. Neither party applied for
      permission to adduce further evidence.
   9. Thus the matter comes before me.








   The documents relied upon by the Appellants as corroboration


  10. It is common ground before me that the Respondent  placed  before  the
      First Tier Tribunal a bundle that was unlikely  to  assist  the  Judge
      hearing the appeals. Such pagination as exists in that  bundle  (which
      is neither complete nor sequential) suggests very  strongly  that  the
      bundle has been the victim  of  some  mishap  in  the  course  of  its
      compilation, and that a number of the documents listed in the index to
      it, have in fact been omitted from it.
  11. Marked as pages 76 and 78 appear the  translations  of  two  documents
      that the Appellants relied upon (77 and 79 are copies of the  original
      photocopies relied on). They bear the dates of 13 October 2012 and  14
      October 2012 respectively, and they are said to have  been  issued  to
      one of the sons of the First Appellant as a result of his approach  in
      person to the Afghan authorities for assistance in gaining some  state
      protection for his sister, the Second Appellant, against the  unwanted
      advances of her  suitor  and  the  violence  his  circle  had  already
      demonstrated towards both of  the  Appellants.  These  documents  were
      produced to the Respondent in support of the original  asylum  claims.
      They were relied upon before Judge Clarke as corroborative evidence of
      the account given by the Second Appellant  and  her  brother  in  oral
      evidence.
  12. Put simply Judge Clarke made no reference to the existence or  content
      of these documents in the course of  the  reasoning  offered  for  the
      rejection of the evidence of the Second Appellant and her  brother  as
      untrue. No specific findings were made in relation to the weight  that
      could be attached to their existence or content.  Indeed  the  parties
      are agreed before me that the only reference to them in  the  Decision
      is to be found in the bald statement at paragraph 5;  "The  Appellants
      provided original petitions to  the  Respondent."  Leaving  aside  the
      criticism that this description may not even properly represent  their
      nature and content, I am satisfied that  on  a  fair  reading  of  the
      Decision as a whole the impression is  given  that  Judge  Clarke  has
      otherwise simply overlooked their nature and content.
  13. I accept as Ouseley J did in CJ (on the application of  R)  v  Cardiff
      County Council [2011] EWHC 23,  the  importance  of  the  approach  in
      Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm AR  318.  Documentary  evidence  along
      with its provenance needs to be  weighed  in  the  light  of  all  the
      evidence in the case. Documentary evidence does not carry  with  it  a
      presumption of authenticity, which specific  evidence  must  disprove,
      failing which its content must be accepted. What is  however  required
      is its appraisal in the  light  of  the  evidence  about  its  nature,
      provenance, timing and background evidence and in the light of all the
      other evidence in the case, especially that  given  by  the  claimant.
      That simply did not occur in the course of these appeals.
  14. In my judgement Judge Clarke ought to have taken the findings of  fact
      made by Judge Nightingale in September 2012  as  his  starting  point.
      Those findings dealt with the circumstances in  which  the  Appellants
      were living in Kabul at the date of refusal on 3  February  2012,  and
      indeed the  decision  also  records  the  evidence  presented  to  the
      Tribunal about the circumstances at the date of hearing.
  15. Judge Clarke  ought  to  have  considered  those  findings,  and  that
      evidence, in the light of the evidence  that  he  was  presented  with
      concerning the deterioration in the First Appellant's health, and, the
      evidence concerning the deterioration in the Appellants' safety within
      Kabul; SSHD v D (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 702. There were plainly two limbs
      to the Appellants' case before Judge Clarke, in relation to  the  risk
      of harm that they were said to face in the event of return  to  Kabul;
      the general risk as women who were without the support of male  family
      members living in Afghanistan, and the specific as women who  faced  a
      risk of harm from the circle of a man who had expressed the desire  to
      take the Second Appellant as his wife against her will. Both needed to
      be addressed.
  16. Whilst I am satisfied that it would have been open to Judge Clarke  to
      have decided to place little weight upon the nature and content of the
      two documents [pp76 & 78], if that had been his  starting  point,  and
      thus if there had been an analysis of  the  evidence  given  to  Judge
      Nightingale by the brother of the Second Appellant at the  hearing  in
      September 2012, it would be quite wrong of me to  simply  assume  that
      this would necessarily have been the course taken. Equally, whilst the
      evidence would appear to have allowed the Tribunal  to  find  that  in
      truth the Appellants faced no risk of harm upon return either  because
      they were not in fact living in Kabul without  male  support,  or  for
      some other reason, it would be quite wrong of me to simply assume that
      this would necessarily have been the course taken.
  17. I am satisfied that Judge Clarke's approach to the evidence  was  such
      as to render the Decision unsafe, because material  evidence  was  not
      taken into account. I have in these circumstances  considered  whether
      or not to remit the appeal to the First Tier Tribunal  for  it  to  be
      reheard, as requested by the Appellants. In the circumstances  of  the
      appeal I am satisfied that this is the correct approach, and I note Ms
      Kenny does not seek to suggest  otherwise  given  my  decision  above,
      which I reached during the course of argument. In circumstances  where
      it would appear that the  relevant  evidence  has  not  properly  been
      considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law
      has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his  case  to
      be properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of
      the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover  the  extent  of
      the judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard  to  the
      over-riding objective, it is appropriate that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the  Practice
      Statement of 25 September 2012.
  18. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of  the  parties  I
      make the following directions;
           i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and the  appeal  is
              remitted to the First Tier Tribunal. The appeal is not to  be
              listed before Judge SJ Clarke. The appeal is to be listed  at
              Taylor House on the first available  date  allowing  3  hours
              with a Dari interpreter booked for that hearing.
          ii) The Anonymity Direction previously made  by  the  First  Tier
              Tribunal is preserved.




Decision

  19. The Determination promulgated on  19  October  2014  did  involve  the
      making of an error of law and accordingly the decision upon the appeal
      is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal  with
      the following directions;
           i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and the  appeal  is
              remitted to the First Tier Tribunal. The appeal is not to  be
              listed before Judge SJ Clarke. The appeal is to be listed  at
              Taylor House on the first available  date  allowing  3  hours
              with a Dari interpreter booked for that hearing.
          ii) The Anonymity Direction previously made  by  the  First  Tier
              Tribunal is preserved.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 26 January 2015


