

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                     Appeal Number:
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
      AA/03200/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Date Sent                |
|On 11 October 2013                        |On 14 October 2013       |
|                                          |                         |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                          Mrs Salima Khalifa Enbaya
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                       Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                        Respondent
                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:              Mr S Jaisri, Counsel
For the Respondent:           Mr C Avery,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.         This appeal comes before me following the grant  of permission
      to appeal to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler  on  23
      August against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bird
      dated 30 July 2013. No anonymity order  was  made  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and none has been requested of the Upper Tribunal.

   2.         The appellant is a Libyan national  born  on  1  January 1954.
      She arrived here as a visitor in late 2011  and  a  few  months  later
      claimed asylum. Her husband and children had accompanied her  and  are
      dependent upon her claim. The purpose of the visit  was  so  that  her
      husband could receive medical treatment. After  their  arrival  rebels
      had taken hold of Tripoli, ransacked her house and  had  been  looking
      for her husband who had been a Major Brigadier in  the  Libyan  Police
      Force until his retirement in 2002. For this reason  she  feared  that
      she and her family would be at risk. The situation was exacerbated  by
      the fact that they were from the Deke tribe from Benhi Walid which had
      supported Gaddafi. The respondent refused the application on 18  March
      2013.

Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

   3.       For the appellant, Mr Jaisri argued that the judge had failed to
      make a clear finding on whether it was accepted that  the  appellant's
      husband had been a high ranking official in the police force.  It  was
      further argued that if this had been  accepted,  then  the  judge  had
      failed to adequately explain why someone with such a profile would  be
      able to return safely and had failed to  engage  with  the  background
      evidence relating to such persons which she had been referred  to.  It
      was also argued that the judge had failed to give reasons for why  she
      found the evidence of the appellant to be vague and had also failed to
      engage with the aggravating fact that she and her  husband  came  from
      Gaddafi's tribe and would be perceived as a loyalist.

   4.       Mr Avery responded. He maintained that the  judge  had  accepted
      that the appellant's husband was a high ranking  police  official  but
      had nevertheless found that he would not excite any adverse  attention
      upon return.  His past occupation was not  a  compelling  risk  factor
      particularly as he had retired  over  10  years  ago.  The  judge  was
      entitled to find that the witnesses were vague. This evidence  related
      to how the appellant had learned of the raid on her  house  and  there
      had been issues over this even at the interview. She had not  provided
      details of the neighbours from whom she had  allegedly  obtained  this
      information. With regard to  their  place  of  origin,  there  was  no
      evidence that this was a determinative factor. The background evidence
      had been considered.

   5.       Mr Jaisri replied. He submitted  that  apart  from  the  answers
      given by the appellant at the interview with respect to  the  raid  on
      her house, she had provided  further  evidence.  The  judge  had  been
      referred to the background material but had  failed  to  consider  the
      husband's profile in the context of that evidence. At  my  request  Mr
      Jaisri listed various pages of the bundle  which  he  maintained  were
      relevant to the claim. He  repeated  his  earlier  argument  that  the
      family would be perceived as loyalists because of their tribal origins
      and that this factor had not been considered.

   6.       That completed the submissions. At the conclusion of the hearing
      I reserved my determination which I now give.

Findings and Conclusions

   7.        I have considered all the evidence and  submissions  carefully.
      I do not find any merit  in  the  first  ground  of  appeal  i.e.  the
      allegation that the judge did  not  make  a  clear  finding  that  the
      appellant's husband was formerly a high ranking official in the police
      force. At paragraph 3 the judge notes the  appellant's  evidence  that
      her husband had worked in the police force. At paragraph 5  she  notes
      his rank was Major Brigadier. At paragraphs 11 and 14 when summarising
      the refusal letter the husband's occupation  is  referred  to.  It  is
      repeated at paragraph 20 when the judge confirms she has taken account
      of the grounds of  appeal  which  set  out  his  position  and  tribal
      origins. There is further reference  to  it  in  the  summary  of  the
      submissions made by both sides.

   8.       The judge then turns  to  her  findings.  At  paragraph  41  she
      states: "The appellant's claim rests on the fact that her husband  was
      a high ranking police official under the Gaddafi  regime.  He  retired
      from his post in 2002/2003 and has received  recommendations  for  his
      service. The appellant has produced documents to  support  this".  She
      then continues: "On the lower standard, I accept that the  appellant's
      husband was in the police force as claimed and that he retired  around
      2002/2003". In paragraph 42 she confirms that she has  "accepted  that
      the appellant's husband was in the police force" and at  paragraph  47
      she refers to the "appellant's husband's standing in the police  prior
      to 2003".  Given these repeated statements and the earlier  references
      to the husband's position, it is clear to me that the  judge  accepted
      the claim as put in this respect. Had she only accepted that he was  a
      police officer and not that he was of the rank claimed, she would,  no
      doubt, have said so after making her findings in paragraph 41.

   9.       The second complaint is that if this profile was accepted,  then
      the judge was wrong to find that it would not attract adverse  in  the
      appellant and her family. This is linked with the criticism  that  the
      profile and risks were not considered in  the  light  of  the  country
      material. It also ties in with the claim  that  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant was vague.

  10.       The judge noted the appellant had said she  had  claimed  asylum
      because her  husband  needed  medical  treatment  and  that  this  was
      corroborated by their daughter. She found this to be  significant  and
      considered that it was his need for medical treatment that had led  to
      the  family's  departure  rather  than  a   need   for   international
      protection.

  11.       The judge then considered the sur place claim. This  arose  from
      the alleged news obtained from  Tripoli  that  their  house  had  been
      ransacked by people looking for the  appellant's  husband.  The  judge
      plainly did not accept this part of the appellant's account. Whilst it
      is alleged that she gave no reasons for why she found this evidence to
      be "vague" a careful reading of the determination  makes  this  plain.
      The judge refers to the appellant having heard that her house had been
      "destroyed and divided into two" (paragraph 4), that she had been told
      in June 2011 (which would be prior to her arrival in the UK in August)
      that an unknown group of armed rebels had been told where her  husband
      was (paragraph 8), that she had "been unable to give details as to who
      the neighbours were who had informed her" and  that  these  neighbours
      had  been  informed  by  "street  children"(paragraph  15),  that  her
      siblings had not notified her of the alleged raids and destruction  of
      her house and that none  of  her  neighbours  or  family  members  who
      remained in Libya had made  statements  in  support  of  these  claims
      (paragraph 48).  Those are ample reasons  to  support  the  conclusion
      that the evidence in respect of the circumstances giving rise  to  the
      sur place claim was vague.

  12.       There remains the  issue  of  whether  in  the  absence  of  any
      specific event which showed that the appellant and/or her husband  was
      of interest, he had a profile which in itself would be sufficiency  to
      place them at risk.  The judge asked herself this  question  and  also
      considered whether the tribal factor would be relevant (paragraph 41).
      At paragraph 44 she does take account of the evidence referred to  and
      notes that that there were steps to take senior officials into custody
      by the incoming regime. Further evidence is referred to  at  paragraph
      45 where the judge notes that various suspected Gaddafi loyalists  are
      taken into custody by opposition militia. The  OGN  is  considered  at
      paragraphs 45-46.  The  judge  differentiated  those  cases  from  the
      circumstances of the appellant and her husband noting that the husband
      had not been in active service for over ten years; indeed  he  is  now
      elderly and infirm as well. She further found that  the  rest  of  the
      family lived in Tripoli without incident; that  undermined  the  claim
      that a tribal connection would  result  in  them  being  perceived  as
      Gaddafi loyalists. Those were findings plainly  open  to  her  to  the
      evidence.

  13.       For all these reasons, I find that the  judge  was  entitled  to
      find as she did. The grounds do not show that she erred in law.

Decision

  14.       The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  any  errors  of  law. The
      decision to dismiss the appeal is upheld.

            Signed:







      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


            11 October 2013


