







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03522/2007


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 December 2014                   |On 22 December 2014                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE K ESHUN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between


                             Mr Omar Amin Ahmad
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, counsel, instructed by Morgan Has
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Iraq, born on 5 July 1987. He left  Iraq
    when he was 16 years old and arrived in the UK on 11  August  2003.  He
    claimed asylum the next day.

 2. On 15 March 2004 he was granted discretionary  leave  to  remain  as  a
    minor. In a subsequent  decision  the  respondent  refused  his  asylum
    application and his  application  to  extend  his  leave.  He  appealed
    against that decision which came before Immigration Judge Jhirad on  19
    April 2007 who dismissed his appeal.

 3. On 4 June 2007 Immigration Judge Southern  ordered  reconsideration  of
    that decision.

 4. His appeal subsequently came before Senior Immigration Judge Martin  on
    14 May 2008. She found that the determination of Judge Jhirad contained
    a material error of law. She found that it was clear from  her  reading
    of the determination that the Judge did not  address  the  question  of
    humanitarian protection, namely that he  would  still  be  at  risk  of
    serious harm on account of  the  deteriorating  security  situation  in
    Iraq.

 5. Judge Martin considered the background evidence and relevant  decisions
    but considered that there was a total absence of  evidence  to  support
    the appellant's claim that he would be  entitled  to  succeed  on  that
    basis. Accordingly, the Judge's failure to consider  the  question  was
    not material to the outcome as  it  could  not  possibly  succeed.  She
    dismissed his appeal.

 6. The appellant was then granted  permission  to  appeal.  The  Court  of
    Appeal ordered by consent that the appeal be allowed to the extent that
    it be remitted to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (now  the  Upper
    Tribunal) for a fresh consideration.

 7. On 29 March 2010, following a case management hearing, directions  were
    given. The case was to be heard before 15 September 2010 as a result of
    anticipated country guidance.

 8. Thereafter it appeared for reasons which remain  unclear  that  nothing
    further happened within the appeal. It was not listed before any judge.
    No representations were received on behalf  of  either  party  for  the
    appeal to be listed.

 9. The matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge Craig on 22 April 2014.  He
    directed that the appeal was to be listed  for  hearing  on  the  first
    available date after 1 June 2014. The  appeal  was  to  be  limited  to
    consideration of the Qualification Directive as well as the  Article  8
    claim, taking into account the considerable delay in the hearing of the
    appeal.

10. On 18 June 2014, Mr Justice McCloskey noted  that  the  case  had  been
    listed for 18 June 2014. However, the "serial and grave  misdemeanours"
    with regard to the failure to comply with directions was deprecated. In
    the circumstances, he adjourned the hearing to the first available date
    after 1 August 2014.

11. On 15 October 2014, the appellant raised additional grounds  of  appeal
    under Article 8, based on the authority of the House  of  Lords  in  EB
    (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41.

12. In the additional grounds, it was  contended  that  the  appellant  has
    "very significant private life in the UK" which included mental  health
    treatment as well as the fact that he is in the  middle  of  a  degree.
    This was all important to  his  mental  health  and  well  being.  Such
    relationships in respect of his treatment would not be available to  be
    continued in Iraq.

13. It was contended that the appellant had been granted leave to remain in
    the UK on 16 March 2004 until 5 July 2005. Before  the  expiry  of  his
    leave, he applied for further leave which was refused  on  20  February
    2007. It is that refusal which  remains  the  subject  of  the  current
    appeal. The appellant  was  issued  a  "one  stop"  warning  to  adduce
    additional grounds against the refusal.

14. It is contended that his leave has thus been extended by  s.3C  of  the
    1971 Immigration Act. In the circumstances,  he  has  accumulated  more
    than ten years' lawful residence here.

15. The grounds referred to the decision in MU  ("Statement  of  additional
    grounds" - long residence -  discretion)  Bangladesh  [2010]  UKUT  442
    (IAC).  There,  the  Tribunal  had  regard  to  the  decisions  in   AS
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1076 and  NB  (Sri  Lanka)  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 1076, that there was no time limit on serving a  statement  of
    additional grounds in response  to  a  s.120  notice.  Accordingly,  an
    appellant may accrue ten years' lawful leave (including leave  extended
    by s.3C of the 1971 Act) while his appeal is pending. The Tribunal  may
    then be asked to decide whether the appellant qualifies for  indefinite
    leave under the Long Residence Rule.

16. It is further provided in MU that an application cannot be  made  under
    the Long Residence Rule for only limited leave to  remain.  Two  years'
    leave may be granted under paragraphs 276A1-4, but only to  people  who
    have applied for indefinite leave, and who are eligible for  it  solely
    because their knowledge of English or of life in the  UK  is  not  good
    enough.

17. It was accepted before us that the  appellant  was  unable  to  succeed
    under the paragraph 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  Accordingly,
    the appeal was no longer being advanced on that basis.

18. It was submitted that the appellant satisfied  the  requirements  under
    paragraph 276B(i) as he had had ten years' lawful residence. It is also
    a requirement under paragraph 276B(iv) that  the  applicant  must  have
    sufficient knowledge of the English language and  sufficient  knowledge
    about life in the UK, unless he is under 18 or aged 65 or over  at  the
    time he makes his application.

19. We were referred to Appendix KoLL under the Immigration  Rules.  It  is
    noted that sufficient knowledge of the English language and about  life
    in the UK is a requirement under the rules.

20. The appendix also sets out general exemptions to  the  requirements  on
    grounds  of  age,  and  enabling  the  decision  maker  to  waive   the
    requirement in the light of special  circumstances  in  any  particular
    case. Reference was made to Part 3, which deals with "exceptions".   It
    is provided that notwithstanding any requirement  to  the  contrary  in
    these rules, for the purpose of this appendix, an applicant will not be
    required to demonstrate sufficient knowledge of  the  English  language
    and about life in the UK where in all the circumstances  of  the  case,
    the decision maker considers that, because of the applicant's mental or
    physical condition, it would be unreasonable to expect  such  applicant
    to fulfil that requirement.

21. It was contended on behalf of the appellant that having regard  to  his
    mental or physical condition, he qualified for an exemption.

22. Ms Holmes accepted that even at this stage the appellant  was  entitled
    to raise this ground of appeal pursuant to the s.120 notice.

23. She also accepted that the  appellant  had  satisfied  the  requirement
    under the Rule that he must have had at  least  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence in the UK. She did  not  make  any  submission  as  to
    whether he is also entitled to an exemption under paragraph 267B(iv) of
    the rules.

24. She noted  however  that  the  public  interest  concerns  set  out  at
    paragraph 276B(ii) have not been  assessed  by  the  Home  Office.  She
    submitted that in the circumstances, the matter should be  remitted  to
    the respondent for the necessary public interest assessment to be made.

     Assessment

25. We find that the appellant has shown that he satisfies the requirements
    under paragraph 276B(i) of the Immigration Rules. He also qualifies for
    an exemption under paragraph 267B(iv) of the rules.

26. We also find that it is appropriate for the case to be remitted to  the
    respondent in order to carry out an assessment with regard to paragraph
    276B(ii) of the Immigration  Rules.  To  that  extent,  the  appeal  is
    allowed.

     Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed to the extent referred to in  paragraph  26.  The
    matter is remitted  to  the  respondent  for  a  decision  to  be  made
    regarding the public interest as set out in paragraph 276B(ii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.




    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed: Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer   Dated: 15/12/2014
