


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03573/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4th April 2016                      |On 22nd August 2016                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                E SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     VK
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. A Walker, instructed by Jein Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The First-tier Tribunal has made  an  anonymity  order  and  for  the
       avoidance  of  any  doubt,  that  order  continues.   VK  is  granted
       anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings.   No   report   of   these
       proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify   her.    This
       direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this direction could lead to proceedings being
       brought for contempt of court.


    2. The appellant before me is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department and the respondent to this appeal,  is  VK.   However  for
       ease of reference, in the course of this determination I shall  adopt
       the parties' status as it was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
       shall in this determination, refer to VK as the  appellant,  and  the
       Secretary of State as the respondent.


    3. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       George promulgated on 5th January 2016,  in  which  she  allowed  the
       appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
       Department of 6th February 2015, to refuse the appellant's claim  for
       asylum, humanitarian protection and on Article 8 grounds.


Background


    4. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  She arrived in the  UK  in
       December 2013 and made a claim for asylum.  It was  the  respondent's
       decision of 6th February 2015 to  refuse  to  grant  asylum  and  her
       decision to remove the appellant from the UK  by  way  of  directions
       under paragraphs 8-10 of schedule 3 to the Immigration Act 1971, that
       gave rise to the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    5. The appellant attended the hearing of her appeal  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.  She was represented.  A summary  of  the  appellant's
       claim and the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal is to be  found
       at paragraphs [1] to [7] of the Judge's decision.  At paragraphs [10]
       to [15] of the decision, the Judge sets out the respondent's decision
       and the respondent's position.  At paragraphs [13] to [16] the  Judge
       records:


             "13.  A letter had been provided by  the  appellant  dated  13
             July 2015 from ...., Justice of the Peace, in Sri Lanka.   The
             Justice of the Peace said that the appellant  had  helped  the
             LTTE since  school  days  and  confirmed  the  recruitment  in
             February 2009; the surrender to the Sri Lankan  army  and  the
             abduction and payment of a bribe [sic] for release.   It  also
             noted that the CID (in Sri Lanka) had seen  the  appellant  in
             newspapers working against the Sri Lankan  government  in  the
             UK. This letter was sent by email from an email  address  that
             did not contain the name of the Justice of the Peace.


             ...


             15.  At the hearing on 16 July 2015, the  respondent  withdrew
             the concessions that the appellant was Tamil from  Sri  Lanka;
             she had a low level involvement in the LTTE and that  she  had
             been forcibly conscripted.   The  hearing  was  adjourned  and
             directions  were  made  for  the  respondent  to  notify   the
             appellant of the reasons for  withdrawal  of  the  concessions
             within 14 days and verification of the letter from the Justice
             of the Peace.


             16.   Prior  to  the  appeal  hearing  today,  the  respondent
             provided a letter dated 10 November 2015 indicating  that  the
             document from the Justice of the Peace  was  not  genuine  and
             therefore, the appellant is not credible and  this  reinforces
             the respondent's position that the appellant was not taken  by
             the Sri Lankan army and  detained  as  she  had  claimed.  The
             respondent provided case notes  of  a  telephone  conversation
             between ..... (the Justice of the Peace)  on  22  September  5
             saying that he had not issued the letter to the appellant,  he
             had been away from home undergoing cancer treatment and  could
             not issue letters to anyone and in  any  event,  he  does  not
             issue letters for people residing in Jaffna district."


    6. At paragraph [22] of her decision, the Judge refers to  the  material
       before her in three bundles filed on behalf of the appellant.  In the
       appellant's addendum bundle C, the  Judge  identifies  the  following
       documents adduced by the appellant;


             "iii.     Letter  from  the  appellant's  solicitors  to   the
             respondent dated 14 November 2015 expressing concern about the
             disclosure of the appellant's details to someone in Sri  Lanka
             (namely the Justice of the Peace) by fax  to  an  unknown  fax
             number, without any redaction  and  also  the  fact  that  the
             respondent had spoken to someone  whom  they  believe  is  the
             Justice of Peace  on  an  unknown  phone  number  and  seeking
             clarification as to  how  the  identity  of  this  person  was
             confirmed;


             iv.  An email dated 24 November 2015 to  the  Justice  of  the
             Peace from the appellant's  solicitor  (to  an  email  address
             which did not show name) requesting further details;


    7. The Judge's findings and conclusions are to be  found  at  paragraphs
       [49] to [94] of her  decision.   The  Judge  considered  the  various
       facets of the claim and the evidence before her and at paragraph [74]
       states:


             "74. I  find  that  the  appellant  has  given  an  internally
             consistent story. I am particularly persuaded by  the  account
             given to Dr Goldwyn within a  short  period  of  time  of  her
             arrival in the UK.  Dr Goldwyn's expert opinion  supports  the
             appellant's claim that she has been tortured and is  credible.
              Dr Zapata supports the claim  that  the  appellant  has  been
             tortured and is credible.  This is supported by the  GPs,  the
             EACH Counselling Service and also Mrs Paraharan.   In  looking
             at this evidence  in  the  round,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             appellant has discharged the burden  of  proof  to  the  lower
             standard and I find as a fact that:


              i. The appellant is Sri Lankan of Tamil descent;


             ii. She was a supporter of  LTTE  and  that  she  was  forcibly
                 conscripted by this organisation in February 2009  and  she
                 underwent 30 days of training;


            iii. The appellant and her family surrendered to the Sri  Lankan
                 army and they were detained in an army camp for almost  two
                 years;


             iv. The appellant was married and that this was a  marriage  of
                 convenience;


              v. The appellant was abducted by armed men  and  held  against
                 her will for about seven to eight days;


             vi. The appellant was sexually abused by two of the men holding
                 her every day;


            vii. She was punched in the chest  and  stomach  and  beaten  by
                 cable and wooden poles, bitten, burnt with  cigarettes  and
                 beaten until she was unconscious;


           viii. The appellant was branded with a metal  rod  and  that  the
                 scars she bears are consistent with this;


             ix. The appellant was restrained by  her  captors  on  her  arm
                 which caused scarring;


              x.  The appellant did not inflict these  injuries  on  herself
                 and they were not self-inflicted by proxy injuries;


             xi. The injuries on the chest and thighs occurred at  the  same
                 time and that they happened within the timescales  asserted
                 by the appellant;


            xii.  It  is  perfectly  plausible  that  the   appellant   lost
                 consciousness  or  blanked  out  when  the  injuries   were
                 inflicted at the same time on the chest and thighs  -  this
                 is a case where the serious injuries were inflicted at  the
                 same  time.   The  Appellant  is  able  to  remember  being
                 restrained by the arm and having  a  plate  thrown  in  her
                 face.


    8. Having made those findings of fact the Judge went on to consider  the
       risk upon return by reference to the country guidance set out  in  GJ
       (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  319.   For  the
       reasons that are set out at paragraphs [76] to [93],  the  Judge  was
       satisfied that the appellant has a justified fear of being persecuted
       or of other  serious  harm  if  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.  The  Judge
       concluded that the appellant is entitled to recognition as a  refugee
       and is entitled to humanitarian protection and her appeal succeeds on
       these grounds.


The grounds of appeal and the hearing of the appeal before me


    9. The respondent advances two grounds of appeal.  First,  at  paragraph
       [49] of her decision the Judge proceeds upon  the  premise  that  the
       appellant's three brothers in  the  UK  will  only  have  been  given
       indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  because  of  their  stated
       involvement with the LTTE.  The Judge found that the  fact  that  all
       three brothers are in the UK gives credence to the appellant's  claim
       that she was recruited by the LTTE and furthermore, that there  is  a
       risk on return to Sri Lanka. The respondent  submits  that  paragraph
       [49] of the Judge's decision contains a wholly irrational  series  of
       non sequiturs, which necessarily infects the  whole  of  the  Judge's
       fact-finding process.


   10. Second, the Judge erred in relation to  the  evidence  purporting  to
       have come from a Justice of the Peace in Sri Lanka.   The  respondent
       had obtained a document verification report that established  that  a
       document relied upon by the appellant purporting  to  come  from  the
       same JP,  had been shown to be false.  On the day of the hearing, the
       appellant relied upon an email from  the  JP  that  was  produced  on
       behalf of the appellant effectively attesting to the  genuineness  of
       the initial document that she had relied upon. The respondent submits
       that the Presenting Officer offered  the  Judge  the  opportunity  to
       adjourn the case for the purposes of verifying that further document,
       but the Judge ruled that this was not necessary. Notwithstanding that
       indication, the Judge went on to find the documents from the JP to be
       reliable. The respondent submits that it was procedurally unfair  and
       irrational for the Judge to place reliance upon the material from the
       JP,  having  earlier  indicated  that  it  was  unnecessary  for  the
       respondent to carry out any further checks  on  the  document  relied
       upon by the appellant.


   11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chohan
       on 25th February 2016.  The  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine
       whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a  material
       error of law.


   12. Before me, Mr Whitwell adopts the grounds  of  appeal.    He  submits
       that the Judge simply assumed that the appellant's brothers have been
       granted status in the United Kingdom on account of  LTTE  activities,
       and the Judge erred by proceeding upon  an  assumption  that  has  no
       evidential  foundation.   Mr  Whitwell  accepts  that  there  was  no
       application for an adjournment made  by  the  Presenting  Officer  to
       enable further enquiries  to  be  made  in  respect  of  the  further
       material relied upon by the appellant, said to have come from the JP.
       He submits that the reasons given by the Judge at paragraphs [71]  to
       [73] of her decision for finding that the documents from the  JP  are
       reliable, are inadequate.   He submits that there would be no  reason
       for the JP to say that he does not issue letters for people who  live
       in other districts and that the JP did not say he  would  not  answer
       the questions. The fax number used by the British High Commission  to
       communicate with the JP was a fax number that had  been  provided  by
       the JP himself. Mr Whitwell submits that the British High  Commission
       followed the proper procedures in verifying the authenticity  of  the
       documents relied upon by the appellant, and the Judge  presumes  that
       the JP would lie to the British High Commission.


   13. The appellant has filed a rule 24 response  dated  24th  March  2016.
       She maintains that there are no material errors in  the  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge and that the findings made by the Judge
       were open to  her  on  the  evidence.   Ms  Walker  submits  that  at
       paragraph [49] of the decision, the Judge simply noted that the  fact
       that the appellant's brothers appeared to have  indefinite  leave  to
       remain in the UK, is more likely than not, because  of  their  stated
       involvement with the LTTE and  that  that  "gives  credence"  to  the
       appellant's account. She submits  that  the  reasons  why  the  Judge
       accepted the appellant's account to be credible are wide-ranging  and
       the Judge had considered each piece of evidence  on  its  own  merits
       before reaching her overall conclusion, having looked at the evidence
       in the round.


   14. Ms Walker submits that the Judge gave adequate reasons at  paragraphs
       [71] to [73] of her decision for finding that the documents from  the
       JP are reliable.   She submits that the respondent now seeks  to  re-
       argue the appeal because the respondent disagrees with  the  findings
       made by the Tribunal.  She submits that there was  no  evidence  from
       the respondent that any  particular  procedures  were  followed  when
       enquiries were made by the British High Commission and it was open to
       the Judge to accept what had been said by the JP, as to  why  he  did
       not confirm the contents of his initial letter over the telephone  to
       the British High Commission.


Discussion


   15. It is useful to begin  by  setting  out  what  the  Judge  stated  at
       paragraph [49] of her decision.  The Judge states:


             "49. The appellants' three brothers are all in the UK. One  is
                  a British citizen and the others have indefinite leave  to
                  remain.  This is common cause. I do not  know  the  reason
                  for them being granted indefinite leave to remain  but  it
                  seems more probable than not, applying the civil  standard
                  of proof, that  this  leave  will  only  have  been  given
                  because of their stated involvement with the LITE.  I find
                  the fact that all three  brothers  are  in  the  UK  gives
                  credence to the appellant's claim that she  was  recruited
                  by the LTTE and furthermore,  that  there  is  a  risk  on
                  return to Sri Lanka.


   16. The Judge acknowledges that she does not  know  the  reason  for  the
       appellant's brothers being granted indefinite  leave  to  remain.   I
       have some sympathy with the submission made by  the  respondent  that
       the Judge appears to proceed upon an assumption that the  leave  will
       only have been given because of their  stated  involvement  with  the
       LTTE.  However, as Ms Walker submits, the Judge simply took the  view
       that the fact that all three brothers are in the UK  "gives  credence
       to" the appellant's claim that she was  recruited  by  the  LTTE  and
       there is a risk on return to Sri Lanka.  Although that is  the  first
       matter referred to by the Judge in the section of the decision headed
       "Findings and Conclusions", it was in my judgement,  not  a  material
       consideration in the Judge's overall assessment  of  the  appellant's
       claim.


   17. At paragraphs [50] to [73]  of  her  decision,  the  Judge  carefully
       considers all of the other evidence before her.  The Judge  found  at
       paragraph [74] that the appellant has given an internally  consistent
       story and the Judge noted that she was  "particularly  persuaded"  by
       the account given to Dr Goldwyn within a short period of time of  her
       arrival in the  UK.   The  experts  that  the  Tribunal  heard  from,
       supported the appellant's claim that she had been  tortured  and  was
       credible.  Before  setting  out  her  findings  of  fact,  the  Judge
       confirms that she has looked at the evidence in  the  round.    Given
       the range of evidence before  the  Tribunal  and  considered  by  the
       Judge, in my judgement, the findings made by the Judge and set out at
       paragraph [74] of the decision would not have been any different even
       if the Judge had simply recorded that the appellant's  brothers  have
       indefinite leave to remain in the UK, but the Judge did not know why.
        A proper reading of the careful consideration of the evidence by the
       Judge makes it clear that the Judge reached her findings by reference
       to the other evidence  before  her  that  was  consistent  with,  and
       corroborated the appellant's account of events.  Any error  that  the
       Judge fell into in assuming that the appellant's  three  brothers  in
       the UK will only have been given indefinite leave to  remain  because
       of their  stated  involvement  in  the  LTTE,  is  in  my  judgement,
       immaterial. I therefore reject the first ground of appeal.


   18. As to the second ground of appeal, the issue  for  me  to  decide  is
       whether or not the Judge properly considered the  competing  evidence
       regarding the letter from the JP before accepting at  paragraph  [73]
       of her decision, the explanation as to why the JP did not confirm the
       contents of his initial letter over the telephone to the British High
       Commission.  The Judge states at paragraph [73] that  she  considered
       the evidence as a whole and applied the principles in Tanveer  Ahmed.




   19. I follow the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD
       [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  The Court of Appeal held that a  finding  might
       only be set aside for error of law on the grounds of perversity if it
       was irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or  one  that
       was wholly unsupported by the evidence.  A finding that is "perverse"
       embraces  findings  that  are  irrational  or  unreasonable  in   the
       Wednesbury sense, and findings of fact that are wholly unsupported by
       the evidence.  On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should  not  overturn  a
       judgment at first instance, unless it really could not understand the
       original  judge's  thought  process  when  he  was  making   material
       findings.


   20. At paragraphs [70] to [73]  of  her  decision,  the  Judge  carefully
       considered the letter from the JP.  In my judgement it  was  open  to
       the Judge for all of the reasons set out at paragraphs [70]  to  [73]
       to find that the documents from the  JP  are  reliable  and  entirely
       consistent with the appellant's  claim   Having  carefully  read  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and her reasons,  I  reject
       the submission that the reasons given by the  Judge  are  inadequate.
       I reject the second ground of appeal advanced by the respondent.


   21. It follows that the appeal is dismissed.


 Notice of Decision


   22. The appeal by the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  is
       dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


   23. An anonymity direction has been made by the First-tier  Tribunal  and
       shall continue.

Signed                                  Date 22nd August 2016



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


No fee has been paid and no award can be made.


Signed                                  Date 22nd August 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
