
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03975/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2015                      |On 14 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     ks
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, Counsel instructed by Waran & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 11  November  1985  and
    she appealed against the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  29
    May 2014 to remove her from the UK as an illegal  entrant  following  a
    refusal to grant her asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  protection
    under the European Convention.

 2. The appellant left Sri Lanka using her own passport on 20 October  2009
    and entered the UK as a Tier  4  (Student)  Migrant.   The  appellant's
    history was that in May 2007 whilst in Sri Lanka  she  met  and  had  a
    relationship with someone by the name of VT working for an NGO and  who
    undertook the transport of weapons for the LTTE.   In  April  2009  she
    received a telephone call stating that the body of VT had  been  found.
    Subsequently she was visiting the house as her  putative  mother-in-law
    and she was arrested and detained by the Sri Lankan  authorities.   She
    asserts that she was held in detention for two and a  half  months  and
    after a month she was the victim of sexual abuse and that she was raped
    and this was videoed during her detention.

 3. She was able to  secure  her  release  via  a  bribe  and  through  the
    assistance of an agent who also arranged for her to leave  the  country
    for the UK.  She entered the UK on 20 October 2009 and was accommodated
    by a friend of her father's.  She had a relationship with this person R
    and subsequently became pregnant.  Her child  was  born  on  4  October
    2010.  R is a Dutch national and has now returned to Holland.

 4. Since being in the UK the appellant formed a relationship with  KK  who
    is also a refugee from Sri Lanka.  It  is  asserted  that  she  is  now
    pregnant by him and their relationship  started  at  the  beginning  of
    2014.

 5. The  appellant's  case  was  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cockrill on 5 November 2014 and he dismissed that appeal on 11 November
    2014 on all grounds.  An application for permission to appeal was  made
    on five grounds.  It was asserted that the judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's overall credibility and the accounts she had given  of  how
    she had been detained and sexually assaulted in Sri Lanka was accepted.
     Despite this  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  was  at  no  or
    insufficient risk on return to Sri Lanka and that the  authorities,  in
    particular the CID were no longer interested in her.  It was  submitted
    this was speculative and inconsistent with the other evidence  accepted
    by the judge and it  was  contended  that  were  the  appellant  of  no
    interest to the authorities she would have been  released  without  the
    need for payment of a bribe, would simply have been  released  and  the
    release by way of a bribe would not be recorded as  a  lawful  release.
    On that basis there must be risk that on return the appellant would  be
    at risk of detention and further persecution.

 6. Secondly,  the  appellant  had  given  evidence  her  parents  were  in
    Trincomalee and that they had told her the CID had been  to  the  house
    asking them about her whereabouts.  The judge stated at [48] "I do  not
    accept that aspect of her  case  at  face  value".   This  is  perverse
    bearing in mind the positive credibility finding made in favour of  the
    appellant as to the other aspect of the evidence.  Indeed at  [41]  the
    judge had found that he could see why the  authorities  would  wish  to
    detain and question her about the boyfriend's activities.

 7. Thirdly, the judge had misunderstood the country guidance  of  GJ  (Sri
    Lanka) [2013] UKUT 00319.  The issue is whether on return the appellant
    is perceived by the authorities of forming part of the Tamil  Diaspora.
    The  relevant  parts  of  the  appellant's  background  are  that   the
    authorities would have a record of whether she had a relationship  with
    someone who was transporting weaponry for the LTTE,  she  was  detained
    and her treatment during detention and the length of her detention, the
    fact she had paid a bribe were  all  factors  which  were  relevant  in
    assessing the risk of return.

 8. Fourthly, in dealing with the risk factors the  judge  had  taken  into
    account an irrelevant fact when dealing with  the  assessment  of  risk
    finding "it should also be borne in mind that  the  appellant's  family
    remain living in Sri Lanka, and, so far  as  I  can  see  matters,  the
    appellant can properly and reasonably go back to them  and  not  be  at
    real risk of persecution for any Convention reason.

 9.  In  ground  5  finally  the   judge   should   have   considered   the
    proportionality issue outside the Immigration Rules.  He was  wrong  at
    paragraph 46 to find that the Rules provided a comprehensive  code  for
    cases involving consideration of family and private life.

Conclusions

10. Following a finding of an  error  of  law  in  the  decision  by  Judge
    Cockrill on the basis I  found  inadequate  reasoning  in  relation  to
    whether was at risk  on  return  I  preserved  the  findings  of  Judge
    Cockrill at paragraphs 39, 40, 41, 42 and 43.

11. These read as follows:

         "39. In short, the appellant's life seems to have  been  relatively
             uneventful. She attended school and  completed  her  education
             reaching 'A' level standard.  She  then  assisted  her  mother
             domestically; her father was running  his  own  business.  The
             centrepiece of this appellant's case is her relationship  with
             a man, V.  That  relationship  was  not  approved  of  by  her
             family. There is nothing at all  lacking  in  plausibility  or
             credibility about that particular scenario. I accept that  the
             appellant had formed a relationship with this man, V,  and  in
             fact she went to  live  with  him  and  his  family.  That  is
             documented, to  some  appreciable  degree,  by  the  household
             register. Some analysis took place  of  that  register  and  I
             accept that she was being described really as V's wife in that
             document.  I think that is material which  does  appropriately
             confirm the accuracy of the appellant's  case.  I  reject  the
             argument   presented by the respondent that is a document that
             carries little weight. In my judgement it should be given some
             reasonable amount of weight. What is said to have occurred  is
             that V was killed at a time when he was transporting weaponry.
              There is no other evidence which would tell me one way or the
             other whether that is true and whether he was involved in LTTE
             activity but it does seem to me that  some  weight  should  be
             attached to the death certificate. I accept,  looking  at  the
             totality of the material presented to me, that V was killed in
             suspicious circumstances.  I accept that he may have had  some
             involvement with the LTTE  but  that  was  not  known  to  the
             appellant before his death.

         40.  I accept, specifically, that so far as she was  concerned  her
             then boyfriend was working for an NGO  and  she  thought  that
             that is why he was out often  in  the  evenings  or  away  for
             several days at a time.  I repeat  the  point  that  there  is
             nothing at all  incredible  about  that  narrative.  There  is
             nothing  which  makes  it  so  lacking  in   plausibility   or
             credibility that I should respond to it.

         41.  What occurred subsequently was that the appellant was  herself
             picked up by some men in a van and was held in detention for a
             little over two months. This is, of course,  also  central  to
             her case. I can quite accept that if the narrative  about  her
             boyfriend is accurate that the authorities in Sri Lanka  would
             want to see whether or not the appellant  had  any  meaningful
             knowledge about her boyfriend and his LTTE activities. To that
             end, I can quite see why they would wish  to  detain  her  and
             question her.  I repeat the point that that in itself  is  far
             from being implausible.  The country  material  on  Sri  Lanka
             does show depressingly that those who are  held  in  detention
             can be subject to sexual abuse and attack  and,  although  the
             appellant gave only a fairly short  and  simple  reference  to
             being raped and being the  victim  of  sexual  abuse,  what  I
             conclude, looking again at the case as a whole,  is  that  she
             was the victim of some  sexual  abuse  whilst  she  was  being
             detained.

         42.  I also accept the way in  which  she  described  her  release,
             namely as the result of a bribe being paid to the CID, so that
             she could be released into the care of an agent.  Again,  this
             does not seem to me anything which seems at  all  implausible.
             It is well known that bribes are paid in Sri Lanka  to  effect
             the release of someone held. By that stage, of course, the CID
             would have established what, if anything, the appellant really
             knew about this now late boyfriend and, as far as  I  can  see
             the simple fact is that they would have concluded that she was
             ignorant of his activities and really was not of  any  use  to
             them any longer. The appellant  was  therefore  permitted,  in
             effect, to leave after the bribe was paid. She spent some time
             in Colombo.  The respondent has criticised the appellant about
             her description of her journey.  I have tried to  see  whether
             or not the appellant was accurate and reliable in her  account
             and, as far as I can tell, the fact that she mentioned only  a
             few checkpoints does not seem to me to  undercut  the  overall
             credibility of her account as to her experiences n Sri  Lanka.
             What I  accept  specifically  is  that  she  did  entrust  all
             practical matters to that agent to gain the student  visa  and
             so that the appellant could leave Sri Lanka  in  safety  using
             her own transport.  It  seems  to  me  critical  to  a  proper
             understanding of this case to appreciate that  the  agent  was
             the person that facilitated that departure.

         43.   I  also  accept  that  the  appellant   entered   into   this
             relationship with a man who was a good deal older than her who
             provided that money which had been used for  the  bribe.   The
             appellant, basically,  did  not  want  to  proceed  with  that
             relationship because of the man's age and the appellant gave a
             perfectly clear and reasonable description of her thinking."

12. At the hearing before me  further  documentation  was  submitted  which
    confirmed that on 22 March 2013 the appellant's partner,  Mr  K  K  had
    been granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  refugee.   He
    was named on the birth certificate as the father of the child  born  on
    15 May 2015, one A K.

13. Although the passport  of the Dutch national said to be the  father  of
    the appellant's older child was produced, there was no confirmation  as
    to the paternity of the older child born to the appellant by  way,  for
    example,  of  DNA  analysis,  and  although  I  have  found  that   the
    appellant's credibility was not questioned, I am not persuaded that  it
    has been established that this child is the child of a Dutch  national.
    That said, it is clear that this a close family unit.

14. I bear in mind the preserved findings in relation  to  the  appellant's
    asylum claim and case law of MP and NT v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 829 and  GJ  (Sri  Lanka)  [2013]  UKUT
    00319.

15. GJ and Others (Post civil war returnees) has established that the focus
    of the Sri Lankan government's concern has changed since the civil  war
    ended in May 2009 and that the government's  present  objective  is  to
    identify Tamil activists in the diaspora who  were  working  for  Tamil
    separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri  Lankan  state.    It  is
    clear that this appellant  has  not  been  overtly  working  for  Tamil
    separatism in the United Kingdom.

16. It was also accepted that the risk for those in  whom  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities were interested in existed not necessarily at  the  airport
    but after the arrival in their home area where their arrival  would  be
    verified by the CID or police within days. That said, the head note  of
    GJ confirms that individuals who are perceived to be a  threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are perceived  to
    have a significant role in relation to post-conflict  Tamil  separatism
    within the diaspora were those who would be at risk.   The  Sri  Lankan
    authorities' approach is based on the sophisticated intelligence  basis
    to activities within Sri Lanka and in the diaspora and they  are  aware
    that many Sri Lankans travel abroad as economic migrants.

17. I have noted above what has been accepted regarding the appellant.  She
    is a Tamil from north Sri Lanka and her previous partner had  links  to
    the LTTE. On the strength of that she was  detained  and  assaulted  in
    detention of which there is a  possible  record.    It  is  clear  from
    paragraph 237 and 290 of GJ that the UNHCR guidelines should  be  taken
    into account and those with "more elaborate links to the LTTE" can vary
    but may include "persons with family links or who are dependent  on  or
    otherwise closely related to persons with  the  above  profiles."   The
    "above  profiles"  included  former  LTTE  combatants  or  cadres.   GJ
    confirms that the risk will depend on the specifics of  the  individual
    case but nonetheless GJ confirmed that the UNHC Guidelines had assisted
    them in reaching their conclusions.

18. Therefore I accept that the appellant has links which may be classified
    as 'more elaborate' to the LTTE.

19. The past history of the appellant must be of relevance in assessing the
    risk on return and  it  is  against  this  background  I  consider  the
    circumstances of the appellant.  The appellant's claim is found  to  be
    credible in that she was placed in detention and assaulted but that she
    was able to secure her release via a bribe. She  facilitated  her  exit
    from Sri Lanka via an agent and thus did not leave the country  without
    assistance.  She is a Tamil with connections to someone who worked  for
    an  NGO  and  died  under  suspicious  circumstances  and  it  is   the
    appellant's evidence and has always been the appellant's evidence  that
    the Sri Lankan authorities have visited her home and  are  looking  for
    her.  She stated in oral evidence and also stated in her account during
    her asylum interview that the authorities  had  visited  her  home  and
    beaten up her  brother.   Bearing  in  mind  the  positive  credibility
    findings made in favour of the appellant by the First-tier Tribunal,  I
    see no  reason  to  depart  from  the  appellant's  evidence  that  the
    authorities have visited her home in Trincomalee. Why  the  authorities
    would be interested in her if they did not know  about  her  connection
    with her previous boyfriend in Sri  Lanka  is  not  clear,  but  it  is
    suggested that this is because of his links to the LTTE  and  thus  she
    too is associated and of interest.

20. I accept that the appellant was detained by the  authorities  and  thus
    she was previously perceived to have links with the LTTE whilst she was
    in Sri Lanka.  On this fact  together  with  the  acceptance  that  the
    authorities have visited her home, I consider that there may be a  risk
    that she will be picked up by the authorities on  return  and  detained
    for interrogation.

21. The fact that she had secured her previous release via a bribe was also
    accepted and this would indicate that the authorities had a  maintained
    interest in her. It is possible this continues. MP and NT  acknowledges
    that the fact that release is secured with a bribe  may  indicate  that
    the authorities might still find the person was of interest or  concern
    to them.  Indeed she claims that there is  a  record  of  her  previous
    interrogation.  I also note that should she return  there  is  now  the
    added risk that she is linked with someone who has indeed been  granted
    refugee status in the UK.

22. What was accepted in GJ was that if a person is  detained  by  the  Sri
    Lankan security service on return there remains a  real  risk  of  ill-
    treatment or harm requiring international protection and that  internal
    relocation was not an option. I find that the appellant is at  risk  of
    detention on return home  by  the  Security  Services  and  risks  ill-
    treatment.

23. Even if her need of international protection is not  accepted,  I  note
    that the appellant now has formed a relationship  and  is  living  with
    someone KK who has been granted refugee status in  the  United  Kingdom
    and they now have a child together born on 15th May  2015.   These  are
    arguably good grounds for consideration of the appellant's case outside
    the Immigration Rules.

24. As stated in MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985 "if the relevant group of
    IRs is not such a 'complete code' then the proportionality  test  would
    be more at large albeit guided by the Huang test and UK and  Strasbourg
    case law".

25. At paragraph 64  of  Singh  v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74   the  court
    confirmed,

         "... that there is no need to conduct a full  separate  examination
         of Article 8 outside the Rules where, in  the  circumstances  of  a
         particular  case,  all  the  issues  have  been  addressed  in  the
         consideration under the Rules."

26. I find however that it is not the case that all  the  relevant  factors
    have been taken into account in this matter.

27. Applying the five stage test set out in Razgar v SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27
    the appellant has established family life in the UK  with  her  partner
    and certainly with her second  child.  Her  partner  has  been  granted
    refugee status, and her second child is the daughter of someone who has
    been granted refugee status.  The threshold for the engagement of  such
    family life is low and thus engaged.  I accept that on the face  of  it
    if my findings in respect of the asylum claim are  rejected,  that  her
    removal as decided by the Secretary of State in its  decision  of  29th
    May 2014  was  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  necessary  for  the
    protection of rights and freedoms of others through the maintenance  of
    immigration control and I attach weight to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position: Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

28. I turn to a consideration of proportionality.  SS Congo v  SSHD  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 317 confirms that the starting point in Article 8  cases  must
    be a consideration of the rules.  I accept the appellant is the genuine
    partner of  a  refugee  in  the  United  Kingdom  who  would  encounter
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  that  partner  continuing
    outside the UK precisely because he has been granted refugee status.  I
    note EX.2.  confirms  that  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)
    "insurmountable obstacles"  means  the  very  significant  difficulties
    which would be faced by the applicant or their  partner  in  continuing
    their family life together outside  the  UK  and  which  could  not  be
    overcome or would entail very serious hardship  for  the  applicant  or
    their partner.

29. However the Immgration Rules require that the  appellant  must  be  the
    partner for two years prior to the application and the appellant cannot
    comply with this requirement.

30. It was Mr Murphy's submission  that  the  appellant  could  enlist  the
    assistance of  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  as  there  would  be  significant
    obstacles to her returning to Sri Lanka. I would  agree  that  although
    she has not lived in the United Kingdom for 20 years, on the face of it
    that her family life is now based in the United Kingdom  failing  which
    she would be split from her partner. I accept there is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship between them as they are living together, he is
    supporting her and they now have a child. Even if her asylum claim were
    not to be upheld, it would be the case, that her partner and the father
    of her child is a refugee from Sri  Lanka,  and  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the family, as  a  whole,  relocating  to  Sri
    Lanka.  There was no challenge to the established relationship  between
    the appellant and her partner or that the refugee father was the father
    of the appellant's child.

31. I must also take into account the best interests of the children  as  a
    primary factor, ZH (Tanzania)  v SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4,  and  the  best
    interests of the second child must be that  she  lives  with  her  half
    brother and both parents. It is not in the best interests of the  child
    to be separated from the father  who  is  at  present  supporting  them
    through his work.  As I state, there was no  evidence  that  the  first
    child was in fact a Dutch national, or at least  no  evidence  supplied
    apart from that oral evidence supplied by the mother and  appellant  to
    the effect that he was a Dutch national and as such I find he should be
    treated in the  absence  of  any  further  evidence  as  a  Sri  Lankan
    national.

32. I cannot accept that it would be reasonable to expect the  children  to
    be separated  from  their  father  at  their  young  age.   Nor  it  is
    reasonable to accept them to separate from their mother.

33. I turn to the application of Section 117B and find that  the  appellant
    cannot speak English and although her partner supports her  financially
    for  maintenance  there  was  no  indication  that  they  reached   the
    subsistence level required by the Immigration Rules or that the  family
    would not be a burden on the state through  the  use  of  the  NHS  and
    education.

34. Should there be a requirement that the appellant leaves the UK to  make
    an application for entry clearance? I considered whether the  temporary
    separation is proportionate.  I note that it is not sufficient to  rely
    solely on the case law concerning Chikwamba v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40, R (on the application  of  Chen)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Appendix  FM   Chikwamba  -
    temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).

35. I do, however, find that there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    appellant  and  her  husband  who  are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with two children pursuing their family life  outside  the
    United Kingdom long term. An insistence on the appellant returning even
    for the short term to Sri Lanka  to  make  such  an  application  would
    afford significant complications (aside from my findings  with  regards
    asylum) in terms of care for the children and indeed although I  cannot
    speculate on the success of such an application, there is no  guarantee
    that any entry clearance application would be successful or the time it
    would take. This would have the impact of splitting  the  family  which
    even for a very short period  would  in  turn  severely  undermine  the
    children's best interests.  I also take into account  the  effect  that
    her removal alone would have on the children and  her  partner  in  the
    United Kingdom further to Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39.

36.  It  is  clear  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with a  partner  who  has  refugee  leave  and  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  that  partner  continuing
    outside the UK and that is leaving aside the question of the children.

37. I bear in mind the principles enunciated in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11

         "In an Article 8 case where this question is reached, the  ultimate
         question for the appellate immigration  authority  is  whether  the
         refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances  where  the
         life of the family cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
         elsewhere, taking full account of all  considerations  weighing  in
         favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the  applicant
         in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
         fundamental right protected by Article 8. If  the  answer  to  this
         question is affirmative, the refusal is unlawful and the  authority
         must so decide. It is not necessary that the appellate  immigration
         authority, directing itself  along  the  lines  indicated  in  this
         opinion, need ask in addition whether the  case  meets  a  test  of
         exceptionality."

38. I therefore allow the appeal both on asylum grounds and in relation  to
    Article 8 ECHR.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


Notice of Decision

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
