
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03623/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th January 2016                 |On 27th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Medley-Daley of Broudie Jackson and Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, MS, date of birth 3rd March 1971 is a citizen of Iran.

 2. Having  considered  all  the  circumstances  I  [do  not]  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Hillis  promulgated  on  19th  May  2015.   The  judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent
    to refuse to recognise him as a refugee.  That decision was made on 6th
    February 2015.  Thereafter a decision was taken to remove the Appellant
    from the United  Kingdom  under  Section  10  of  the  1999  Act.   The
    Appellant appealed against the immigration decision.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Hillis and dismissed.

 4. The Appellant now seeks to appeal against that decision  on  the  basis
    that the decision contained material errors of law.

 5. The Appellant's representative commenced his submissions  by  referring
    to the fact that there are a number of cases before the Court of Appeal
    relating to whether leaving Iran illegally and without a passport would
    expose an individual on return to a risk of being persecuted or  having
    imputed to an individual a political opinion adverse to the government,
    which in turn would expose an individual to a risk of persecution.  The
    current country guidance seems to indicate to the contrary  [see  MA  v
    Switzerland (Application number 52589/13)].  At paragraph 57 refers  to
    the fact that whilst there are serious human rights violations in  Iran
    the Court did not feel that such would give rise to a violation of  the
    Convention if an applicant were returned to the country. In GN (Iran) v
    SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 112 the Court of Appeal agreed that  the  evidence
    did not show that an illegal departure or being a failed asylum  seeker
    would by themselves give  rise  to  a  risk  of  mistreatment  engaging
    Article 3.  SB (risk on return-illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053
    also makes the point that those facing enforced return do not generally
    face a risk of persecution by reason of that alone.  It also found that
    even if a person had exited Iran illegally that  continued  to  be  the
    situation.

 6. Whilst further  consideration  may  have  to  be  given  to  background
    information the country guidance cases seem to be clear.

 7. I turn next to the issue with regard to  Christianity.   The  judge  in
    paragraph 34 seems to indicate that the Lord's Prayer would be  recited
    at all Christian services.  With respect it is unclear what  experience
    the judge has of Christian services in Iran  and  specifically  Iranian
    house churches.  Certainly some denominations in the United Kingdom  do
    not  at  their  meetings  regularly  recite  the  Lord's  Prayer.   The
    representative for the Home Office accepted that it was not possible to
    state what form of service would take place in an Iranian house  church
    whether that be the Chaldean, Assyrian or one of the western  Christian
    churches.  It is  not  clear  whether  the  Appellant  appreciated  the
    difference at that stage or  whether  the  difference  was  established
    during the course of the hearing.  The judge seems to make  it  a  very
    significant point in his conclusions with  regard  to  the  Appellant's
    conversion.

 8. That approach with regard to certain  aspects  of  religious  observers
    seems to colour the judge's  conclusion  with  regard  to  whether  the
    Appellant had attended services in Iran  and  whether  or  not  he  had
    converted to a form of Christian religion in Iran.

 9. It was accepted by the Home Office  that  the  approach  by  the  judge
    disclosed a material error of law.

10. In light of that error of law both parties agreed that the appeal would
    have to be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

11. The basis of the Appellant's case stems from his alleged attendance and
    active participation in house church services in Iran.  The approach of
    the judge with regard to the facts indicates a presumption on the  part
    of the judge which is not justified;  which  is  not  supported  by  an
    evidential basis; and which is not borne out  by  background  evidence.
    In the light of that there is  a  material  error  of  law  within  the
    decision of the judge.  The appropriate course is for the matter to  be
    heard afresh with none of the findings of fact preserved.

Notice of Decision

12. There is a material error of law in the original decision.  I therefore
    set the decision aside and direct that the matter be  heard  afresh  in
    the First-tier Tribunal without any of the findings of fact to stand.

Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

