

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03677/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th January 2016                          |On 22nd February 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between


                                     N H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Salmon, Bradford Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Turnock
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 30th April 2015.



Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 28th  July  1990.   He
    came to the UK following a successful appeal against  a  refusal  of  a
    visit visa arriving on 25th December 2010.  He claimed asylum  on  26th
    February 2014, having overstayed his six month visit visa, saying  that
    if returned to Bangladesh he would face the  risk  of  persecution  and
    serious harm because of his sexual orientation.  He also claimed a fear
    of family members following a dispute over ownership of land.

 3. The judge, in a careful and detailed determination, set out all of  the
    evidence and the submissions which were made on  the  parties'  behalf.
    He considered the  question  of  the  appellant's  sexuality,  and  his
    evidence that he had had a relationship whilst in Bangladesh, and  said
    that he had been consistent in  his  assertions  in  relation  to  that
    relationship which he accepted had taken place.

 4. He also accepted that the appellant was considered by his family to  be
    of limited intelligence and that, together with the sexual relationship
    with the older boy, would be matters which would be of concern to them.
     On a limited number of occasions they did act violently, probably  out
    of frustration towards him.  However, the incidents were isolated,  not
    persistent and he was taken to see an Imam and a Mufti, neither of whom
    sought to inflict punishment on him. There were no serious  threats  to
    cause him physical harm.

 5. He concluded that the family decided it would be better for them and if
    he were sent out of the country and they  therefore  made  a  concerted
    effort to obtain a visit visa to the UK where he had some family. Those
    efforts involved the production of false documentation. The  judge  was
    satisfied that the  family  had  continued  to  produce  further  false
    documentation and he specifically rejected a letter said to have   come
    from the family which he said did not reflect  their  feelings  towards
    him but which was designed to support an application to enable  him  to
    remain in the UK.

 6. He concluded that the appellant was not at  risk  of  serious  harm  or
    persecution from members of the family.

 7. The judge then  considered  in  detail  the  question  of  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk as  a  homosexual  man  in  Bangladesh.  The
    country information before him did not support the  assertion  that  he
    would be at risk of persecution on  return.   He  examined  the  expert
    report from Mr Ashraf Ul Hoque in relation to relocation.  He said that
    it was likely that the appellant would become a constituent of half  of
    the country's population living below the poverty line should he return
    to Bangladesh and relocate to another part of the country.   The  judge
    said that poverty and discrimination could not found the  basis  for  a
    claim for asylum and humanitarian protection.

 8. He said that the evidence in relation to the land dispute was vague and
    unsubstantiated.  There was  no significant  risk  of  suicide  and  no
    argument that the appellant should be allowed to remain on Article 3 or
    Article 8 grounds.

 9. He dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal, in summary, that the grounds
    the judge had erred in not regarding  the  family's  treatment  of  the
    appellant as persecutory, had erred in relation to  the  assessment  of
    reasonableness of relocation and had  not  made  any  findings  on  the
    evidence of the appellant's sister.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
    on 27th July 2015.  He said that the determination was  thoughtful  and
    careful but considered that the grounds merited further  consideration.



12. The respondent served a  reply  defending  the  determination  on  18th
    August 2015.

Submissions

13. Mr Salmon amplified his grounds.  He submitted that the judge had  been
    illogical in concluding that the appellant would not be attacked by his
    family again and had come to the unlawful conclusion that  the  violent
    behaviour to which he had been subjected was not  persecutory.  He  was
    particularly vulnerable, being of low intelligence, and the  judge  had
    understated the gravity of the behaviour meted out to him.

14. He also submitted that the judge had not applied the relevant case  law
    in relation to internal relocation; the appellant would be  subject  to
    extreme deprivation which could be the  foundation  for  the  grant  of
    humanitarian protection.  It  was  not  acceptable  to  expect  him  to
    relocate and to live in extreme poverty.

15. Mrs Petterson defended the determination.  She said that the judge  had
    given clear reasons for his  decision.   The  judge  had  set  out  the
    evidence in relation to what had happened to the appellant when he  was
    living with his family, was entitled to find that  it was not treatment
    amounting to persecution and there was no real risk  of  repetition  on
    return.  There was no error in his assessment of internal flight.   The
    appellant  would  not  be  in  a  worse  position  than    many   other
    Bangladeshis and in any event would haves the benefit of  the  assisted
    voluntary return schemes.

Findings and Conclusions

16. There is no error of law in this determination.

17. So far as the family was concerned, the  judge  set  out  the  evidence
    which was that his brother had thrown a stone at him  on  one  occasion
    which had hit him on the right side of his forehead.   Subsequently  he
    had punched him on the body on quite  a  few  occasions  and  not  long
    afterwards his mother had hit him on his arm and his back.   The  judge
    described those incidents as having  been  isolated  and  having  taken
    place on a limited number of occasions.  There  can  be  absolutely  no
    quarrel with his assessment since it is firmly based on the appellant's
    own evidence.  The judge was quite right to conclude that the appellant
    was not at risk of serious harm or  persecution  from  members  of  his
    family based on their past behaviour towards him.

18. So far as the evidence from the appellant's sister was  concerned,  the
    judge dealt with the letter which was said to have been sent to her  by
    the family and gave wholly sustainable reasons  for  finding  that  the
    letter was not evidence that the family genuinely wished him  harm.  He
    assessed R B's evidence and said that she felt clear compassion for her
    brother and was seeking to assist him but was plainly entitled to  find
    that since there was no  attempt  to  put  any  of  the  dire  warnings
    contained  in  the  letter  into  effect  when  the  appellant  was  in
    Bangladesh there was no reason to conclude that they would do so if  he
    returned.

19. It was not argued that the appellant's family would seek to do him harm
    if he lived apart from them in Bangladesh.  The  judge  considered  the
    question of relocation and the report of Dr Ul Hoque.  Dr Hoque records
    the figures for the percentage  of  the  population  below  the  income
    poverty line in Bangladesh as being 49.6%. The fact that the  appellant
    might be below the poverty line is not  a  basis  for  concluding  that
    relocation would not be reasonable.  The situation in  which  he  would
    find himself is no different to half the population of Bangladesh.

20. The appellant's case was not put on the basis that he wanted to live as
    an openly gay man in Bangladesh.  It seems that he had only  one  brief
    relationship whilst there and  there  has  been  no  reference  to  any
    relationships in the UK nor any desire to live in any other way than he
    did before.  There is no challenge to the judge's conclusions that  the
    country information did not support the assertion that the treatment of
    homosexual men there amounted to persecution.

21. This is an exceptionally thoughtful  and  well  reasoned  comprehensive
    determination. The grounds plat forward arguments which  were  made  to
    the judge but rejected by him for  the  reasons  which  he  gave.   His
    conclusions are unassailable.

Decision

22. The original judge did not err  in  law.   The  appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed and the judge's decision stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor



