
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03686/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd August, 2013                          |On 23rd October, 2013        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                           MOHAMMAD SHARIFI RAZAVI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Selway, Solicitor from Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was born on 11th June, 1982 and is a citizen of Iran.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on 3rd March, 2013, having left Iran on  8th
    February that year and crossed Turkey hidden in a lorry.  On 3rd April,
    2013, the Secretary of State decided to  remove  the  appellant  as  an
    illegal entrant.  The appellant appealed that decision and  his  appeal
    was  heard at North Shields on 21st May, 2013  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cope.

2.   The basis of the appellant's claim for  asylum  was  set  out  in  some
    length at paragraph 19 of Judge Cope's determination.  He said that the
    appellant lived with his  family  in  Tehran  and  following  the  2009
    Presidential  elections  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  started  to
    download political and religious materials on to his  laptop  computer.
    He apparently deleted them after two or three days  once  he  had  read
    them.  He became friends with Rasul, a colleague at work,  and  on  1st
    February, 2013 during the course of a  conversation  with  Rasul  about
    religion he  mentioned  a  film  he  had  heard  called  'Innocence  of
    Muslims'.  He said that it could be downloaded from the internet.

3.   The appellant and Rasul went to the appellant's house because he had  a
    vast internet connection.  Using anti-filter software, the two of  them
    downloaded the film on to the appellant's computer  and  the  appellant
    maintains they watched it. It was about fourteen minutes  long.   Rasul
    asked for a copy of the film to show to his father,  so  the  appellant
    put a copy onto a CD for him and Rasul took it away with  him at  about
    4 p.m.  After midnight, Rasul's mother called the appellant to say that
    Rasul had not returned home. The following day on his way to  work  the
    appellant tried to call Rasul, but there was no answer  either  on  his
    mobile phone or on his land line.   The appellant's  mother  telephoned
    the appellant at about 4. p.m. the same day to  say  that  the  Iranian
    intelligence and security forces had raided the appellant's home.  They
    had searched the house and removed his belongings including books, CDs,
    DVDs and  his laptop. In addition they had taken away his father and  a
    car was outside watching the  house.

4.   The appellant believed that these events  must  have  occurred  because
    Rasul had been detained by the authorities.   The  appellant  destroyed
    his telephone sim card before dialling a  friend  of  his,  Hamad,  and
    arranging to go and stay in Hamad's house on the outskirts  of  Tehran.
    The appellant was unable to contact Rasul, but  he  did  speak  to  his
    mother at their home.  She told  the  appellant  that  Rasul  had  been
    arrested and that she knew about the film that been  given to him.  She
    blamed  the  appellant  and  asked  him  to  hand  himself   into   the
    authorities. The appellant claims that he stayed at his friend's  house
    for about six days and then arrangements were made for him to leave the
    country.

5.   The Immigration Judge did  not  believe  the  appellant's  account.  He
    found him not to be credible and found his account to be a fabrication.
     The judge pointed out, at paragraph  29  of  his  determination,  that
    there was no background evidence before him about the nature or content
    of the film 'The Innocence of Muslims' and he  had  not  been  provided
    with a copy of it, either by the  appellant  or  the  respondent.   The
    judge made various findings and dismissed the appellant's appeal.

6.   The appellant was not represented at  the  hearing.   However,  he  had
    been  represented at a Case Management Review which took place  on  3rd
    May.

7.   The  appellant  sought  to  challenge  the  decision  and  in  granting
    permission Judge Simpson said this:

         "When seeking permission to appeal grounds  were  settled  for  the
         appellant by solicitors. The grounds  seeking  permission  asserted
         that the judge had not been in a position  to assess  the  veracity
         of the appellant's evidence and reach adverse credibility  findings
         without sight of the YouTube page showing  the  film  Innocence  of
         Muslims, which film was at the centre of  the  appellant's  account
         about why he left Iran and sought asylum.


         Having regard to the importance of the principle of the equality of
         arms in the administration of justice without sight  of  the  above
         evidence it is considered that the damaging findings reached by the
         judge concerning  the  core  of  the  appellant's  claim  were  not
         properly open to him."

8.   At the hearing before me, Mr Selway pointed out that  the  Home  Office
    accept that the DVD in question was in the public domain  in  Iran  and
    has been for some time.  He sought to persuade me that there were other
    problems with the determination and asserted that the  judge  had  made
    various assumptions. For example, he said that at paragraph 35  of  the
    determination the judge pointed out that the version that the appellant
    and Rasul watched was fourteen minutes long, but  that  the  respondent
    had pointed out that this is a trailer version and that apparently  the
    full length version was 72  minutes long. The judge was relying  on  an
    assumption.

9.   The judge looked at the questions and answers put to the  appellant  at
    his asylum interview and noted that the appellant claimed that  he  had
    not fully understood the questions put to him by  the  interviewer  and
    thought he was being asked whether or not there were similar  films  to
    Innocence of Muslims. Mr Selway submitted  that  at  paragraph  42  the
    judge had also erred by assuming that the  appellant  and  Rasul  would
    have heard of the film, to the extent that he was interested in it  and
    had discussed with the appellant, yet apparently he had  not  heard  of
    it, despite the fact that the president had strongly disapproved of the
    film. Mr Selway did, in fairness  to  him,  and  in  my  view  entirely
    properly, point out that  even  despite  what  he  described  as  being
    "errors" in the determination, the determination was still sustainable.
    He relied on the grounds. For the respondent Mr Dewison relied  on  the
    Rule 24 response made on behalf of the Secretary of State.

10.  I note that at the Case  Management  Review  hearing  on  3rd  May  the
    appellant  was  represented  by  a  solicitor  who   has   considerable
    experience in dealing with asylum matters.  The appellant, for whatever
    reason, chose not to be represented at the hearing  before  the  judge.
    Nonetheless it is  clear  from  the  judge's  determination  that  this
    soliciotr assisted the appellant in the  presentation  of  his  appeal.
    There is nothing in the grounds to suggest that the  appellant  was  in
    any way prejudiced by not being represented at the hearing  before  the
    judge.  No mention was made at the Case Management  Review  hearing  on
    3rd May of the DVD in question. It was not produced to the  Immigration
    Judge and I  do  not  believe  that  he  has  committed  any  error  by
    determining the appellant's appeal without sight of it.  It was for the
    appellant to prove his case. The standard of proof is only a  very  low
    one, but that does not meant it does not exist.

11.  The judge noted,  at  paragraph  24  of  the  determination,  that  the
    appellant had given an account of events  in  Iran  on  four  different
    occasions. On 4th March, 2013 in his  interview, on 19th March, 2013 in
    his statement of evidence interview, in  his witness statement  of  8th
    May, 2013 and in  his oral evidence to the judge at the   hearing.  The
    judge noted that the appellant had been consistent in what he had  said
    about events in Iran and that he  had  consistently  claimed  that  the
    appellant and Rasul had download a video considered to be anti-Islamic.
     He accepted also what the appellant said about the treatment of people
    perceived by the Iranian authorities to  hold  anti-Islamic  views.  He
    clearly examined the background evidence and found it  consistent  with
    the background evidence too.  He noted however that the  heart  of  the
    appellant's claim was that he claimed  to  be  wanted  by  the  Iranian
    authorities for actual  or  perceived  anti-Islamic  views  because  he
    watched a video film which was deemed to be against Islam and this  had
    come to the attention of the authorities.

12.  At paragraph 29 of his determination the judge pointed out  that  there
    was no evidence before him about the nature or contents of the film and
    he had not been provided with a copy.  The judge  was  aware  from  the
    respondent's  Reasons  for  Refusal   Letter   that   the   appellant's
    credibility was in issue and one of the roans given by  the  respondent
    for doubting the appellant's  claim  was  that  the  version  that  the
    appellant and Rasul had claimed to watch  was  fourteen  minutes  long,
    whereas in fact the full version was 74 minutes and the YouTube website
    contained both. The fourteen minutes version is said to be  a  trailer.
    The appellant sought to deal with this point at  paragraph  13  of  his
    witness statement and claimed that his answers at questions 70  and  71
    of the interview make it clear that he had not  fully  understood  what
    the interviewer had meant.  The appellant thought he  was  being  asked
    whether or not there were similar films to Innocence of Muslims and his
    answer to question 71 put to him at the interview shows this. The judge
    recorded this at paragraph 37 and at paragraph 38 of the  determination
    said

         "Having myself looked at the questions and answers at questions  70
         to  72  I  disagree.  The  questions  are  perfectly   clear.   The
         interviewer specifically asked about other  versions  of  the  same
         film as the fourteen minutes version that the appellant had said he
         had watched.  Not whether he  had  watched  other  different  films
         which were similar to Innocence of Muslims."

    In my view that was a perfectly proper finding for the judge to make.

13.  It had also been said that during the course of  cross-examination  the
    appellant gave a different answer when questioned about  the  point  by
    the Presenting Officer.  The appellant claimed that he had just  talked
    about the film that he had downloaded himself and that he  thought  the
    interviewer meant that version.   The judge pointed out that there  was
    no  mention  made  by  the  appellant  in  his  oral   evidence   about
    understanding the question in the interview as understanding about  the
    other film.  The judge was entitled to find as he did at  paragraph  40
    that it was surprising that the appellant was not apparently  aware  of
    public criticism of Innocence of Muslims made by  the  president.   The
    judge was similarly entitled to find a  considerable  coincidence,  and
    not one that he believed, that Rasul should have heard about  the  film
    Innocence of Muslims, to the extent that he was interested  in  it  and
    then discussed it with the appellant, and  yet  he  had  not  heard  of
    mentioned to him that no lesser a person  than  the  President  of  the
    Islamic Republic strongly disapproved of the film. The point the  judge
    was making and in  my  view  perfectly  validly,  was  that  these  two
    individuals must have realised that what they were doing would  not  be
    approved of by the authorities.

14.  At paragraph 69 the judge pointed out that he had given as much  credit
    as he felt able for the consistencies that he found in the  appellant's
    account, and there was a limited amount of credit that had to be  given
    to him as a witness in relation to the  consistency  that  his  account
    bore to the background evidence about the way people who are thought to
    be anti-  Islamic  are  regarded  by  the  authorities.  He  concluded,
    however, that the claim made by the appellant was a fabrication and did
    not believe that the appellant had any fear of persecution  or  serious
    harm at the hands of the authorities.  The judge  considered  that  the
    appellant would not at any risk were he to be  returned  and  dismissed
    the appeal.

15.  I believe that the judge was entitled to find as he did and  I  believe
    that the criticisms made of him for proceeding to make the findings  in
    relation to the claim without sight of the  YouTube  page  which  shows
    Innocence of Muslims does not disclose any error of law  on  his  part.
    The appellant was represented and at no time was it ever  suggested  on
    behalf of the appellant  that  the  judge  should  view  the  DVD.  The
    appellant, for whatever reason, decided not to be  represented  at  the
    hearing and failed to adduce any specific evidence in relation  to  it.
    That was his choice.

14.  There is no error  of  law  in  his  determination  and  I  uphold  the
    determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cope.  This  appeal  is
    dismissed.





Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

