
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03848/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 October 2014                            |On 7 November 2014            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                     T S
                         (anonymity DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis (Counsel instructed by Theva Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in a determination  before  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Abebrese) promulgated on 5  August  2014  in  which  he
    dismissed the appeal on asylum, humanitarian and human rights  grounds.



2.   The appellant's date of birth is 3 March 1991 and he is  a  citizen  of
    Sri Lanka.

Background

3.   The appellant claimed to be at risk of  persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason on return to Sri Lanka.  The appellant claimed  that  he  had  a
    past history of LTTE involvement and was subsequently rehabilitated  to
    his home village in 2009 subject to restrictions.  He set up a  tuition
    centre where he employed 29 teachers including an ex-LTTE member called
    Mr A.  The appellant was arrested on 5 January 2014,  taken  to  a  CID
    camp where he was  questioned  for  three  to  four  days,  beaten  and
    tortured.  He was released from detention after  payment  of  a  bribe.
    His uncle arranged for his release and for an agent to take him to  the
    UK.

4.   In reasons for refusal dated 23 May 2014  the  respondent  accepted  as
    credible the appellant's claim to have been kidnapped and  involved  in
    the LTTE in the past.  There was no documentary or independent evidence
    to support the establishment of a tuition centre and no evidence of any
    high profile on the part of Mr A.  The respondent did not  accept  that
    the appellant had been arrested and detained in 2014 and relied on  the
    country guidance case of GJ and Others (Post-Civil War  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.

5.   In a determination the Tribunal set out findings from paragraph  13  to
    20.  The Tribunal did not find the appellant's claim  to  be  credible.
    There was no reason why Mr A was arrested at this  time,  when  he  was
    under restriction and rehabilitation.  It was not  realistic  that  the
    appellant would  be  arrested  five  years  after  his  involvement  in
    incidents in 2009.  The evidence revealed a tenuous connection with  Mr
    A.  The Tribunal did not find it credible that the appellant set  up  a
    tuition centre or employed 29 people  and  found  his  evidence  as  to
    methods of recruitment to be lacking in credibility.  It found that the
    appellant had no experience upon which to be able to set up  running  a
    business and that he lacked the skills or  organisational  know-how  to
    set up a tuition centre.

6.   The Tribunal considered in the alternative that the appellant  was  not
    a person at risk under the categories listed in GJ.  It found that  his
    account did not lie with the objective  material  regarding  Sri  Lanka
    post-2009 and/or GJ.  There was insufficient evidence of any  political
    activity since leaving Sri Lanka and he would not  be  perceived  as  a
    person intent on reviving the Civil War.  It found that he would not be
    at risk because he had been  released  without  charge.   He  found  no
    evidence to show that he would be placed on a  stop-list  or  otherwise
    have a high profile.  The Tribunal placed little weight on  the  expert
    evidence from Dr Chris Smith or on the medical report from Dr Martin.


Grounds for Permission

7.   The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision relying on eight grounds of appeal as follows:

    (1)  The Tribunal materially erred by refusing to grant the appellant's
         application for an adjournment.


    (2)  The  Tribunal's  findings  that  it  was  not  credible  that  the
         appellant set up a tuition  centre  were  not  adequately  reasoned
         and/or made without proper reference to the appellant's evidence in
         cross-examination.


    (3)  No adequate reasons were  given  for  departing  from  the  expert
         opinion of Dr Smith or from the objective evidence.


    (4)  Reasons for finding that the appellant was not credible as to  his
         detention  in  January  2014  were  flawed  and  inconsistent  with
         objective evidence.


    (5)  The Tribunal materially erred by failing to place  any  weight  on
         the letter of Dr S Savamohan.


    (6)  The Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons  for  departing  from
         the expert medical opinion of Dr Martin.


    (7)  The Tribunal erred in assessing risk as set out in GJ and  Others.




    (8)  The Tribunal  erred  by  failing  to  give  any  consideration  to
         paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules.

Permission

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge De  Haney
    on 11 September 2014.

9.   Judge De Haney found the first ground  in  respect  of  an  adjournment
    unarguable.  Whilst  finding  the  other  grounds  were  "unnecessarily
    prolix" Judge De Haney considered there were  arguable  errors  of  law
    that the reasoning was insufficient for both  the  adverse  credibility
    findings and in the treatment of the medical and expert reports.

Rule 24 Response

10.  The respondent opposed  the  appeal  arguing  that  the  second  ground
    amounted  to  a  disagreement  only.   Grounds  3  and  4  referred  to
    background evidence that was before the Tribunal.  The  respondent  was
    unable to comment further because  she  lacked  the  relevant  material
    including the file or evidence.

11.  Grounds 7 and 8 were relevant  in  the  event  of  upholding  that  the
    Tribunal's credibility findings were unsustainable.

Error of Law Hearing

12.  At the hearing before me Mr Shilliday and Mr Lewis indicated that  they
    had had an opportunity to discuss the appeal prior to the hearing.   Mr
    Lewis confirmed that new evidence was  now  available  from  the  local
    officer in the area and from  a  local  MP  both  confirming  that  the
    appellant had established a tuition centre as a local business. The new
    evidence was that to which the adjournment  application  was  made  and
    refused by the Tribunal.  Mr Shilliday conceded that this  amounted  to
    an error of law on ground 1.  He further  accepted  that  there  was  a
    clear error with regard to the Tribunal's failure to give  reasons  for
    placing no weight on the medical evidence.  He did not, however, accept
    that there was any error with regard to  the  Tribunal's  reasoning  in
    rejecting the evidence of Dr Chris Smith.

13.  Mr Lewis indicated that his primary submission related  to  the  ground
    refusal to grant an adjournment, which was a clear error of law in view
    of the new evidence obtained by the appellant.

14.  Further the failure to give reasons for rejecting the medical  evidence
    was material when considered in the context of the Secretary of State's
    reasons for refusal at paragraphs 59 to 63.   The  respondent  accepted
    that the appellant's treatment  in  2013  was  evidenced  in  objective
    material but  raised  concerns  that  there  was  no  medical  evidence
    provided.  The appellant responded to those concerns  and  produced  an
    expert medical report for the Tribunal hearing.  It  was  extraordinary
    in that context for the Tribunal to place little weight on the  medical
    evidence that supported the appellant's claim.

Discussion

15.  I heard the submissions made by both  representatives  and  taken  into
    account the concessions indicated by Mr Shilliday. I am satisfied  that
    the determination discloses a material  error  of  law  such  that  the
    determination must now be set aside.

16.  The Tribunal at [24] placed little weight on the  medical  evidence  of
    Dr Martin  because  "they  are  based  on  self-corroborative  evidence
    provided to him in the main by the  appellant  in  that  the  appellant
    claims that he sustained  injuries  and  he  was  tortured  during  his
    detention".  The Tribunal then concluded that it was not persuaded that
    the scars were caused directly as a result of being beaten and tortured
    notwithstanding that Dr Martin's evidence was  that  they  were  caused
    directly as a result of being beaten and tortured.   I  find  that  the
    Tribunal has failed to give adequate reasons for effectively  rejecting
    the medical evidence which concluded that there was no doubt  that  the
    injuries were caused intentionally  and  highly  likely  to  have  been
    caused by torture .  I further find that the Tribunal  did  not  fairly
    assess the medical evidence in the  context  that  it  was  adduced  in
    response to the Secretary of State's concerns that there was an absence
    of medical evidence.

17.  Secondly, I am satisfied that the Tribunal erred in refusing  to  grant
    an adjournment for the appellant to obtain  further  evidence  relevant
    to the core of his claim, namely the establishment of a tuition centre.
     I find that the appellant has now obtained new relevant evidence which
    is material to the credibility of his claim.

18.  In considering how to remake  the  decision  I  have  referred  to  the
    President's Practice direction.  I take the view that the matter should
    be  heard  afresh  because  the  errors   have   tainted   the   entire
    determination and findings therein, together with the fact  that  there
    is new evidence relevant to credibility and assessment of risk,  to  be
    considered.

Notice of Decision

There is an error of law in the determination which shall be set aside.

The appeal is remitted to Taylor House for hearing de novo (excluding  Judge
Abebrese) on 9 April 2015.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 6.11.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award - exempt.


Signed                                  Date 6.11.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
