
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03957/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 September2015                   |On 23 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             DILOJAN KARUNAKARAN
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jegarajah, instructed by A & P Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 9 June 2015, I found that there was an error on a point  of  law  in
    Judge Adio's decision and  reasons  statement  of  2  April  2015  that
    required it to be set aside and remade.

 2. As I indicated in the notice of decision of 9  June  2015,  a  copy  of
    which is annexed hereto for convenience, much of Judge Adio's  decision
    and reasons statement is preserved and  the  issues  that  have  to  be
    reconsidered are narrow.  I needed to rehear evidence  and  remake  the
    decision relating to the Home Office's allegation that  Mr  Karunakaran
    had given an implausible account about the help his father provided  to
    the LTTE because  on  the  Home  Office  reading  of  the  respondent's
    evidence it appeared that Mr Karunakaran's father helped the LTTE after
    the end of hostilities.

 3. At the start of the hearing  on  1  September  2015  I  explained  this
    position to Mr Avery and Ms Jegarajah because neither had been involved
    with this appeal previously.  Both had seen  my  earlier  decision  and
    were content with the limited issues that had to be revisited.

 4. Ms Jegarajah advised me that she might seek  to  argue  that  the  Home
    Office acted improperly when making its decision and  in  pursuing  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal because it  was  acting  contrary  to  its
    published country of origin information  and  thereby  contravened  the
    guidance given in CM (EM  country  guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00059(IAC).  I indicated that as this was the Secretary  of
    State's appeal, it was open to Ms Jegarajah to make any submissions she
    thought appropriate.

 5. I heard from the respondent.  Despite this  being  the  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State, I agreed that he should be examined in chief by  Ms
    Jegarajah and thereafter that he was cross-examined by Mr  Avery  since
    this seemed the most sensible approach in the circumstances.

 6.  Mr  Karunakaran  gave  his  evidence  through  the  Tribunal's   Tamil
    interpreter.  He was asked about his answers to  question  150  of  the
    asylum interview that took place on 29 April 2014.  He  confirmed  that
    his father's business involved transporting paddy sacks from the fields
    which were in LTTE controlled areas to the mill which was not and  that
    at the checkpoints the LTTE would place items they wanted to move among
    the paddy sacks.  This occurred up until the A9 road was closed,  which
    was in 2006.

 7. After the A9 road was  reopened,  Mr  Karunakaran  confirmed  that  the
    business resumed delivering paddy but that the LTTE activities  ceased.
    The road reopened in 2010, after the hostilities  ended.  He  confirmed
    that the allegations made against his father were made in 2011 but were
    about his father's activities between 2002 and 2006.   The  allegations
    were made in 2011 by a disgruntled employee who was sacked but who  had
    connections with the authorities.

 8. Mr Avery submitted that Mr Karunakaran had changed his account and that
    is was  odd  that  the  authorities  should  have  been  interested  in
    assistance provided to the LTTE so long ago.  According to Mr Avery, it
    was not plausible that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would  have  any
    continuing interests in him and his father in 2011 or now.

 9. Ms Jegarajah placed the additional evidence in  context  and  submitted
    that Mr Karunakaran had clarified the answer he gave at interview.   It
    was clear that he had never  said  that  his  father  was  involved  in
    helping the LTTE in 2011  and  the  Home  Office's  allegation  to  the
    contrary arose from a misunderstanding of his answers.  The  additional
    oral evidence confirmed that any involvement with the  LTTE  ceased  in
    2006.  The fact this was linked to the closure of the A9 road indicated
    that the evidence was reliable.

10. Ms Jegarajah reminded me that in GJ  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) as  referred  to  by  Judge  Adio.   The
    evidence would suggest that Mr Karunakaran would be on a stop list,  as
    described at paragraph 356(7d).  Ms Jegarajah also  submitted  that  it
    was not open to the Home Office to  argue  anything  to  the  contrary,
    given the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in CM.  The August  2014
    Country of Information Service Report clearly indicated the  continuing
    interest in people like Mr Karunakaran.

11. I have considered  the  additional  evidence  and  submissions.   I  am
    satisfied that the  Home  Office  was  mistaken  in  thinking  that  Mr
    Karunakaran said in interview that his father was involved  in  helping
    the LTTE in 2011.  In context, it is clear that at question 150 of  his
    asylum interview record, he was recounting what his father had done  in
    the past to help the LTTE.  This is evident, for example, by  the  fact
    Mr Karunakaran referred to "those days".  In addition, I have  had  the
    benefit of hearing from Mr Karunakaran myself.  He was  cross  examined
    at the hearing and did not waiver in his evidence.  He was clearly  not
    primed as his answers were without hesitation and were  appropriate  to
    the questions asked.

12. It follows that I find there is nothing in the Home Office's allegation
    that Mr Karunakaran's account is implausible.  He has never  said  that
    he or his father  continued  to  help  the  LTTE  after  2009  and  the
    allegation relied on by the Home Office arose from  a  misunderstanding
    of the answers he gave during his interview.  Those  answers  have  now
    been clarified.  Because they do not undermine Judge  Adio's  preserved
    findings, I find that Mr Karunakaran is a refugee.

13. Turning to Ms Jegarajah's other submission, I find it is empty  because
    the Home Office's case was not a failure to disclose material  it  knew
    about or  should  have  known  about  but  on  an  allegation  that  Mr
    Karunakaran's evidence was not credible.  As a result, I  do  not  find
    that there is sufficient evidence that the Home Office knowingly misled
    the Tribunal by not focusing  on  its  policy  guidance  regarding  Sri
    Lanka.  Placing the case in context, the Home  Office  focused  on  the
    issue of credibility and not on the question that if the  account  were
    true whether the appellant would be a refugee.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge Adio contained  an  error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.

I remake the decision and find that the respondent is a refugee.   Therefore
Mr Karunakaran's original appeal against the immigration decision of 29  May
2014 is allowed.




                               Signed   Date 23 October 2015


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                   ANNEX: ERROR ON A POINT OF LAW DECISION

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio's
    decision and  reasons  statement  promulgated  on  2  April  2015.   In
    essence, the Secretary of State argues that Judge Adio failed  to  take
    into consideration her argument that a key  part  of  Mr  Karunakaran's
    account was so implausible as to undermine the entirety of  the  claim.
    Ms Savage confirmed this was the extent of the appeal.

 2. As indicated at paragraph 18 of her reasons  for  refusal  letter,  the
    Secretary of State believed the appellant to have said that his  father
    was still assisting the LTTE in 2011.  The Secretary of State drew this
    conclusion from the answer given to question  150  of  the  substantive
    asylum interview.  Given that the LTTE ceased operations in 2009,  this
    was impossible.  Mr Dhanji acknowledged that he had no evidence that Mr
    Karunakaran had sought to challenge the Secretary of State's expression
    of his account at any juncture in the appeal process before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 3. It is evident from paragraphs 28 and 29 of his determination that Judge
    Adio properly considered the coherence of Mr Karunakaran's accounts and
    his findings are well reasoned.  However, at no point  has  Judge  Adio
    engaged with the issue of the plausibility of those accounts as  argued
    by the Secretary of State.  Neither has he made a finding as to whether
    the Secretary of State's  reading  of  the  evidence  is  accurate  and
    reliable.

 4. These deficiencies are not ones that I can correct.  The  Secretary  of
    State  raised  a  legitimate  concern  about  the  plausibility  of  Mr
    Karunakaran's claim and it was not dealt with by Judge Adio.  This is a
    material issue because if the Secretary of  State's  argument  is  made
    out, then irrespective of the coherence of the appellant's account,  it
    would be so implausible as to make it impossible  to  accept  as  being
    truthful.

Decision

 5. It follows that I find there is legal error in the decision and reasons
    statement because Judge Adio has failed  to  engage  with  all  of  the
    issues pleaded in the case.

 6. It also follows that the decision and reasons statement has to  be  set
    aside for this issue to be addressed.  However, after discussions  with
    both representatives, I am satisfied that it is not  necessary  to  re-
    examine the entirety of the appellant's  evidence  because  as  I  have
    indicated  even  if   the   accounts   are   coherent   the   potential
    implausibility would nevertheless be of such magnitude as to  undermine
    Mr Karunakaran's credibility.

 7. As no interpreter was available at Field House on 9  June  2015  I  was
    unable to remake the decision as I could not hear evidence.  A  resumed
    hearing will be arranged, subject to the following directions.

Directions for resumed hearing

 8. The appeal hearing is to be resumed on the earliest  opportunity  after
    14 days before me DUTJ McCarthy).

 9. A Tamil interpreter is required.

10. The likely hearing time is 1.5 hours.

11. The issues are limited to those indicated above.

12. Mr Karunakaran is required to provide a witness statement, dealing with
    the issue identified above, at least 14 days before the next hearing.

Summary of decision

The decision  and  reasons  statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Adio
contains an error of law and is set aside to the extent indicated above.

A resumed hearing will be arranged, subject  to  the  above  directions,  in
order to address the remaining issues.
