
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03375/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th March 2016                             |On 31st March 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                     MK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss G Peterson, Counsel, instructed by Stuart & Co
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant I refer to the parties
    as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of Turkey, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 16th February 2015
    to refuse his application for asylum in the UK.    First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dineen allowed the appeal on asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.
    The Secretary of State now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that   there   were   serious
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's account of having been involved with
    the PKK or any other opposition party in Turkey, his claim to have been
    detained by the authorities there, and  the  duration  of  any  alleged
    detention there and the judge rejected this  part  of  the  Appellant's
    account. However the  judge  found  that  the  fact  that  two  of  the
    Appellant's brothers have been granted refugee status in the  UK  is  a
    matter which "would be likely  to  be  revealed  by  enquiries  in  the
    Appellant's home area and which in any event would have to be  revealed
    by the Appellant answering truthfully if about his family" [76].

 4. The judge further found that it is likely that the Appellant  would  be
    asked why he claimed asylum in the UK and, if answering such  questions
    truthfully, he would have to admit that initially his case  for  asylum
    was based on his claimed or suspected involvement with the PKK [77].

 5. The judge concluded that, notwithstanding his findings in  relation  to
    the Appellant's lack of credibility;

         "he would be likely to be passed on for  further  investigation  to
         the police and then to the Anti-Terror branch.   In  the  hands  of
         either of those organisations he would, bearing in mind the country
         information referred to above,  be  at  real  risk  of  persecutory
         treatment." [78]

 6. He found it unlikely that the Turkish authorities would be inclined  to
    accept that the Appellant was lying to the  UK  authorities  about  his
    activities and history. The judge found that as the Appellant would  be
    at risk of persecution it would not be reasonable to expect  his  child
    to leave the UK to go to Turkey and allowed the appeal under Article  8
    also.

 7. In the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Secretary  of  State
    contends that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  apply  the
    relevant case law of CY  (Turkey)  v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  393;  IM
    (Turkey) v SSHD [2207] EWCA Civ  505;  and  CE  (Turkey)  [2004]  UKIAT
    00233.  It  is  further  contended  that  the  judge  noted  that   the
    Appellant's mother came to  the  UK  and  returned  to  Turkey  without
    difficulty and it is contended that this demonstrates that there is  no
    risk to the Appellant.  The Secretary of State  further  contends  that
    the enforced return of  a  failed  asylum  seeker  is  not  a  category
    identified in any case law which would place the Appellant at  risk  in
    Turkey.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it is arguable  that
    the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    Appellant was at risk on return despite not being a  truthful  witness.
    In the Rule 24 statement it is contended that the judge  was  right  in
    allowing the appeal in that the Appellant claimed that he was  at  risk
    of returning to Turkey on the basis of his association with his  family
    members who are "known separatists".

 9. At the hearing before me Miss Peterson submitted that  the  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal opened with a concession from the Secretary  of
    State that the Appellant's brothers had made claims for asylum based on
    the same sorts of activities as those claimed  by  the  Appellant.  She
    said that the Presenting Officer said that  one  of  the  brothers  was
    granted asylum and the other brother's  application  was  refused,  but
    that decision was withdrawn  before  his  appeal  and  he  was  granted
    exceptional leave to remain in the  UK.   She  submitted  that  it  was
    accepted they had  given  credible  accounts  and  she  submitted  that
    submissions were made in the First-tier Tribunal that  the  Appellant's
    family was a political family.

10. Miss Peterson submitted that  she  was  not  entirely  happy  with  the
    findings made by the judge and submitted that  the  judge  should  have
    taken the status of and decisions made in relation to  the  Appellant's
    brothers as  his  starting  point  for  the  credibility  findings  but
    submitted that in the end that is where the judge's  findings  did  go.
    She submitted that the conclusion was open to the judge  based  on  all
    factors set out in IK (Returnees - records  -  IFA)  Turkey  CG  [2004]
    UKIAT 00312 and that the judge's findings at paragraph 76 are based  on
    these submissions.  She submitted that is not simply arrest warrants on
    the GBTS but other factors which spark further  investigations  by  the
    Turkish authorities upon return.

11. Miss Peterson submitted that the evidence before the judge included the
    Home Office concession and the  Appellant's  responses  in  his  asylum
    interview in relation  to  his  brothers  and  their  activities.   She
    submitted that the judge essentially concluded at paragraphs 76 and  78
    that the standing of the family will come to light and that would  lead
    to further investigations of the Appellant.  She submitted  that  those
    findings can stand on  the  basis  of  the  country  guidance  and  the
    situation in Turkey as  it  was  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.   She
    submitted that the situation has arguably worsened since then.

12. Miss Peterson strongly disputed that there was  any  evidence  for  the
    judge's assertion at paragraph 50 of his decision that "in  any  event,
    the Appellant's wife states clearly that  she  and  their  child  would
    accompany him if he were to have to return to Turkey".   She  submitted
    that there was no evidence for this in the Appellant's  wife's  witness
    statement or in her record of her oral evidence.  She  submitted   that
    there is no evidence that the Appellant's wife and child  would  return
    with him to Turkey.

13. Relying on IK Miss Peterson  submitted  that  a  number  of  cumulative
    factors would cause further investigation in relation to the Appellant.
    These include his family connections, his  Kurdish  ethnicity  and  his
    lack of passport  upon arrival in Turkey.

14. Mr Nath submitted that the judge has not set out enough information  as
    to  his  reasoning.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  states  that  the
    Appellant's brothers were granted refugee status but does not  go  into
    the reasons why  they  were  so  granted  and  does  not  go  into  the
    Appellant's Asylum Interview Record.  He accepted that he  had  a  note
    that the Presenting Officer mentioned the Appellant's brothers  at  the
    outset of the  hearing.  He submitted that,  although  the  Appellant's
    case is in relation to the risks caused  by  his  family's  activities,
    paragraphs 76 and 78 do not explicitly state this.  He  submitted  that
    the judge fell short of dealing properly with  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation.

Error of Law

15. I accept that on an initial reading of  paragraph  76  of  the  judge's
    decision it may appear that the judge considered that the  simple  fact
    that his brothers had been granted refugee status in the UK would be  a
    matter which would lead to an increased risk  for  the  Appellant  upon
    return to  Turkey.   However,  I  take  into  account  Miss  Peterson's
    submissions and I accept that the Appellant had detailed his  brothers'
    activities in the asylum interview, in particular from  paragraphs  117
    onwards.  I accept that this evidence was before the judge as  well  as
    the indication from the Presenting  Officer  at  the  outset  that  the
    Appellant's brothers' accounts had been accepted.  It is  therefore  is
    in this context and on the  basis  of  this  evidence  that  the  judge
    reached the conclusion at paragraph 76.   I  accept  that  reading  the
    decision as a whole and in light of the evidence before the judge  that
    this conclusion at paragraph 76 was more than just a reference  to  the
    fact that the Appellant's brothers have been granted refugee status.  I
    accept that the judge must have had in mind the evidence before him  as
    to the Appellant's family background  and  profile  which  he  accepted
    would be likely to be revealed by enquiries  in  the  Appellant's  home
    area.

16. At paragraph 77 the judge talked about the fact that the Appellant is a
    failed asylum seeker and I accept that this in itself would  not  be  a
    ground  for allowing the  appeal.  However, I consider that  this  must
    be read in the context of paragraphs  76  and  78  and  I  accept  Miss
    Peterson's submission that the judge took into account  the  cumulative
    effect of these factors in reaching his conclusion that  the  Appellant
    would be subject to investigation upon return to Turkey  and  the  risk
    associated with that.  This conclusion was open to the judge  in  light
    of the guidance in IK.

17. The judge also allowed the appeal on human rights grounds following  on
    from his findings that the Appellant would be at risk on return.   This
    falls short of a full examination of the Appellant's  right  to  family
    life and in this context I note that there  is  nothing  before  me  to
    indicate that there was evidence before the judge that the  Appellant's
    wife said that she and her child would accompany the  Appellant  if  he
    had to return to Turkey.  In any event, in light of the fact  that  the
    judge allowed the appeal under Article 8 because of  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant on return [51], I am satisfied  that  there  is  no  material
    error in his consideration of this part of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

18. The judge made no material error in the decision and  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed                              Date: 14th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date: 14th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

