
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03828/2008


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 October 2016                          |On 14 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                     ts
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati of Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 28  October  1977.   He
    appeals the decision of the respondent made over six years  ago  on  22
    May 2008 to remove him and to refuse his asylum claim.  On 3 April 2008
    the respondent had found that the appellant was a person in respect  of
    whom  removal  directions  may  be  given  under  Section  10  of   the
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999  on  the  basis  that  he  had  used
    deception.

2.   The background to the appellant's arrival in this country  is  that  he
    applied in February 2004 for an entry clearance to come to the UK as  a
    working holidaymaker.  Although the application was initially  refused,
    it appears that he successfully appealed the decision and he arrived in
    the United Kingdom on 27 April 2006.  His working holidaymaker visa was
    due to expire on 6 April 2008.  On 3 April 2008 he applied for asylum.

3.   The appeal as can be seen has had a lengthy  history.   It  first  came
    before an Immigration Judge on 15 September 2008.  The judge  dismissed
    the appeal.  There was a reconsideration  hearing  on  25  March  2009.
    While the Tribunal identified a material error of law in  the  decision
    of the Immigration Judge, it  substituted  a  decision  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal  on  all  grounds  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    decision.  There was an application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal.  The appeal was disposed of by consent proceedings  on
    8 October 2010. A fresh hearing was directed. There was then a  lengthy
    delay before the matter in fact came to the Upper Tribunal.  On 30 June
    2015 the Tribunal directed there should be  a  Case  Management  Review
    hearing on 21 July 2015 at the Harmondsworth Hearing Centre.

4.   The appellant's appeal then came before  the  Tribunal  on  12  January
    2016 when the hearing was adjourned until 3 February 2016.

5.   The  narrow  issue  taken  before  me  at  the  hearing  relates  to  a
    jurisdictional point.  It was argued before the First-tier  Judge  that
    the removal decision that had been made in respect of the appellant was
    unlawful.  This argument was raised before the First-tier Judge at  the
    hearing on 12 January 2016 when the appellant  was  represented  by  Ms
    Allen.  At the adjourned hearing the appellant was  represented  by  Ms
    Bayati, who appeared before me.  The relevant part of the  decision  of
    the First-tier Judge reads as follows:

         "4.  The first hearing before me was on 12th January 2016.  On that
             occasion Ms Allen submitted that I had no jurisdiction to hear
             the appeal as the removal decision made on 22nd May  2008  was
             unlawful.  The appellant had been served with Form  IS151A  on
             3rd  April  2008.   That  form  indicated  that  the  relevant
             immigration officer was satisfied that the appellant had  used
             deception  in  seeking  leave  to  remain.   In  the  specific
             statement of reasons, it is recorded that  the  appellant  had
             entered the UK on a valid working holiday visa.  The appellant
             had said that he had problems in Sri Lanka before leaving  the
             country and he failed to disclose this to the ECO and also  to
             the IO at the time of arrival in the UK.


         5.   Ms Allen submitted that  the  appellant  had  entered  the  UK
             lawfully and was not an overstayer.  Events  had  deteriorated
             whilst he was in the UK and  he  had  then  decided  to  claim
             asylum.   There  had  been  no  verbal  deception.   That  was
             consistent with the account given  by  the  appellant  in  his
             asylum interview.  The appellant had been quite clear that  he
             had not said that he intended to claim asylum in the UK.   The
             appellant had made a subject access request to the  respondent
             for his file.  He had not received a response.


         6.   Ms Bell provided me with a copy of the Form IA126E  which  was
             completed by an immigration officer when the appellant claimed
             asylum on 3rd  April  2008.   That  form  includes  a  section
             entitled, 'Illegal Entry Contention'.  The form indicates that
             the appellant was interviewed under caution on the same  date.
             It continues,


                  'The subject admitted to the interviewing officer that  on
                  arrival, when questioned by an Immigration Officer, stated
                  that he had come to the United Kingdom to work.   However,
                  it had been his true intention to claim asylum once in the
                  United Kingdom, deceiving the Immigration Officer  on  the
                  control'.


         7.   Ms Bell also provided me with a file minute completed by Sonya
             Poulter who had decided that the IS151 decision should not  be
             withdrawn.   She  had  made  enquiries  with  the  Immigration
             Officer  who  conducted  the  interview.   That  officer   had
             confirmed that the tape recording of the interview would  have
             been destroyed; probably  around  2012.   The  IS126E  was  an
             official record of a caution interview.


         8.   I considered that it was more likely than not that the tape of
             the interview of 3rd April 2008 had been destroyed  given  the
             length of time since that interview.  I took into account that
             the form  IS126E  had  been  completed  at  the  time  of  the
             interview.  That form clearly  records  that  the  appellant's
             intention when he entered the UK was to claim asylum.  On  the
             balance of probabilities, I was satisfied that the  respondent
             had demonstrated that the appellant used deception in  seeking
             leave to remain in the UK and that the  removal  decision  was
             therefore lawful.  I determined that  I  had  jurisdiction  to
             hear the appeal.


         9.   Ms Allen then made an application to adjourn  the  hearing  to
             enable the appellant to provide evidence in  order  to  update
             his case.  She said  that  the  bundle  of  evidence  did  not
             include a copy of an interview with the appellant in 2011  nor
             did it contain a number of documents  submitted  to  the  case
             owner including documents submitted for the hearing before the
             Court of Appeal.  Ms Bell opposed the application.   Initially
             I indicated that I was  not  prepared  to  adjourn  the  case.
             Clear directions had been set at the Case  Management  hearing
             on 27th August 2015  that,  on  receipt  of  the  Home  Office
             bundle, the appellant's representative should notify the  Home
             Office in writing of any documents they consider to be missing
             from the  Home  Office  bundle  within  28  days.   A  further
             direction was made that the appellant's representative  should
             serve an appeal  bundle  not  less  than  5  days  before  the
             hearing.


         10.  On reflection I considered the fact  that  the  appellant  had
             only been served with  a  copy  of  the  file  minute  at  the
             hearing.  Although his representatives should not have assumed
             that the  hearing  would  not  be  effective  and  although  I
             considered that the appellant had had ample  time  to  prepare
             his case, I considered that in order to be  scrupulously  fair
             to the appellant, I should allow an adjournment  in  order  to
             allow him time to submit any  further  evidence  on  which  he
             sought to rely.  I adjourned the hearing  until  3rd  February
             2016 before me.


         11.   On  3rd  February  2016  Ms  Bayati  applied  for  a  further
             adjournment  of  the  case.   She  said  that  the   appellant
             maintained that the immigration decision was not in accordance
             with the law.  She  said  that  the  appellant  lived  with  a
             relative who had extensive health needs.   The  appellant  had
             attempted to obtain a report from an independent social worker
             (ISW) in order to  assist  the  Tribunal.   An  ISW  had  been
             identified who could prepare a report  by  the  22nd  February
             2016.  Ms Bell opposed the application.


         12.  I considered that no new evidence had been put  before  me  to
             persuade me to alter my decision of the 12th January 2016 that
             I had jurisdiction  to  hear  the  appeal.   There  was  ample
             evidence before  me  to  show  the  health  condition  of  the
             appellant's relative.  The appellant and his witness were also
             in a position to give  me  oral  evidence  on  the  point.   I
             considered that I could determine the  appeal  fairly  without
             adjourning the case for the provision of an ISW's  report.   I
             therefore refused  the  application  for  an  adjournment  and
             proceeded to hear the appeal".

6.   In response to the arguments advanced by Ms Bayati,  the  judge  stated
    as follows in the concluding paragraphs of her decision:

         "79. I have set out above at paragraphs 4 to 8 the  reasons  why  I
             concluded at the earlier hearing that the immigration decision
             was a lawful decision.  Ms Bayati maintained that the decision
             was not in accordance with the law.  In her skeleton  argument
             she referred to the job offer that had been  received  by  the
             appellant.   I  attach  little  weight  to  that  letter.   No
             evidence was provided to me of any job  applications  made  by
             the appellant.  The letter is addressed to the appellant  care
             of his address in Sri Lanka whilst he was living in the UK.


         80.  When the appellant completed his  application  for  a  working
             holidaymaker visa he said on his application that he  intended
             to see the country, take  employment  and  complete  his  CIMA
             finals.  No evidence was provided before me to show  that  the
             appellant had taken the opportunity to  undertake  appropriate
             work experience as he had suggested in his application.   When
             cross examined on this point the appellant said  that  he  had
             not taken up his CIMA studies in the UK; he said  it  was  not
             necessary as a working holidaymaker.


         81.  When he was asked why he had made reference  to  CIMA  in  his
             application, the appellant said that it was very costly to  do
             it and the college said he needed a student  visa  to  do  it.
             The appellant provided no evidence to suggest that he had made
             any enquiries with colleges or prospective employers to enable
             him to progress his CIMA studies.  On the evidence before me I
             find that the immigration decision was made in accordance with
             the law".

7.   The judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

8.   There was an application for permission to  appeal.   The  grounds  are
    acknowledged to be extremely lengthy by Ms  Bayati  who  settled  them.
    The first seventeen paragraphs of the grounds deal with the issues that
    were raised before me.  The remaining grounds (paragraph 18 to 39) take
    issue with other aspects of the  determination  including  the  judge's
    factual analysis.  Permission was granted on all grounds by the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 4 April 2016.  It was said that it was  arguable  that
    the judge had erred in law in finding that the Home Office form  IS126E
    represented "sufficient evidence to show the appellant was  an  illegal
    entrant who used deception to gain  entry  to  the  UK  and  hence  the
    respondent's removal decision was lawful".

9.   The appeal was  listed  for  a  Case  Management  Review  before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Storey on 25 May 2016 to consider  the  application  for
    disclosure by the respondent of the file details held by  her  relating
    to an interview with the appellant on 3 April  2008  at  Croydon.   The
    judge refused the application and ruled that the appellant  was  barred
    from continuing to pursue the matter relating to disclosure of the file
    particulars of the 2008 interview at the next hearing.

10.  The decision of Judge Storey had to a certain extent been overtaken  by
    subsequent disclosure by the respondent prior to the hearing before me.
     An additional difficulty was that neither party had had sight  of  the
    decision of Judge Storey prior to the hearing.   Counsel  had  obtained
    her copy from the appellant and I adjourned the proceedings briefly  to
    give Mr Bramble the opportunity to read it.

11.  Mr Bramble drew to my attention that in paragraph  5  of  the  decision
    (having dealt with the disclosure issue) the  judge  had  continued  as
    follows:

         "As it happens, I consider that the judge's treatment of the matter
         of whether the respondent had made a lawful decision to  treat  the
         appellant as an illegal entrant in 2008 was unimpeachable.  But  it
         was not in fact a matter which was justiciable  before  him  [sic].
         The only matter that was before the judge, following the  terms  of
         the consent order made by the Court of Appeal  and  the  subsequent
         remittal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  was  whether  to  allow  or
         dismiss the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to
         remove the appellant having refused his asylum claim".

12.  Mr Bramble raised the issue as whether this was appropriately a  matter
    to be dealt with at the Case Management  Review.   Mr  Bramble  further
    acknowledged that the burden was on the Secretary of State to make good
    the allegation of deception which rested on the key  sentence  "However
    it had been his true intention to  claim  asylum  once  in  the  United
    Kingdom, deceiving the Immigration Officer on the control".

13.  Mr Bramble asked rhetorically if there was no typed or tape  record  of
    the interview, was what was said sufficient to satisfy  the  burden  of
    proof  resting  on  the  Secretary  of  State.   If  the  evidence  was
    insufficient, then the judge had erred in finding  that  deception  had
    been made out.

14.  Counsel took me to the screening interview that had taken place on  the
    same day with the same Immigration Officer.   The  appellant  had  said
    that he was currently working in Piccadilly Circus  and  was  suffering
    from various medical conditions including vitiligo and  headaches.   He
    had used his own passport to  enter  the  country  and  he  had  passed
    through immigration control.  When asked what his reason was for coming
    to the UK he is recorded as having said:

         "I came here on a working holiday visa and I was working.


         Due to the problems in Sri Lanka, there is massive fraud among  the
             Sinhalese.


         I want to go back to Sri Lanka, but I cannot  go  now  and  I  want
         temporary protection".

    When asked briefly to explain why he could not return to Sri  Lanka  he
    replied "I may be disappeared or tortured or killed if I go back  now".
    Counsel also referred to the appellant's answer to question 72  at  his
    asylum interview when he was asked when exactly had he decided to claim
    asylum.  The appellant's answer is lengthy but it is recorded  that  he
    had decided to claim asylum after/on "20 February 2008" having  visited
    the Immigration Advisory Service in January 2008.


15.  Ms Bayati referred to the Immigration Advisory  Service  letter  of  14
    April  2008  where  the  appellant's  advisors  had  responded  to  the
    allegation of deception and had stated as follows:

         "From interviewing our client, we think that Ms Nair  misunderstood
         our client's instructions.  [Our client] at the time he applied for
         a working holidaymaker visa, in February  2004,  had  not  had  any
         threats made against him at this time.  The  threats  made  against
         him and communicated to his parents were made subsequently  to  him
         leaving Sri Lanka, and at the time  he  made  his  entry  clearance
         application he was not in fear of  his  former  colleagues  who  he
         reported to his management.  We hope that  on  the  basis  of  this
         information, that this section upon the IS151A, we have referred to
         can be disregarded".

16.  Counsel said there had never been any response  to  this  letter.   The
    threats made against the appellant had arisen after his departure  from
    Sri Lanka.  The initial application for the entry clearance had been in
    2004 and it had been granted in  2006.   What  had  been  said  by  the
    Immigration Officer to support the allegation of illegal entry was  not
    correct.  It was simply founded on an inference drawn by  the  officer.
    There was no evidence to support the conclusions that he had been party
    to deception when applying for the entry clearance or on entry.

17.  The Immigration Advisory Service had raised an issue about  the  matter
    of deception at the time.  There had been no response  to  the  letter.
    The First-tier Judge had  been  in  error  in  stating  that  the  form
    "clearly records that the appellant's intention when he entered the  UK
    was to claim asylum".  All that was recorded was an inference drawn  by
    the officer.

18.  Mr Bramble noted that  Ms  Nair  had  dealt  with  both  the  screening
    process and the notice that had been issued alleging  deception.   What
    was said later at the full interview was more  difficult.   One  should
    look at the documents at the time of the decision.  Was  it  sufficient
    to rely on what was said in the decision bearing in mind the  screening
    interview in the absence of any evidence of notes or  tape  recordings?
    If the allegation had not been sufficiently made good to prove the case
    "it stops there".  If what the judge had said in paragraph 8 (that  the
    form "clearly records that the appellant's intention  when  he  entered
    the UK was to claim asylum") was in fact simply an inference  drawn  by
    the officer, was the judge entitled on the  balance  of  probabilities,
    bearing in mind that the burden lay on the Secretary of State, to  find
    as she did?

19.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered the arguments on the point that has been raised in
    relation to the deception issue.

20.  As a preliminary matter, I take into account that Judge  Storey  barred
    any point being taken in relation to disclosure of the file particulars
    of the 2008 interview.  However, since that  decision  there  has  been
    disclosure and the matter is to that extent water under the bridge.

21.  The matter before Judge Storey was a  Case  Management  Review  hearing
    and I do not consider that his observation in paragraph 5 was  intended
    to bind the Tribunal at the full hearing.  In relation to what was said
    by the Court of Appeal in the consent order,  I  see  nothing  in  that
    order that would limit the issues before the Tribunal.  The matter  was
    listed for hearing afresh.

22.  Quite apart from the issue of disclosure, the  appellant  had  taken  a
    point on the legality of the respondent's decision in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  The only matter at issue at the CMR hearing was the disclosure
    issue and while disclosure was refused that  aspect  has  since  become
    academic.

23.  In relation to the powers of  a  Tribunal,  it  clearly  has  power  to
    determine its  own  jurisdiction.   This  was  not  a  case  which  was
    considered on its merits by the Court of Appeal - it was simply allowed
    and remitted to be heard afresh.   The  argument  about  deception  and
    whether the respondent's removal decision was lawful was one  that  was
    accepted as having been arguable when the First-tier  Tribunal  granted
    permission to appeal and accordingly it is a point  properly  at  issue
    before the Upper Tribunal.  It was not submitted  in  the  respondent's
    response that there was not jurisdiction to deal with the matter.

24.  In this case the burden rests on the Secretary of State  to  make  good
    her allegation of deception.  The appellant's admission that he came to
    the United Kingdom to work was not  inconsistent  with  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom as a working holidaymaker.  The judge's finding that  it
    was clearly recorded that the appellant's intention when he entered the
    UK was to claim  asylum  is  not  made  out  on  the  limited  material
    available.  The form records that a caution was administered.  There is
    no tape record or other note of the interview.  The material is  simply
    insufficient to support the judge's conclusion that  the  form  clearly
    recorded the appellant's intention.  What is set out on the face of  it
    is no more than an inference drawn by Ms Nair.

25.  This was not a point taken  years  later  -  the  Immigration  Advisory
    Service raised concerns in their  letter  of  14  April  2008,  clearly
    taking issue with the allegation of deception.  The advisors never  had
    the courtesy of a response to their letter in which  they  invited  the
    respondent to disregard the allegation of deception.

26.   Mr Bramble acknowledges there is  no  tape  or  other  record  of  the
    interview.  It appears from paragraph 7 of the determination  that  the
    tape would have been destroyed some four  years  after  the  interview.
    This was notwithstanding the letter written by the Immigration Advisory
    Service to which the representatives never had a reply.

27.  Counsel submitted that the judge had misdirected herself on  the  facts
    in concluding that the form clearly recorded the appellant's  intention
    when he entered the UK was to claim asylum.  On the material before  me
    the respondent has failed to make  good  the  allegation.   It  is  not
    demonstrated that the appellant made the admission about his intentions
    as  claimed.   Had  the  Immigration  Advisory  Service's  letter  been
    responded to and had a tape or transcript  been  provided,  the  matter
    could have been clarified.  Mr Bramble acknowledges that the  screening
    interview and the respondent's decision was taken on the same  day  and
    conducted by the same officer and regard could properly be had to that.
     There it is recorded, as I have said above, that the appellant came on
    a working holiday visa and worked and there does not appear to  be  any
    suggestion of deception in what he said, it does not indicate that  the
    appellant came to the United Kingdom with  the  intention  of  claiming
    asylum.  He came on a working holiday visa "and  I  was  working".   He
    refers to the problems in Sri Lanka and the fraud there and wanting  to
    return to Sri  Lanka  "but  I  cannot  go  now  and  I  want  temporary
    protection".  It is important to  note  that  the  appellant  uses  two
    different tenses when describing his history.  He  makes  no  admission
    that he intended to claim asylum and posed as a  working  holidaymaker.
    In paragraph 10.2 when asked why  he  could  not  return  to  his  home
    country he said "I may be disappeared or tortured or  killed  if  I  go
    back now".

28.  I was also referred to the answer to question  72  at  the  appellant's
    full interview but Mr Bramble points out that this was at a later  date
    and the screening interview and the decision was recorded by  the  same
    officer and accordingly merits more consideration than what was said at
    a later date.   Having  regard  to  what  was  said  at  the  screening
    interview and all the material circumstances in order to make good  the
    allegation it would have been necessary to point to an  admission  made
    at the interview.  While  the  judge  notes  that  the  form  had  been
    completed at  the  time  of  the  screening  interview,  the  screening
    interview does not advance the respondent's case that the appellant had
    practised deception.  The screening interview  says  clearly  that  the
    appellant entered the UK as a working holidaymaker to work.

29.  Neither party invited me to place reliance on what the judge stated  at
    paragraphs 79-81 of the determination. There she maintains the position
    that she had earlier taken. The grounds of appeal take issue  with  her
    observations about the CIMA course: the appellant had considered such a
    course in 2003 but he would have had to come on a student  visa  rather
    than a working holidaymaker visa.  In any event, there was  nothing  in
    the evidence at the adjourned hearing or the judge's reasoning  thereon
    that would have filled the evidential gap in the respondent's case and,
    as I say, neither party referred to it.

30.  It follows that the central plank on which the respondent's case  rests
    falls away.  As Mr Bramble pithily put it, if the  allegation  was  not
    made out "the case stops there".

Decision:

31.  The decision of the First-tier Judge was materially flawed in  law.   I
    re-make it.  The allegation of deception has not been  established  and
    it falls to the respondent to revisit the decision on a  lawful  basis.
    The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT - FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 12 October 2016

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
