

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03845/2014
                                                               AA/03852/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 April 2016                           |On 28 April 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                   IS (1)
                                   mA (2)
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, instructed by J M Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction  in  relation  to  the
appellants because of the nature of the case.  I consider it appropriate  to
make a similar order in the Upper Tribunal under Procedural  Rule  14(1)  to
prohibit the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  members
of the public to identify the appellants.  To give effect to this order  the
appellants are to be referred to by the initials above.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision and  reasons
    statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk that was promulgated on  18
    May 2015.

 2. The complaints raised are all focused on the judge's  consideration  of
    the evidence of the second appellant.  At the date of  hearing  he  was
    just under 12 years old.  He did not give oral evidence but provided  a
    handwritten letter explaining why he feared return to  Pakistan  and  a
    drawing of an incident when his  father  killed  another  person.   The
    appellant's fear of returning to Pakistan is also recorded in a  letter
    from his consultant paediatric  nephrologist  and  in  a  psychological
    report.

 3. To understand the  arguments,  it  is  necessary  have  regard  to  the
    paragraph that offends the appellant.

         "28.  I find that it is difficult to assess  the  veracity  of  the
         Second Appellant's evidence as  he  was  aged  under  10  when  the
         incident of shooting is said to have occurred and so is a minor and
         so I have to deal with his evidence as a  vulnerable  person  under
         the guidance given to me when dealing  with  such  persons.   I  am
         aware on the First Appellant's evidence as to how close she  is  to
         her son and how concerned and keen she is to provide him  with  the
         medical evidence that he requires.  I cannot rule out, having heard
         and seen the First Appellant's evidence that the  Second  Appellant
         will also have been made aware of this and I cannot rule  out  that
         he would be significantly influenced by his mother,  who  was  also
         present  in  the  psychological  assessment  interview.   In  those
         circumstances, I am  not  satisfied  that  the  Second  Appellant's
         evidence  is  sufficient  to  override  or  undermine  the  adverse
         credibility of the Fist Appellant who provides the main account."

 4. In summary, the grounds of appeal argue the following.

 5. The judge was wrong to have regard to judicial guidance  regarding  how
    to assess evidence from a vulnerable witness as the Joint  Presidential
    Guidance only applies where there is live evidence.

 6. The judge was wrong to approach the second appellant's evidence on  the
    basis that she could not "rule out" that he might have been  influenced
    by the first appellant, his mother.   The  judge  had  to  examine  the
    evidence of the second appellant in the round.

 7. The judge failed to have regard to a number of matters central  to  the
    second appellant's evidence, namely the fact two medical  professionals
    had assessed him and accepted that he feared return to Pakistan.

 8. The judge was wrong to approach the second appellant's evidence on  the
    basis that it might be capable of overriding the  negative  credibility
    findings made against the first appellant.  The proper  approach  would
    have been to assess the second appellant's evidence in isolation before
    reaching conclusions in the round.

 9. The appellant also argued that if the judge's approach  to  the  second
    appellant's evidence was wrong in law, then it affected  her  decisions
    in respect of the appeal against the refusal of the  asylum  claim  and
    against the refusal of the  human  rights  (private  and  family  life)
    claim.

10. In his submissions, Mr Pipe withdrew  the  first  argument  because  he
    appreciates that the judge had to have regard to the  second  appellant
    being a child and therefore that he was by law a vulnerable person.

11. Mr Pipe elaborated the other grounds.  He said  Judge  Birk  failed  to
    make a specific finding about the handwritten letter  provided  by  the
    second appellant and the fact that letter was prepared in the  presence
    of a student support and welfare officer.  He added that the judge made
    no findings regarding the drawing  provided  by  the  second  appellant
    about what had happened in Pakistan  before  he  left.   Mr  Pipe  also
    submitted that the idea that the first appellant was able to  influence
    the second appellant to the extent that the second appellant  was  able
    to deceive medical professionals and the student  support  and  welfare
    officer  was  unsound  since  the   second   appellant   had   learning
    difficulties as shown by the psychological report.

12. The Home Office's rule 24 response and Mr McVeety's reply are arguments
    in support of the judicial decision.  They argue that Judge  Birk  made
    clear findings that the account given by the first appellant was to  be
    rejected and comment that the judge gave good reasons for  finding  the
    documents relied upon by the appellants to be unreliable.  The findings
    regarding the documentary evidence was not challenged  in  the  grounds
    and Mr Pipe did not seek to amend the grounds to include this issue.

13. Both representatives described the decision and  reasons  statement  as
    being  poorly  structured  and  there  were  concerns  about   numerous
    typographical errors but both recognised these points did not  identify
    legal errors and merely undermined  the  confidence  they  had  in  the
    decision.

14. I reserved my decision and reasons which I now give.

15. Although I accept that  the  decision  and  reasons  statement  is  not
    particularly well structured, I  do  not  find  that  it  is  so  badly
    structured as to reveal legal error.  When examined, it is  clear  that
    Judge Birk has considered and assessed the separate strands of evidence
    before bringing her findings together for an overall assessment.

16. The strands of evidence she had were: (i) the evidence from  the  first
    appellant, (ii) the evidence  from  the  second  appellant,  (iii)  the
    documentary evidence relied on by the appellants,  and  (iv)  documents
    relied on by the respondent.  Judge Birk dealt with  these  strands  in
    turn.  In paragraphs 21 to 26 she gave cogent reasons for  finding  the
    first appellant not credible and those findings are not challenged.  In
    paragraphs 27 and 28 she found the evidence of the second appellant  to
    be weak  and  gave  reasons  for  her  findings.   Those  findings  are
    challenged as I have indicated.  In paragraphs  30  to  32  Judge  Birk
    rejected the reliability of the documentary evidence  provided  by  the
    appellants and her reasons are unchallenged.  In paragraph 33 she found
    the dealt with the first appellant's admission that  she  had  provided
    false and incorrect information in her visa application and again those
    findings are not challenged.  At paragraphs 21 and 29 Judge  Birk  gave
    summaries of her findings, and brought all  her  findings  together  in
    paragraph 34  where  she  decided  the  appellants'  evidence  was  not
    reliable and therefore they were not refugees.

17. It is in this context that I have to consider the findings in paragraph
    28.  In this context they make sense and do not  show  any  failure  to
    consider the evidence of the second appellant or  to  apply  the  wrong
    test.  It is clear from the last sentence of that paragraph that  Judge
    Birk recognised the possibility that the child's evidence might lead to
    a different conclusion than the conclusion she  reached  regarding  the
    first appellant.  But as she indicated in paragraphs  27  and  28,  the
    child's evidence was weak.

18. The complaint that Judge Birk was wrong to suggest that the  child  was
    significantly influenced by his  mother  is  not  sustainable  for  the
    following reasons.  It is acknowledged that the child  has  a  learning
    disability.  It is reasonably likely that  the  first  appellant  would
    have talked to him about what had happened in  Pakistan  and  that  the
    child's memories would be affected by the information provided  by  her
    albeit inadvertently.  This is  a  normal  process,  recorded  in  many
    studies involving the memories of adults and children, which show  that
    memories change.  In this way it was open to Judge Birk to  infer  that
    the child's evidence would be influenced by the  first  appellant.   Mr
    McVeety identified that the psychological evidence shows that the child
    was  not  asked  any  probing  questions  when   examined.    This   is
    understandable given his learning disability but  means  there  was  no
    assessment as to what influence the  mother  had  had  on  the  child's
    memories.  Judge Birk concluded she could not give  significant  weight
    to the child's evidence and in my opinion her reasoning  is  sufficient
    to sustain that conclusion even though it  might  have  been  expressed
    more clearly.

19. In this situation there was no need for  the  judge  to  make  specific
    findings about the  drawing  or  the  handwritten  letter.   They  were
    clearly before her and there is no basis on which to think she did  not
    take them into consideration.  Her reasons are sufficient to show  they
    were not to be given any significant weight.

20. For these reasons, I find Judge Birk's decision to be free  from  legal
    error and I uphold her decision.



Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed  because  there  is  no  legal
error in the decision and reasons of Judge Birk and her decision is upheld.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
