
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03897/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 6 January 2015                    |On 14 January 2015                   |
|Prepared 7 January 2015              |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                FAIZAN AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 25  November  1980.
         He entered the UK as a  student  with  leave  to  remain  until  31
         October 2005. That leave was then varied so that it expired  on  31
         October 2006, and then again  until  31  October  2007.  A  further
         application to vary his leave was unsuccessful,  but  he  was  then
         granted leave to remain as a student until 31 January  2009.  There
         were then two applications during 2009 for  a  grant  of  leave  to
         remain which were unsuccessful, but he  was  eventually  successful
         with a third, so that he was granted leave to remain as  a  student
         until 31 January 2011. An application to vary that grant  of  leave
         was unsuccessful, and the decision to refuse it prompted an appeal.
         His appeal rights were duly exhausted on  29  March  2011.  Further
         applications for a grant of leave to remain outside the Immigration
         Rules were made on 13 May 2011, 16 August 2011, 30  November  2011,
         and 8 February 2012.

      2. At interview on 1 December 2011 the Appellant asserted that he  was
         prepared to return to Pakistan within 7 days and would purchase his
         own air ticket to do so. He never took any steps to do so.  Instead
         upon being detained by the Respondent in Glasgow on 23 July 2013 in
         order to effect his removal to Pakistan he claimed asylum.

      3. The Respondent's most recent decision to remove the  Appellant  was
         therefore made on 29 May 2014, when his asylum claim  was  refused.
         (It  is  plain  that  earlier  decisions  to  remove  either   went
         unchallenged, or were unsuccessfully challenged.)  It  was  against
         the removal decision  of  29  May  2014  that  the  Appellant  most
         recently appealed to the Tribunal. His appeal was heard on 10  July
         2014, and dismissed in a Determination promulgated on 24 July  2014
         by First Tier Tribunal Judge Manchester.

      4. By a decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge  Page  dated  18  August
         2014  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  decided  that   the   Appellant's
         application for permission to appeal was made out of time  by  five
         days, and declined to extend time on the basis that  the  Appellant
         had offered no explanation for the tardy  application.  Whether  or
         not that decision was correct (and the Appellant argues that it was
         not) the Judge went on to decide that the  application  would  have
         been refused in any event because the handwritten grounds disclosed
         no arguable error of law in the Determination, and amounted  merely
         to a disagreement with the Judge's findings.

      5. The Appellant duly renewed his application for permission to appeal
         to the Upper Tribunal. Although the application  was  granted,  the
         text of the decision does not expressly engage with  the  issue  of
         whether or not the application to the First Tier  Tribunal  was  in
         time. It is however perhaps implicit in  the  grant  of  permission
         that it was considered to be in  time.  However  the  text  of  the
         decision indicates that the intention of the decision maker was  to
         refuse  the  application  for  lack  of  substantive  merit;   This
         application fails to identify any properly arguable material  error
         of mistake of  law  in  the  judge's  determination  or  defect  or
         impropriety of a procedural nature  in  the  proceedings  at  first
         instance. It is nothing more than a series  of  disagreements.  The
         appellant did not give a truthful account: he was found not  to  be
         credible.  The  appellant   cannot   bring   himself   within   the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules and  it  cannot  properly  be
         said  that  there  is  anything  about   the   appellant   or   his
         circumstances which would permit the judge to allow the  Article  8
         claim outside the rules.

      6. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice on  29  September  2014.  She
         pointed out that the Upper Tribunal plainly intended to refuse  the
         application for permission, and that it had been granted in  error.
         She invited the Upper Tribunal to correct the mistake, and  reissue
         the decision upon the application as a refusal of permission.

      7. For whatever reason the matter has not  been  the  subject  of  any
         further judicial consideration, or directions, and thus the  matter
         comes before me.

      8. Neither party has applied  for  permission  to  rely  upon  further
         evidence pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
         Rules 2008.

    The criticisms relied upon by the Appellant

      9. In all the circumstances of  this  case  I  propose  to  treat  the
         original application for permission as being  in  time,  given  the
         date stamps upon the Determination which records it as having  been
         promulgated on both 24 July and 28 July 2014.

     10. The handwritten grounds to the application before  the  First  Tier
         Tribunal raise different  points  to  those  raised  in  the  typed
         grounds to the application before the Upper Tribunal.  I  therefore
         invited the Appellant to explain  what  he  considered  to  be  the
         error(s) of law that he relied upon.

     11. The Appellant's response  was;  first,  that  he  had  no  ties  to
         Pakistan, and thus he should have  been  granted  leave  to  remain
         under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. He  accepted  that
         he was the only person to have given oral evidence, but referred me
         to the bundle of  documents  prepared  for  the  hearing  at  first
         instance which contained letters from his brother, and his  friend,
         and thus evidence concerning the "private life" he had  established
         whilst living in the UK [ApB pp12-14]. Second, he relied  upon  the
         lack of general safety in Pakistan, the activities  of  terrorists,
         and the advice of the  FCO  to  British  citizens  that  travel  to
         Pakistan carried a high risk. Finally the  Appellant  asked  me  to
         take into account the content of a document dated  5  January  2014
         which  he  handed  up,  entitled  "note  of   Appellant's   written
         submissions".

     12. The first of these complaints lacks merit because it amounts  to  a
         bald disagreement with the Judge's finding that the  Appellant  did
         maintain ties to Pakistan, despite the length of time that  he  had
         contrived to live in the UK. That finding  was  well  open  to  the
         Judge to make, as a consequence of the unchallenged  finding  (that
         was based upon the Appellant's own evidence) that his parents  were
         both alive and living in Pakistan, and that  he  had  travelled  to
         Pakistan to visit them twice since his first entry to the UK. It is
         not enough  for  the  Appellant  to  simply  and  baldly  deny  the
         existence of ties to Pakistan, and on the  available  evidence  the
         Judge did conduct an entirely adequate assessment  of  all  of  the
         relevant evidence and circumstances in arriving at this  conclusion
         on the issue.

     13. The second of these complaints also lacks merit  because  it  is  a
         bald disagreement with the assessment of risk of harm faced by  the
         general population of  Pakistan.  The  general  security  situation
         within Pakistan has of course very recently been considered by  the
         Upper Tribunal in the course of AK & SK (Christians; risk) Pakistan
         CG [2014] UKUT 569.  Whilst  the  country  undoubtedly  faces  many
         problems the situation  is  not  such  as  to  found  a  claim  for
         international protection by the ordinary citizen.

     14. In the grounds to the application before the  First  Tier  Tribunal
         the Appellant additionally relied upon the complaint that the Judge
         had failed to  consider  why  his  elder  brother  had  moved  from
         Pakistan to the UK, and whether their circumstances might be linked
         for the purpose of establishing a grant of leave to  remain.  There
         is no merit in that complaint because the Appellant failed to place
         before  the  Judge  any  evidence  to  suggest  that   his   family
         relationship to  his  elder  brother  gave  rise  to  any  risk  of
         persecution, or serious harm, upon return to Pakistan. It  was  not
         for the Judge to speculate on such a matter,  or  to  conduct  some
         enquiry into the circumstances of his elder  brother;  particularly
         so when (as here) the elder brother had given written evidence, and
         neither he nor the Appellant had raised the matter.

     15. In the grounds to the application before  the  Upper  Tribunal  the
         Appellant additionally relied upon the complaint that the Judge had
         failed to consider his Article 8  appeal  outside  the  Immigration
         Rules. There is no merit in that complaint because the Judge did so
         in paragraphs 46-48 of the Determination.

     16. Finally, in the written submissions that were relied  upon  at  the
         hearing before me, the Appellant advanced an  entirely  new  point,
         namely that the Judge failed to consider  s117A  of  the  2002  Act
         (introduced with effect from 28 July 2014). Whilst this  point  has
         not been subject of any application for permission  to  appeal,  or
         grant, in the circumstances of this case it  is  expedient  for  me
         nonetheless to deal with it.

     17. Whilst the Determination is indeed silent in relation to s117A  and
         s117B of the 2002 Act, upon a fair reading of the Determination  as
         a whole it is plain that the issues raised therein have been  dealt
         with expressly or by implication by the Judge.  Thus  it  is  clear
         that the Judge had well in mind that the maintenance  of  effective
         immigration controls was in  the  public  interest;  s117B(1).  The
         Appellant does speak English given his lengthy education in the UK;
         s117B(2). The Appellant is not financially independent since he had
         no leave which would permit him to take lawful full time employment
         capable of extension by operation of  s3C.  Nor  did  the  evidence
         before the Judge suggest he was independently wealthy as  a  result
         of savings or inheritance, and thereby  able  to  support  himself;
         s117B(3). Any private life formed by the Appellant since his  entry
         to the UK in 2005 has been created whilst  his  immigration  status
         has been precarious. Moreover for a large part of the time that  he
         has physically been  living  in  the  UK,  he  has  been  doing  so
         unlawfully; s117B(4)(5). The Appellant did not claim  to  have  any
         relationship with any partner, or any "qualifying child"; s117B(6).

     18. In the circumstances the failure of the Judge to  deal  in  express
         terms with s117A and s117B either gives rise to no  arguable  error
         of law, or to no error of law that requires me  to  set  aside  the
         decision he made upon the Article 8 appeal and remake it. In  short
         it is plain  to me that were I to seek to remake the decision  upon
         the Article 8 appeal I would be bound to  reach  exactly  the  same
         overall decision that the Judge did, and for the same reasons.  The
         evidence as to what precisely the Appellant has done with his  time
         whilst living in the UK was scant indeed.

     19. Although the Appellant relied upon a close  relationship  with  his
         elder brother, at the  date  of  the  hearing  and  for  some  time
         previously the latter lived in Edinburgh, and the  Appellant  lived
         in Middlesbrough. The evidence suggested that this was a  situation
         that had endured for some five years. The evidence did not disclose
         any reason for that, or how often the  brothers  met,  or  how  the
         Appellant supported himself financially. The brief letter from  the
         Imam at the Mosque  in  Middlesbrough  merely  confirmed  that  the
         Appellant had attended that Mosque over the course of the  previous
         year, that he had participated in events  at  the  Mosque  and  was
         prepared to give his free time to undertake chores. No  details  of
         the frequency  of  his  attendance,  or  the  nature  of  the  work
         undertaken were given, and the author did not attend the hearing of
         the appeal. No evidence suggested the Appellant had changed mosque,
         and thus the evidence  suggested  that  this  was  a  part  of  his
         lifestyle developed only recently, and in the last  twelve  months.
         The friend who wrote a letter of support  spoke  of  shared  social
         activities over the previous five  years,  but  not  of  any  other
         friends, or relationships developed by the Appellant.

     20. Even taking this evidence at its highest it therefore offered  very
         little insight upon how the Appellant had actually spent his  time,
         how he had supported himself financially, or  the  connections  and
         relationships that he had formed during the nine years he had lived
         in the UK.

     21. As the Judge found, there was  nothing  to  prevent  the  Appellant
         returning to Pakistan to use the qualifications for  which  he  had
         studied in the UK, and to resume the "private life" that he had  in
         that country with his parents, and his  extended  family,  and  the
         friendships that he must have had before he came to the UK. In  all
         the circumstances of this case there was in  my  judgement  nothing
         disproportionate about the Respondent's  most  recent  decision  to
         remove the Appellant to Pakistan.

    Conclusion

     22. The Determination does not disclose any material error  of  law  in
         the Judge's  approach  to  the  evidence  placed  before  him  that
         requires me to set aside his decision and remake it. That being  so
         I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

     23. No anonymity order was made by the Tribunal at first instance, none
         is requested on behalf of  the  Appellant  now,  and  there  is  no
         obvious reason why I should make one of my own motion.





    DECISION


    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    24 July 2014 did not involve  the  making  of  an  error  of  law  that
    requires that decision to be set aside  and  remade.  The  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal is accordingly confirmed.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 7 January 2015
