
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03130/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 3 November 2015                   |On 16 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 MEI ZHU HE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D McGlashan, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  China,  born  15  October  1984.   The
    respondent refused her asylum claim for reasons explained in  a  letter
    dated 6 February 2015.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lea  dismissed  her
    appeal by determination promulgated on 15 July 2015.

 2. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are as follows:




    The FTTJ erred in law because:

      1. She has not made a finding on whether she accepts  or  rejects  the
         evidence of the appellant (see paragraph 19 in her decision, middle
         paragraph on page 3 of her Statement and item  3  in  Inventory  of
         Productions ) that the authorities issued  a  Sterilisation  Order.
         Even if the appellant cannot succeed on the basis that  in  general
         (emphasis  added),  family  planning  policy  in   China   is   not
         persecutory (per AX), she is entitled to succeed on the  particular
         (emphasis added)  facts  and  circumstances  in  her  case  if  her
         assertion that a Sterilisation Order was issued.  At  paragraph  27
         in the decision, the FTTIJ states that the appellant had  not  "...
         adequately..." explained why the Order would not have  been  issued
         earlier but no reasons are given as to why the explanation that was
         given - that it was not issued until the child went to school -  is
         not acceptable, apart from the absence of satisfactory evidence  of
         this, although no reasons are given as to why the appellant  should
         have been expected to tender such evidence.  The  item  itself  was
         lodged (or at least a certified translation) and no adverse comment
         is made by the FTTIJ as to its provenance.   This  was  a  critical
         piece of evidence on which no/inadequate findings have been made by
         the FTTIJ.

      2. She has left out of account evidence she  should  have  taken  into
         account.  In paragraph 35 she considers the submissions made to her
         on behalf of the appellant.  First, a full transcript (not  just  a
         newspaper article) of the decision (Qui Yun Chen v Holder)  of  the
         USA Court of Appeals was lodged (item 9 in IOP 2); and  second  her
         complaint that the appellant's representative "... did not  explain
         exactly in what way AX was now outdated ..." is plainly wrong since
         she  was  referred  to  a  schedule  of  relevant   passages   (she
         acknowledges  this  at  paragraph  11(8))  many  of  which  contain
         evidence of post AX breaches of Family Planning  policy  in  Fujian
         Province, China.  She has therefore erred in law if she has ignored
         this evidence.

 3. Mr McGlashan said that the judge failed to appreciate that the case was
    not based on general risk of sterilisation, but on  production  of  the
    actual sterilisation order made.  I asked Mr McGlashan where this order
    was  to  be  found.  He  referred  to  the  appellant's  inventory   of
    productions No  1  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  page  8,  "certified
    translation of sterilisation order" and page 9, "certified  translation
    of financial penalty order".   He  was  unable,  however,  to  identify
    originals of these documents among the productions  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He was unable to demonstrate that such  documents  had  ever
    been exhibited to the respondent.  He submitted  that  they  must  have
    existed, but he could not say where they are.

 4. The translations each say at the  bottom  of  the  page,  "This  is  to
    certify that the above translation is a true and  accurate  translation
    of the original document attached."  However, in neither  case  is  any
    document attached.  Pages 8 and 9 appear to  be  themselves  originals,
    although they might be copies.

 5. The determination says at paragraph 27:

    "I noted the documentation ... purporting to be a  sterilisation  order
    and  financial  penalty  order  ...  the  appellant  has  however   not
    adequately explained why the fine and sterilisation  orders  would  not
    have been issued when her daughter was sent back to China in 2007.  The
    Chinese authorities must clearly have been aware of  this,  given  that
    they issued the documentation to allow her daughter  to  go  to  China.
    The appellant claim that it is because her partner's parents  tried  to
    register  her  daughter  at  the  school  but  has  not  provided   any
    satisfactory evidence from her partner's parents to suggest  that  this
    in fact happened, despite her clearly still being  in  touch  with  her
    partner's parents (she obtained hukou documentation from them.) "

 6. Mr McGlashan submitted that the appellant had given  evidence  of  what
    she heard from her partner's parents  when  the  attempt  was  made  to
    register the child, and that the  judge  had  not  explained  why  that
    evidence was not accepted.

 7. On the second ground, Mr McGlashan submitted that the judge had  failed
    to consider the evidence.

 8. I noted that the appellant's inventory 2  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    comprises 16 items, running to 135 pages.  All of this  appears  to  be
    background information relating to family  planning  policy  in  China.
    Inventory 3 comprises 8 items of a similar nature, running to 23 pages.
     Inventory 4 contains another 22 items, running to 114 pages.  I  asked
    Mr McGlashan whether the judge had been provided  with  a  schedule  of
    references or synopsis of that material designed to explain which parts
    of those materials  said  anything  significantly  different  from  the
    materials before the Tribunal  deciding  AX  (Family  Planning  Scheme)
    China CG [2012] 00097.  Mr McGlashan said that there  had  been  before
    the court not only a newspaper account but a full copy of the  decision
    in Qiu Yun Chen v Attorney General of the United States  (this  appears
    to be item 8 of the second inventory) and that all the other  materials
    were relevant to human rights  abuses  carried  out  under  the  family
    planning policy in China, which the judge  ought  to  have  considered.
    However, he was unable to point to any  specification  to  support  the
    submission (recorded at paragraph 35 of  the  determination)  that  the
    guidance had become "outdated by these developments".

 9. Mr McGlashan confirmed that he was aware that in a number of  cases  in
    the FtT and in the UT submissions have been made based on United States
    case law and on materials similar to those produced here, and  that  he
    was not  aware  of  any  tribunal  or  court  declining  to  apply  the
    generality of what was decided in AX.

10. Mrs Saddiq submitted that there was no deficiency at  paragraph  27  of
    the determination.  There was no absence of a finding.   It  was  plain
    that the judge did not accept the documentation to be genuine.  It  was
    sensible to observe that if the Chinese authorities wished  to  act  on
    the fact of the appellant having given birth to a child out of wedlock,
    they could have done so in 2007 when, to the contrary,  they  had  been
    prepared to issue documentation to enable the child's travel to  China.
    The appellant insisted on her explanation that this came to light  when
    an attempt was made to register her daughter at school,  but  that  was
    not an assertion the judge was bound to accept.  It was  also  sensible
    for the judge to observe that there could have been  evidence  directly
    from the source of this information, the  parents  of  the  appellant's
    partner, who had sent other documentary evidence.   There  was  nothing
    wrong with these reasons.  They also had to be seen in the  context  of
    the judge's findings from paragraphs 23 to 29, where she  explains  why
    for numerous good reasons she found the evidence from the appellant and
    her partner to be not  credible  or  reliable.   The  judge's  specific
    reasoning regarding the documentation disclosed no error, and this  was
    emphasised  by  placing  that  particular  conclusion  in  its  overall
    context.

11. I did not need to hear from Mrs Saddiq on the second ground.

12. I reserved my determination.

13. The first ground does not show failure to make a  finding.   The  judge
    plainly is not satisfied by the evidence that a sterilisation order was
    issued.  She gives two  reasons,  both  sensible.   As  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted, this also has to be viewed in  the  context  of  the
    overall adverse credibility findings, of which no criticism is made.

14. A judge is of course entitled  (indeed  bound)  not  to  treat  country
    guidance  as  authoritative  if  there  is  different  (usually  later)
    evidence to show that it is not authoritative.   That  usually  happens
    because  the  situation  in  the  country  has  changed.   There   was,
    crucially, no such "schedule of relevant passages" as  claimed  in  the
    grounds.  There was  only  the  filing  of  foreign  case  law  and  an
    undifferentiated mass of material, some predating and  some  after  the
    country guidance case.  There was no meaningful submission to  resolve,
    because  there  was  no  attempt  to  identify  material  significantly
    different from that which had been before the  tribunal  in  AX.   That
    approach attempts to leave it to the tribunal to find  the  appellant's
    case.  It is also unfair to the respondent, who is left  at  a  similar
    disadvantage.

15. Neither of the grounds of appeal shows that the determination  errs  in
    point of law.

16. The determination shall stand.

17. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           13 November 2015
