
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03631/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 7th April 2016                |On the 15th April 2016                |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                                   [A.G.]
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bandegani (Counsel)
For  the  Respondent:     Miss  Fijiwala  (Senior  Home  Office   Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Sweeney promulgated on the 10th August 2015  in  which
       he refused the Appellant's claim for protection on asylum grounds.

    2. Within the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sweeney  it  was
       recorded how the Appellant is a national of Algeria who was  born  on
       the [ ] 1979.  His mother, father, five sisters and one  brother  all
       live in Algeria and he has one  sister  who  lives  in  France.   The
       Appellant's case is that he is gay and he would be  killed/persecuted
       by his own family by reason of his sexuality and  persecuted  by  the
       Algerian state and society as a result of his homosexuality.

    3.  Within  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sweeney   he
       summarised the Appellant's case at [19] of his decision.  He recorded
       how the Appellant's father was a strict disciplinarian who  beat  his
       children,  including  the  Appellant  and  expressed  shame  at   the
       Appellant's manner of speaking and effeminate manner.  The  Appellant
       says that whilst at school at the age of just 11, a 35 year  old  man
       named  Samir  from  the  same  neighbourhood  pretended  to  be   the
       Appellant's cousin and provided excuses to the school as to  why  the
       Appellant did not attend at school and that Samir sexually  assaulted
       the Appellant several times including having sexual intercourse  with
       him.  The Appellant says at the  age  of  15  he  discovered  he  was
       attracted to men and did  not  like  women,  but  that  he  kept  his
       sexuality secret until aged 19 or 20 and that two people in his  home
       area had been murdered for having same sex  relationships.   He  said
       that he was frightened that his family would kill him if  they  found
       out he was gay.  The Appellant worked at the local bakery  from  2000
       until 2010.  Within  his  summary  of  the  Appellant's  case,  Judge
       Sweeney says that the Appellant's case is that the head chef  at  the
       bakery was having a sexual relationship with  a  fellow  chef  called
       Saleh and that on the day he started  at  the  bakery  the  Appellant
       revealed to Saleh that he was gay  and  that  a  sexual  relationship
       subsequently developed between the Appellant and Saleh and  that  the
       Appellant and Saleh had sexual intercourse in the  bakery,  when  the
       head chef would make videos of them.

    4. Judge Sweeney stated that the Appellant's claim was  that  Saleh  had
       ceased his sexual relationship with the head chef, which resulted  in
       the head chef becoming jealous of the Appellant's  relationship  with
       Saleh and that in October 2010 the head chef told the bakery boss  of
       the  Appellant's  relationship  with  Saleh  and  the  Appellant  was
       suspended from work and the Appellant  was  afraid  that  his  father
       would find out the reason why he had been  suspended  as  his  father
       knew the bakery boss.  It was said that the head chef had distributed
       videos that he had taken of the Appellant and  Saleh  throughout  the
       neighbourhood, as a result of which the Appellant was beaten  by  his
       cousin, stabbed in the leg by his brother and stoned  by  neighbours,
       such that the Appellant fled Algeria.

    5. There was no presenting  officer  at  the  appeal  before  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Sweeney, but Judge Sweeney went on within his decision
       to summarise how the Appellant came to the UK, the  contents  of  the
       refusal letter dated the 20th February 2015, and the submissions made
       by Ms Davies on behalf of the Appellant  and  the  skeleton  argument
       that had been produced on his behalf before then going on to give his
       conclusions and reasoning between paragraph  [39]  and  [90]  of  his
       decision.

    6.  Judge Sweeney rejected the Appellant's account of being gay and  did
       not accept the Appellant had been attacked by his brother, his cousin
       and his neighbours as claimed.  Judge Sweeney did not accept that the
       Appellant would have revealed his sexuality to Saleh in circumstances
       where the Appellant barely knew Saleh and in circumstances  where  he
       had little opportunity to assess Saleh's trustworthiness,  given  the
       risks to the Appellant  if  Saleh  were  to  betray  the  Appellant's
       confidence.  Although the Judge noted that the letter from Dr Pickard
       dated the 9th February 2015 in respect of the 3 centimetre laceration
       on the Appellant's upper right thigh was consistent with  him  having
       been attacked with a knife in Algeria, that report was  not  Istanbul
       Protocol compliant and that whilst consistent  with  his  account  of
       having been attacked by his brother,  it  was  also  consistent  with
       other possible explanations.

    7.  The  Judge  went  on  to  weigh,  in  balancing  and  assessing  the
       Appellant's  credibility,  the  evidence  given  by   the   Appellant
       regarding his journey to the UK.  He did not find that  the  evidence
       in that regard was consistent and gave full reasons for  his  finding
       in respect of  inconsistency  regarding  the  account  given  by  the
       Appellant as to how he came to the UK between [64] and [71] and  how,
       for instance,  the  Appellant's  account  of  living  in  Dublin  was
       inconsistent with his  present  evidence  and  further,  how  in  the
       screening interview the Appellant had said that he had  left  Algeria
       at the end of November 2010 and came by boat to Ireland where he  hid
       in the back of a lorry and got off the  boat  in  Dublin,  the  Judge
       found  was  inconsistent  with  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  at
       paragraph 51 of his witness  statement,  where  he  spoke  of  having
       travelled through Turkey and Greece  before  flying  from  Greece  to
       Belgium and then travelling from Belgium to France, before then going
       back to Belgium, before flying to Dublin, before then taking a bus to
       Belfast and ultimately a ferry to Scotland.

    8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweeney went on in any event, to find  that
       even on the basis that he was wrong and the  Appellant  was  gay,  in
       light of the case of OO (gay men: risk) Algeria  [2013]  UKUT  00063,
       that it was possible for gay men to live openly in Algeria  and  that
       living openly did not attract a risk of serious harm,  such  that  he
       found that the Appellant would be able to safely internally  relocate
       within Algeria.  The Appellant's appeal was  therefore  dismissed  on
       asylum grounds, on  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  on  Human
       Rights grounds.

    9. The Appellant has  sought  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal.

   10. Within the Grounds  of  Appeal  it  is  argued  that  the  Judge  has
       incorrectly decided that the Appellant was not a  homosexual  and  as
       such made an error of law.

   11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson
       on the 22nd November 2015, on the grounds that it was  arguable  that
       the Judge in not accepting the Appellant's assertion that he was gay,
       had failed to give any adequate reasons for that assessment  and  the
       fact that the  Appellant  had  not  participated  in  any  homosexual
       activity in the past four and a half years since his arrival  in  the
       United Kingdom did not lead to the inevitable conclusion that he  was
       not homosexual or that he would  not  be  perceived  as  one  in  his
       country of origin.

   12. Within the Rule 24 reply from the Respondent dated the  8th  December
       2015 it was argued that the Judge had properly directed  himself  and
       had given several reasons as to why he did not accept the Appellant's
       account that he was gay and that those reasons were cogent  and  that
       no material error is disclosed.

   13. It was on that basis that the appeal came  before  me  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal.  Mr Bandegani on behalf of the Appellant  argued  that  the
       error made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweeney was apparent from the
       face of the determination.  He argued that the Judge had proceeded on
       a mistaken  basis  of  fact  when  finding  that  the  Appellant  had
       disclosed to Saleh that he was gay on the first day that he  met  him
       and that that was not an accurate recording of the evidence given  by
       the Appellant in his statement and that nowhere within his  interview
       or in the screening interview was that  said.   Mr  Bandegani  argued
       that there was a lack of clarity regarding the facts as to  when  the
       Appellant had revealed he was gay to Saleh.

   14. Mr Bandegani secondly argued that at paragraph 25 of the  Appellant's
       witness statement, the Appellant had given evidence regarding how  it
       was Saleh who had asked if the Appellant was gay and that Saleh had a
       tattoo of a butterfly which would be taboo in  Algeria  and  that  he
       spoke softly and that the Appellant had said that when  Mukhtar  went
       to sleep Saleh had started flirting  with  him  with  his  hands  and
       stroking the Appellant's private parts and pressed the  Appellant  to
       say if he was gay and it was only then that he had confessed that  he
       was gay. Saleh had made him feel at ease.  He argued that  the  Judge
       had not considered the evidence of the Appellant as  to  why  he  had
       revealed his sexuality and that there  was  inadequate  reasoning  in
       this regard.  He argued that if the material evidence  had  not  been
       considered, there was a material error of law.

   15. In respect of the alternative finding  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Sweeney, regarding the  ability  of  the  Appellant  to  safely
       internally relocate within Algeria, he argued  that  the  Judge  only
       dealt with the risk from  the  state  and  had  not  dealt  with  the
       evidence regarding the risk that the Appellant would  face  from  his
       own  immediate  family  and  extended   family,   and   as   to   the
       reasonableness of him internally relocating within Algeria.

   16. Mr Fijiwala on behalf of the Respondent argued  that  there  were  no
       material errors in the  decision.   She  argued  that  the  grant  of
       permission to  appeal  was  misconceived  given  the  fact  that  the
       Appellant had not been involved in a homosexual relationship was only
       one strand of the decision.  She argued that the Judge  was  entitled
       to find that the Appellant had revealed his sexuality to Saleh on the
       first very day that he  was  working  given  the  evidence  contained
       within the Appellant's statement and that the Judge was  entitled  to
       find that the Appellant would not  have  revealed  his  sexuality  to
       Saleh so quickly.  However, she argued that this  was  not  the  only
       factor  that  was  considered  by  the  Judge  in   considering   the
       Appellant's  credibility,  in  that  he  had  also   considered   the
       credibility of the Appellant's account as to how he came  to  the  UK
       and the expert evidence and that taking  all  of  the  evidence  into
       consideration in the round, the Judge had  properly  found  that  the
       Appellant was not homosexual and that was a finding open  to  him  on
       the evidence.  She further  argued  that  the  Judge  had  considered
       whether or not the Appellant would be at risk from the State,  if  he
       were to relocate within  Algeria  and  had  made  findings  that  the
       Appellant would be able to safely relocate within Algeria.

   17. In his submissions in reply Mr Bandegani argued that  the  Judge  had
       not dealt with the question regarding whether or  not  the  Appellant
       would be at risk from his family if internally relocating and  as  to
       the reasonableness of such internal relocation.  He argued  that  the
       Judge's finding that the  Appellant  would  not  have  disclosed  his
       sexuality so quickly and that that  was  inherently  implausible  was
       wrong in law and that the evidence should be considered  holistically
       and that the finding of the Judge that  the  Appellant's  account  of
       having disclosed  his  sexuality  was  entirely  implausible  was  an
       extraordinary finding.  He  argued  that  the  Judge  had  not  given
       adequate  reasons  and  had  not  dealt  with   the   evidence   with
       specificity.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   18. Within his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweeney at [39]  stated
       that he had given very careful consideration to all of  the  evidence
       put before him, and he again bore in mind that he had to  be  careful
       when considering the inherent probability of the Appellant's  actions
       given that he came from a country which had traditions,  customs  and
       practices which are very different from those in the UK at [40].  The
       Judge further bore in mind the difficulty in reaching a  decision  on
       someone's sexual identity and fully took account of the low  standard
       of proof applicable in asylum claims.

   19. Although it is argued on behalf of the Appellant by Mr Bandegani that
       the Judge was wrong to find that the Appellant's evidence was that he
       had disclosed his sexuality to Saleh on the very first  day  that  he
       started to work at the bakery and that the Appellant's  evidence  was
       unclear in  this  regard,  I  do  not  accept  that  submission.   At
       paragraph 23 of the Appellant's statement, he stated how on his first
       day he had been introduced to the owner of the bakery  and  the  head
       chef and the sous chef Saleh.  At paragraph 25 of his  statement  the
       Appellant stated:

           "Saleh and I got on well from the beginning.  He started  asking
           me if I was gay and I was shy and afraid so at  first  I  didn't
           respond.  I noticed that Saleh had a tattoo on his lower back of
           a butterfly which was considered  taboo  is  Islam  and  he  was
           softly spoken like me.  That night when Mukhtar  went  to  sleep
           Saleh started talking to me and he was flirting with his  hands,
           he told me to tell the truth and asked me whether I was  gay  or
           not.  He stroked my private parts because he was sure that I was
           gay and I confessed.  He did everything he could to make me feel
           at ease and it was in the middle of the night, just  us  two  in
           the  bakery.  He  was  so  handsome  and  so  confident  in  his
           sexuality, I was completely in awe of him and attracted  to  him
           from the moment we met.  He was the first to smile at me and  he
           started to talk to me as though we had been friends  for  years.
           Up until this moment I had never dreamed that I would be able to
           talk about my sexuality so openly in Algeria.  He made me forget
           about all of my troubles and all of the nights that I would  cry
           myself to sleep.  The feeling of relief that  I  experienced  in
           coming out was comparable to finding water in the desert.  Saleh
           understood that it was not easy being gay and he knew the  risks
           of being gay in Algerian society.  He swore that what we  talked
           about that night would not be disclosed to anybody,  I  believed
           him because he was gay too, it would have harmed him as well  as
           me to have told anybody.  I felt so liberated after  that  first
           night."

   20. Given the evidence of the Appellant in this regard in  his  statement
       and how at paragraph 23 he referred  to  "on  the  first  day"  being
       introduced to the owner of the bakery, the head chef and  Saleh,  and
       how at 25 he referred to "that night" as  being  the  night  when  he
       confessed to being gay, I do find that that was a finding open to the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge on the evidence presented.  His finding  in
       this regard is neither irrational nor perverse, and I do bear in mind
       that Mr Bandegani was not saying that the Judge had got the  evidence
       wrong in that regard, he was simply asserting that the  evidence  was
       unclear.  The reference to  "that  night"  at  paragraph  25  of  the
       Appellant's statement appears to lead on from the initial meeting  at
       paragraph 23 and is referring to the same day/night. I  do  not  find
       that the evidence was unclear and the finding of the Judge  that  the
       Appellant  had  disclosed  his  sexuality  on  the  first  night  was
       perfectly open to him.

   21. Further, in respect of the argument from Mr Bandegani that the  Judge
       has not taken account of the evidence of the Appellant  at  paragraph
       25 of his statement, as to the reasons why he felt able  to  disclose
       his sexuality to Saleh so quickly, it  is  not  a  necessity  for  an
       Immigration Judge to recite every single piece of  evidence  that  he
       has taken into account, or to fully  set  out  the  contents  of  the
       Appellant's witness statement.  The Judge has  indicated  within  his
       decision that he has taken account of the contents of the Appellant's
       witness statement, and the Judge has clearly  taken  account  of  the
       Appellant's evidence given that at [52] of the  decision,  the  Judge
       recorded that the Appellant suggests in his witness statement that he
       felt  able  to  confide  in  Saleh  as  Saleh  was  forthcoming   and
       comfortable with his sexuality.  The Appellant  believed  that  Saleh
       would keep details of  the  Appellant's  sexuality  confidential,  as
       Saleh would also have been in danger  had  he  disclosed  details  of
       their conversation.  The Judge properly noted how the Appellant's own
       evidence was that he had previously concealed his  sexuality  due  to
       fears that he would be killed by his own family were his sexuality to
       become known and that other people in  the  area  had  been  murdered
       having engaged in same sex relationships at [51].

   22. The Judge went on having considered the Appellant's account to reject
       that account and to find that the Appellant would not have  disclosed
       his sexuality to a man that he did not know on  the  very  first  day
       that he met them.

   23. Although it is argued by Mr Bandegani that it was Saleh who took  the
       lead in the  relationship,  the  Judge  has  clearly  considered  the
       evidence in this regard and not accepted, given the risks were it  to
       become known that the Appellant was gay,  that  the  Appellant  would
       have revealed his sexuality on that night.  Again, I find that was  a
       finding that was perfectly open to the Judge on the  evidence  before
       him.  It is clear from reading the decision that the Judge has  taken
       account of the Appellant's witness statement in this regard,  but  it
       is simply that he did not believe the Appellant's account.  The Judge
       has  also  given  reasons  which  are  adequate  and  sufficient  for
       rejecting the Appellant's account in this  regard,  given  the  risks
       that the Appellant would face were his sexuality to become known  and
       the fact that he did not know Saleh and had not had time to build  up
       trust in him.  The arguments raised by Mr Bandegani  in  this  regard
       simply amount to disagreement with the decision.  The  weight  to  be
       attached to the evidence, I note and remind myself is  a  matter  for
       the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  unless  it  can  be  said  that  the
       findings were either irrational or perverse.  The Judge's findings in
       this regard were not irrational, nor perverse.

   24. Again, when  assessing  credibility,  as  correctly  stated  by  Miss
       Fijiwala, the Judge has not simply relied  upon  the  fact  that  the
       Appellant disclosed his sexuality to Saleh on the first day they met,
       but also took account of the fact that the evidence from  Dr  Pickard
       was not Istanbul Protocol compliant and significantly,  in  assessing
       the Appellant's credibility, the Judge took  into  consideration  the
       Appellant's account of his journey to the UK and the discrepancies in
       that account between [64] and [71] and has therefore  considered  the
       evidence  in  the  round,  before  making  his   findings   regarding
       sexuality. I find that Judge Sweeney has properly considered  all  of
       the evidence in that regard.  These findings were perfectly  open  to
       the Judge.  In my judgment, there  was  no  material  error  in  this
       regard.

   25. Although it is argued by Mr Bandegani that the Judge  has  failed  to
       deal with the specificity of the Appellant's account, the  Judge  has
       taken account of the evidence of the Appellant in  this  regard,  and
       has given reasons for rejecting that evidence.  The  Judge  does  not
       need to specify exactly everything stated by  the  Appellant  in  his
       witness statement, if  his  reasons  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
       account are open to him, which these were.

   26. It has been stated in the latest Country Guidance  case  of  OO  (gay
       men) Algeria CG [2016]  UKUT  00065  (IAC)  at  paragraph  6  of  the
       headnote that:

           "For these reasons, a gay man from Algeria would be entitled  to
           be recognised as a refugee only if he shows  that,  due  to  his
           personal circumstances, it  would  be  unreasonable  and  unduly
           harsh  to  expect  him  to  relocate  within  Algeria  to  avoid
           persecution from family members, or because he has a  particular
           characteristic that might, unusually and  contrary  to  what  is
           generally to be expected, give rise  to  a  risk  of  attracting
           disapproval at the  highest  level  of  the  possible  range  of
           adverse  responses  from  those   seeking   to   express   their
           disapproval of the fact of his sexual orientation.".

   27. This Country Guidance case  post-dated  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Sweeney.  Judge Sweeney properly took account  of  the
       then Country Guidance case that was applicable at the time of OO (gay
       men: risk) Algeria CG [2013] UKUT 00063, in which it was  established
       that the evidence at that time did not  suggest  that  as  a  general
       matter, societal and familial disapproval of  male  gay  identity  in
       Algeria reached levels that were persecutory within  the  meaning  of
       Article 9 of the Qualification Directive or which  otherwise  reached
       the threshold required for protection under  Article  15(b)  of  that
       Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR  and  that  the  admittedly  small
       number of gay men who live openly in  Algeria  do  not,  in  general,
       suffer serious harm amounting to persecution and that if someone  was
       able to establish that  their  behaviour  was  shaped  by  more  than
       disapproval amounting to serious harm, they may be able to  establish
       a need for protection.

   28. Although I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweeney did err in not
       considering whether it would be either unreasonable or  unduly  harsh
       to expect the Appellant to  internally  relocate  within  Algeria  to
       avoid persecution from his family members, and has simply  considered
       that he would not be at risk from the state  and  therefore  able  to
       internally relocate, given that Judge Sweeney did not accept that the
       Appellant was  gay,  the  question  of  internal  relocation  is  not
       relevant in any event.  The findings on internal relocation were only
       in the event that Judge Sweeney was wrong in his  findings  regarding
       the Appellant not being gay.  For the  reasons  given  above,  in  my
       judgment the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweeney in respect
       of the issue as to whether the Appellant was gay were  open  to  him,
       and that therefore any error that he made in respect of how he  dealt
       with the question  of  internal  relocation  does  not  amount  to  a
       material error, given that the Appellant will not need to  internally
       relocate given the finding that he is  not  gay,  which  finding  was
       sustainable on the evidence.

   29. In such circumstances  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Sweeney does not contain a material error of law and is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sweeney  does  not  contain  a
material error of law and is maintained.


Signed
[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty   Dated 8th April 2016
