
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  AA/03661/2010
     AA/09549/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Date Sent                  |
|On 13th August  2013                            |On 16th August 2013        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                            MR DAWIT HAILE KASSAY
                              MS TSELAT KHASSAY
                         (Anonymity Order Not Made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and


                             Secretary of State

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the 1st Appellant: Mr C Yeo (Instructed by Polpitiya & Co, Solicitors)

For the 2nd Appellant: Ms L Hirst (instructed by Blavo & Co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:         Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  two
    Appellants against determinations of the First-tier Tribunal.  This  is
    the first time they have been  heard  together,  they  having  followed
    separate courses through the appeals system heretofore.

 2. The Appellants arrived together  at  Heathrow  on  14th  May  2008  and
    claimed asylum.  They said they were brother and  sister  from  Eritrea
    and claimed asylum on account of  their  Pentecostal  Christian  faith.
    They claimed to have been persecuted in and deported from  Ethiopia  in
    2005 and persecuted in Eritrea on account of heir faith.

 3. While the Appellants were still at the airport a  third  man,  who  the
    Appellants acknowledge was their agent, was arrested elsewhere  in  the
    building in possession of four passports, two of which  were  Ethiopian
    and bore the names and photographs of the Appellants.

 4. That man was arrested  and  prosecuted  for  offences  in  relation  to
    assisting unlawful immigration and has been deported.

 5. The 1st Appellant who I shall refer to  henceforth  as  Dawit  had  his
    asylum claim rejected on 20th August 2008 in which  both  his  age  and
    nationality were disputed.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  and
    his appeal was dismissed on 1st June 2010.   An  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    gave permission to appeal on 23rd June  2010  and  a  Designated  Judge
    hearing the case set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination  on
    26th October 2010 and at a resumed hearing the  same  Designated  Judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  on  12th  November  2010.  Sedley  LJ   granted
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal on 3rd August  2011  and  a
    Consent Order was sealed in the Court of Appeal on  7th  November  2011
    remitting the case to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. The 2nd Appellant who I shall refer to henceforth as  Tselet,  had  her
    asylum claim  refused  on  8th  June  2010.   Her  date  of  birth  and
    nationality were also disputed.  Her appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    was dismissed on 9th February 2010. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted on 28th February 2011 and the First-tier  Tribunal
    determination was set aside on 8th August 2011 with the  matter  to  be
    reheard by the Upper Tribunal.

 7. It was at that stage that it was considered appropriate for the two  to
    be heard together - they were brother and sister and their claims  were
    the same.

 8. The Appellants' claims, as originally made, are that they are  Eritrean
    and were living in Ethiopia with their parents.  In  1999,  while  they
    were visiting an Uncle (Kiros) their parents were taken and deported to
    Eritrea.  Thereafter they lived with and were looked  after  by  Kiros.
    Kiros' son was involved with the OLF and  involved  the  Appellants  in
    distributing leaflets.  In 2005 the authorities came to the  house  and
    arrested them all.  They were detained for one month during which  time
    Dawit was slapped, kicked and beaten  with  the  butt  of  a  gun.   On
    release they were deported to Eritrea.

 9. In Eritrea Dawit was detained and beaten  and  interrogated  about  his
    religion.  His release from detention was facilitated by an uncle  when
    he then was  reunited  with  his  sister.   The  uncle  arranged  their
    departure from Eritrea. Tselat's claim is the same  although  separated
    during detention.

10. In support of his claim Dawit has provided  a  report  from  the  Helen
    Bamber Foundation dated 4th May 2010 and a Psychiatric Report from Dr S
    Jayalath dated 16th July  2013.  Letters  from  the  Eritrea  community
    confirming the Appellants are Eritrean are also provided as are letters
    from their church.

11. The Appellants' faith is  not  in  issue.   It  is  accepted  they  are
    Pentecostal Christians.

12. Both Appellants gave oral evidence on oath before me;  Dawit  first  in
    the absence of Tselat.  Ms Hirst was  given  the  opportunity  to  take
    instructions from  Tselat  after  Dawit's  evidence  and  before  cross
    examination. Both Appellant's were cross-examined  by  their  sibling's
    representative and the Home Office Presenting Officer.

13. In the past both Appellant's  claims  have  been  found  not  credible;
    however those determinations have been set aside and I am dealing  with
    the case today, although prior evidence remains relevant.

14. The Helen Bamber Foundation report in relation to Dawit, prepared by Dr
    Fine recounts Dawit's claimed history as told to him.  He accepts  that
    as his starting  point  as  is  to  be  expected.   He  refers  to  the
    Appellant's ongoing medical problem with his shoulder (said  to  result
    from being hit with a rifle butt) and scars.  Dawit has a lot of  scars
    and  his  shoulder  is  undoubtedly  damaged.  Following  the  Istanbul
    Protocol, the Dr describes some scars as being "highly consistent" with
    the claim and others as "consistent".  None are diagnostic.  Those that
    are said to be highly consistent could have been caused otherwise  only
    by  accidental  injury.   The  Dr  notes  that  the  history  gives  no
    indication of such accident. It has to be borne in  mind  however  that
    the Appellant, claiming as  he  does  that  his  injuries  result  from
    torture, is unlikely to offer evidence of , for example a serious  road
    accident.

15. Dr Fine also carried out a mental state examination and found  that  he
    met the criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD.

16. The more recent report of DR  Jayalathis  is  similarly  based  on  the
    history as relayed by Dawit.  The DR has looked at his medical  records
    and notes that he has been referred to a mental health  clinic  and  in
    December 2012 was prescribed Respiridone,  an  anti-psychotic,  when  a
    diagnosis of Schizophrenia was discussed. However  the  notes  indicate
    that Dawit has received no medication on a regular basis and  there  do
    not appear to have been  any  hospital  admissions  for  mental  health
    issues. Also despite a GP note that Dawit said he felt suicidal,  there
    is no history of attempted suicide or self harm

17. Dr Jayalathis, following his mental state  examination  concluded  that
    Dawit  is  likely  to  suffer  from  moderate  to  severe  episodes  of
    depression with underlying PTSD. He could however, detect  no  symptoms
    of a long standing psychotic illness such Schizophrenia.

18. He suggests that Dawit would benefit from a psychological assessment.

19. Notwithstanding the contents of  the  two  reports,  some  three  years
    apart, there is no evidence of any meaningful  treatment  or  therapies
    that Dawit has undertaken for Mental Health issues.

20. While acknowledging the expertise of the Ds, their opinions have to  be
    set against the evidence as a whole and are both based on  Dawit  being
    an Eritrean national whose history of persecution has been accepted.

21. There are other factors in this case which I find  are  fatal  to  both
    Appellants' credibility.

22. On arrival in the UK and while they were still  at  the  airport  their
    agent was arrested in possession of what  the  Appellant's  accept  are
    genuine  Ethiopian  passports  bearing  their  names  and  photographs.
    Tselat argued that the passports,  while  genuine  were  not  genuinely
    issued and were obtained by the agent for their  travel.   However  the
    passports were issued, with the Appellants photographs, in  2004.  That
    is four years before they entered the UK.  Containing their photographs
    as they do they cannot possibly have been obtained by the agent for the
    purpose of escape, being  4  years  old  by  then.   According  to  the
    Appellants they were yet to be deported from Ethiopia in 2004. They can
    only therefore have been issued to  the  Appellants  as  the  passports
    indicate.  It is also too much of a coincidence for their  acknowledged
    agent to be in possession of passports if they were not theirs.  Tselat
    argued that if it was her passport she would have kept it.   She  could
    not do so however if her intention was to seek asylum as an Eritrean.

23. As  Mr  Yeo  rightly  pointed  out  the  document  from  the  Ethiopian
    authorities, relied upon by the Secretary of State as verifying Dawit's
    passport as genuine contained the wrong  passport  number.   That  does
    mean that document cannot  be  relied  upon.   However  the  Appellants
    accepted the passports are genuine.

24. Furthermore Tselat was interviewed at the  airport  by  an  Immigration
    Officer. A copy of the handwritten transcript  of  that  interview  was
    before me.  Tselat told the Immigration Officer her date of  birth  was
    29/03/90 and that her name was Tselat Khassay.  She said that  she  had
    never had her own passport and had travelled on a forged passport.  She
    said she travelled with her brother.  When the fact that her  Ethiopian
    passport had  been  recovered  from  the  agent  was  put  to  her  she
    acknowledged that her real nationality is Ethiopian and  she  said  she
    had come to the UK for education.  At the hearing when this was put  to
    her she said that the  Immigration  Officer  had  threatened  her  with
    detention if she did not say that.  I  reject  that  explanation.   The
    interview took place over 4 years ago  and  she  has  never  made  that
    allegation before.

25. What is even more damaging is the evidence that Dawit asked his  Social
    Worker to assist him in arranging a  voluntary  return.   To  that  end
    there is evidence that a Social Worker took him to Refugee Action.   He
    had his photograph taken  and  a  Laisser  Passer  was  issued  by  the
    Ethiopian authorities bearing his picture.  That is clear evidence that
    at that time he admitted his Ethiopian nationality and was  willing  to
    return there. Furthermore his father  was  contacted  in  Ethiopia  and
    agreed to look after him.

26. As the Appellants are siblings that evidence not only destroys  Dawit's
    case but Tselat's  also.  If  Dawit  is  recognised  by  the  Ethiopian
    authorities as Ethiopian then his sister must also be  Ethiopian.  That
    evidence was produced in February 2013 and  now  the  Appellants  claim
    they are not in fact siblings.

27. As to the AVR and Laisser Passer, Dawit  denied  applying  for  it  and
    denied ever having had his photograph taken.   It  is  clear  from  the
    evidence that he is lying.  He  did  seek  voluntary  return  and  then
    changed his mind, and  his  story.  The  Laisser  Passer  contains  his
    photograph and his Social Worker has no  reason  to  lie.   Furthermore
    Dawit was  asked  for  his  consent  for  Social  Services  to  divulge
    information from their files to the Secretary of State and  he  refused
    to consent.   In  evidence  he  confirmed  initially  that  he  refused
    consent, and when pressed as to why claimed  to  know  nothing  of  the
    request (it was sent to his solicitors and his Social Worker).  I  find
    that he did refuse consent and that he did so because the  files  would
    reveal that he had sought voluntary return and was in contact with  his
    family in Ethiopia. The Laisser  Passer  is  clear  evidence  that  the
    Ethiopian authorities accept his Ethiopian nationality and I find  that
    he is Ethiopian and not Eritrean.  His family, including his father  is
    in Ethiopia to whom he can return and he did not come to the UK in need
    of international protection.

28. With regard to the new claim that the Appellants are not siblings  they
    could not maintain consistent evidence in  that  regard.   Their  story
    hung together if they were siblings but not when they  claimed  not  to
    be.  They maintained that both sets of parents  were  deported  at  the
    same time and in the same circumstances.  Dawit said that he and Tselat
    were not related at all and that she lived  with  Kiros  but  he  moved
    around as directed by Kiros.  He claimed  to  know  very  little  about
    Tselat and at the same time that they were very close.  His  story  was
    inconsistent and his evidence vague and evasive.  When  inconsistencies
    were pointed out he  blamed  his  mental  health.   However  this  only
    affected awkward evidence.  Other matters  he  seemed  to  be  able  to
    recall with remarkable accuracy as  evidenced  by  his  interviews  and
    statements.

29. Tselat insisted they were cousins on her paternal side and  that  after
    thee deportation of their parents they definitely lived  together  with
    Uncle Kiros. She said that the agent had told  her  to  say  they  were
    brother and sister and so she had but  had  decided  now  to  tell  the
    truth. Her evidence was  inconsistent  with  that  of  Dawit  and  when
    inconsistencies were out to her she blamed it on having been instructed
    as to what to say by the agent.  She insisted  that  her  parents  were
    Khassy Habtom and Semret Haile and that she is an only child.   However
    Dawit also insisted those were his parents' names and had even produced
    a copy of a birth certificate.  Tselat said that she did not know where
    the "birth certificate" came from but they were her parents.  The clear
    implication was that she was saying the birth certificate could not  be
    genuine. That document purports to have been issued to  Dawit's  father
    in Asmara in 1997.  That cannot be correct  as  both  Appellants  claim
    that their parents were in Ethiopia until 1999.  I find  I  can  attach
    little weight to that document.

30. Both Appellants have said throughout the case that they  are  siblings.
    In their screening interviews they  said  so  and  gave  their  parents
    names.   Throughout  the  entire  proceedings  there  claim  has   been
    dependant on their  being  siblings.   I  find  that  they  are  indeed
    siblings and that they are lying  now  in  order  to  protect  Tselat's
    position as a claimed Eritrean.

31. With regard to the claimed involvement with OLF neither Appellant could
    give consistent evidence as to what they had done and the circumstances
    of their arrest and who was arrested. I  do  not  believe  that  either
    Appellant has ever had any dealings with the OLF; their evidence  about
    that was vague and inconsistent.

32. I do not find either Appellant to be a  witness  of  truth.   They  are
    siblings who travelled to the UK  using  their  own  genuine  Ethiopian
    passports for economic/educational  reasons.  They  disposed  of  their
    passports on entry to the agent to conceal their true  nationality  and
    have thereafter pursued a fabricated claim to be Eritreans in  fear  of
    persecution. Dawit has clearly sustained significant injuries but I  am
    unable to accept, even to the lower standard that these  resulted  from
    torture. The Ethiopian authorities have clearly accepted that Dawit can
    return there and if he can so can his sister.

33. These Appellant are devoid of credibility and have lied throughout  the
    process.  They have not been victims of persecution, they did not  live
    with an uncle but with their parents (with whom Dawit at lease is still
    in contact), who have no doubt funded this  whole  sorry  affair.   The
    Refugee Convention is an international instrument designed  to  protect
    the most vulnerable individuals from appalling treatment and the UK has
    signed up to affording victims of persecution asylum.  These Appellants
    have sought to abuse that system by putting forward a wholly bogus  and
    dishonest claim.  It is a great pity that these appeals  have  been  so
    long in the system and it is to be hoped that this will now  be  at  an
    end so that they can be removed to rejoin their family in Ethiopia.

34. The Appellants ages have been an issue in the past but before me it was
    accepted to be no longer relevant as they are both now accepted  to  be
    adults.

35. So far as Article 8 is concerned, the Appellants have been  in  the  UK
    since 2008; however at all times knowing they had no reason to be  here
    and that they were pursuing a dishonest claim.  They  can  be  returned
    together to their family. Dawit is not on regular medication and can be
    cared for by his family.  They  have  no  family  in  the  UK  and  any
    interference with such private life as they have built up in the UK  is
    entirely proportionate, not just for  the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control  but  for  the  maintenance  of  the  proper   functioning   of
    international policies on Refugees.

36. Neither party sought an anonymity order and as I have  determined  they
    are not at risk I make no such order.

37. The appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed on all grounds








Signed                              Date 15th August 2013





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


