
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03062/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 11 November 2015                  |On 28 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                MA (Pakistan)
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik instructed by Ahmad & Williams Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. On 3 September 2015 the Upper  Tribunal  found  legal  error  in  the
       determination  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   PJM   Hollingworth
       promulgated on the 24 June 2015 such that the decision was set aside.



    2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born in 1959. He entered  the
       United Kingdom lawfully as a student with a visa valid to 31  January
       2008. His leave was  extended  to  28  September  2011  in  the  same
       category. The appellant's wife and son joined him on 17 December 2009
       as dependants on his student visa. An application  by  the  appellant
       for further leave to remain was refused and the appeal  against  that
       refusal dismissed on 15 February 2013. The appellant was served  with
       an IS151A on 21 November 2013. He claimed asylum  on  the  13  August
       2014 which was refused. His appeal against that decision came  before
       Judge Hollingworth and was allowed.

    3. The relevant parts of the error of law finding are in  the  following
       terms:

ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND DIRECTIONS

    4. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  PJM
       Hollingworth promulgated on the 24  June  2015  in  which  the  Judge
       allowed MA's appeal against the direction for his removal to Pakistan
       that accompanied the refusal of his claim for asylum.

    5. The basis of the claim recorded in the refusal  letter  is  that  the
       Appellant believes he faces a real risk as a result of  his  religion
       as a Shia Muslim and an imputed political opinion. It is claimed that
       on 22 September 2006 an  unknown  person  fired  a  gun  at  his  car
       although he was able to  escape  by  driving  away.  The  matter  was
       reported to the police and a copy FIR provided in the appeal  bundle.
       It is also said the Appellant experienced problems when conducting  a
       research project for the Pakistan Forestry Institute  when  he  spoke
       out about illegal deforestation by the Taliban.  He  claims  to  have
       received threats from Lashkar-e-Jhangvi by telephone that  he  states
       were traced to Kabul in Afghanistan although there have been no  such
       threats since 2006. It is claimed, however, that the Appellant's wife
       received threats from the same group in 2009 that their son would  be
       kidnapped and killed. The  Appellant  claimed  he  will  be  at  risk
       wherever he returns to in Pakistan due to his problems  in  the  past
       speaking out against Lashkar-e-Jhangvi and the Taliban.

    6. The Judge accepted the Appellant's religious identity and the core of
       the account. It was noted the Appellant will speak his mind and speak
       out but the Judge fails to consider whether this is a case  in  which
       it is reasonable to expect the Appellant to act discretely,  if  this
       is the case, or whether his desire to do so arises from a fundamental
       part of his personal identity such that he cannot be expected to deny
       or suppress the same. This is referred to as the HJ (Iran)  point  as
       the issue is not whether the Appellant will seek out but why.

    7. The Judge found there was no sufficiency of protection  available  in
       Pakistan in a case in which the Appellant had been shot at  once  and
       had provided a FIR in which it  is  noted  the  police  accepted  the
       complaint but had not been able to investigate further as a result of
       the identity of the assailant not being known.

    8. The Judge refers to AW (sufficiency of  protection)  Pakistan  [2011]
       UKUT  31  (IAC)  a  decision  of  Lord  Bannatyne  and  then   Senior
       Immigration Judge Storey in which it was found there is a sufficiency
       of protection available in  Pakistan.   At  the  hearing  Mr  McVeety
       submitted insufficient reasons had been given for departing from this
       country guidance  case  although  a  check  on  the  current  country
       guidance list does not show this case was reported for this  purpose.
       It is a reported determination of the tribunal but one that  analyses
       the situation and provides guidance. The  Judge  refers  to  evidence
       provided which  he  found  supported  the  conclusion  there  was  no
       protection available for the Appellant as a Shia Muslim but  this  is
       inadequately reasoned.  There  are  20-25  million  Shia  Muslims  in
       Pakistan and the content of the determination  and  findings  do  not
       adequately support a claim that they are denied protection based upon
       their religious identity by the Police or other State organisations.

    9. It was accepted the Judge failed to mention or consider the  internal
       flight option in the event the Appellant was  at  risk  in  his  home
       area. If the finding in relation to  there  being  no  sufficient  of
       protection had stood this would have not been a material  error,  but
       in light of the arguable concerns in  relation  to  this  issue  such
       error is material at this stage.

   10. I  find  the  Respondent  has  shown  material  legal  error  in  the
       determination of Judge Hollingworth which shall be set aside.

   11. Directions were given setting out the preserved findings and scope of
       the hearing in the following terms:

        a. The finding the Appellant is a Shia Muslim who was  attacked  as
           claimed on one occasion in 2006 shall be a preserved findings.

        b. The appeal shall be listed for a resumed  hearing  before  Upper
           Tribunal Judge Hanson sitting at Stoke on the 11  November  2015
           at 10.00AM. Time estimate 3 hours.

        c. The Tribunal shall consider in particular the issues of:

             i. The reason why the Appellant feels he needs/wants  to  speak
                out even if this creates a risk for him and his  family  and
                the  reasonableness/lawfulness  of  expecting  him  to   act
                discretely - HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 refers.

            ii. The question of the existence  of  a  real  risk  on  return
                including the nature of that  risk,  reason  for  the  same,
                perpetrator of any threat/actions, location of such risk.

           iii. The availability of a sufficiency  of  protection  from  the
                authorities in Pakistan.

            iv. Whether the guidance provided in AW remains valid  in  light
                of the current country information.

   12. Judge Hollingworth accepted as credible in the appellants account the
       following:

        i.  The  appellant  was  employed  in  forestry   research   in   a
           professional capacity

       ii. The appellant identified extensive deforestation caused  by  the
           Taliban

      iii. The appellant is a  Shia  Muslim  active  in  his  community  in
           Pakistan

       iv. The appellant has already spoken out

        v. The appellants was fired upon by unknown assailants

       vi. The appellant was targeted by those  who  subscribe  to  violent
           sectarian ideologies

      vii. The appellant received a threatening phone call and letter

     viii. The appellant lodged a First Information Report (FIR)

       ix. Subsequent threats have been  made  to  the  appellants  brother
           including a threatening letter with a bullet attached

        x. The appellant is a supporter of Pervez Musharraf and an opponent
           of the Taliban.

   13. In Pakistan  the  appellant  was  employed  by  the  Pakistan  Forest
       Institute  as  a  Research  Officer  in  the  field   of   Geographic
       Information System (GIS) and remote sensing from 1984 -2006. As  part
       of his duties he undertook a case study for land cover classification
       and forest change analysis using satellite  imagery  for  the  period
       2000-2005 for the Northern Area of Pakistan and  listed  the  changes
       that had occurred in the forest area. The appellant  states  that  he
       had mentioned that the Taliban were involved in  illegal  cutting  of
       forests in Northern Pakistan as these areas are  their  safe  havens.
       The appellant states that he believed the Taliban have destroyed  80%
       of the forests.

   14. The issue of deforestation is current in  Pakistan.  Although  it  is
       accepted that deforestation is an issue in Pakistan it has  not  been
       shown this is the preserve of the Taliban.  There are many causes  of
       deforestation which are applicable to Pakistan as  elsewhere.    Some
       of the main causes of the large scale deforestation in  Pakistan  are
       likely to be equally  attributable  to  land  clearance  due  to  the
       construction of dams and barrages to supply water, urbanization,  the
       building of roads, industrialisation causing deforestation as most of
       the industries require wood as their fuel, including industries  such
       as hard wood and safety match box, plywood which require timber.

   15. The appellant claims that as a result of his report,  when  returning
       from a wedding in 2005 an  unidentified  gunman  fired  at  him.  One
       bullet hit his car but no one  was  injured.  It  was  dark  and  the
       identity of the attacker could  not  be  ascertained.  The  appellant
       claims that he realised his life was in danger so he came to  the  UK
       in 2006 and has remained here since.  The  appellant  fears  that  if
       retuned to Pakistan his life will be in danger.

The appellants country evidence


   16. Mr Karnik summarises the appellant's country evidence in his skeleton
       argument as follows:

        i. On February 2014, in Peshawar, KPK province a  Shia  mosque  was
           attacked where  26  were  killed  and  injured.   In  all  these
           incidents the sectarian groups linked  to  the  Taliban  claimed
           responsibility but no one has been arrested and perpetrators are
           enjoying the immunity and the police and  army  failed  to  stop
           such incidents.

       ii. The deteriorating state of rule  of  law  and  criminal  justice
           system had brought to light the failure of the state to  protect
           its citizens specially the marginalised.

      iii. The new militant groups such as Tereek-e-Taliban Pakistan,  have
           emerged from the Taliban insurgents in Afghanistan.   Typically,
           they  are  marked  by  fundamentalist  Sunni  ideology  of   the
           Deobandi, Salafi/Wahhabi and related traditions.   Not  only  do
           they attack  government  institutions,  they  are  also  at  the
           forefront of sectarian violence, targeting Shia communities  for
           instance. Thousands of Shia have been killed in the last  decade
           alone, leading to claims of "Shia genocide".

       iv. Sectarianism is deeply embedded in Pakistan's legal and  social-
           political order today. Among other things, this  is  evident  in
           the  Supreme  Court's  complete  silence  concerning   religious
           freedom

        v. Persecuted groups do not regard the judiciary  as  an  institute
           that protects them.  Making matters worse, the Supreme Court has
           contributed to sectarian  violence  by  acquitting  hundreds  of
           alleged terrorists for lack of evidence.   Post-acquittal,  many
           are reported to be involved again in anti-state activities.

       vi. Apart from common crime, militant groups, including those buying
           into  violent  sectarian  ideologies,   targeted   professional,
           including doctors, teachers and lawyers, belonging to  the  Shia
           sect.

      vii. The Pakistan government's response to extremist violence against
           the  country's  religious  monitories   reflects   incompetence,
           indifference, or  possible  complicity  by  the  state  security
           forces and other  agencies.   The  authorities  have  repeatedly
           failed to apprehend or prosecute members of militant groups that
           have  claimed  responsibility  for  such  attacks.   While   the
           authorities claim to have arrested dozens of suspects linked  to
           attacks against Shia since 2008, only a  handful  have  actually
           been charged with any crimes. A series of attacks on Shia houses
           of worship has resulted in the deaths of  more  than  80  people
           since January 2015.

     viii. Exploiting old  fault-lines  of  Shia-Sunni  and  the  anti-Shia
           sentiments in Pakistan that has been legitimised by state backed
           orthodox Sunni ulama and their religious organisations virtually
           since the creation of Pakistan, the IS has  found  sympathisers,
           supports, and fighters in its 'global war' against Shias.

       ix. The systematic targeting and killing of large numbers  of  Shia,
           including their sects and sub-sects, is part of  the  unfettered
           extremism that dominates Pakistan.

   17. The appellant also seeks to rely upon a country report prepared by Dr
       Giustozzi who notes:

        i.  Violence  against  the  Pakistan  Shia   community   has   been
           intensifying in recent years

       ii. The  attacks  are  taking  place  throughout  the  territory  of
           Pakistan

      iii. Terrorist attacks occur even in the capital

       iv. Sunni militant groups, incusing those with known  links  to  the
           Pakistan military, its  intelligence  agencies,  and  affiliated
           paramilitaries....operate  with   widespread   impunity   across
           Pakistan, as law enforcement officials effectively turn a  blind
           eye to attacks

        v. A new development is the emergence of  a  new  strong  anti-Shia
           organisation,  from  within  the  ranks  of  the  TTP....Several
           commanders of TTP have joined the Islamic State of Al  Baghdadi,
           whose headquarters is in  Syria.   The  receive  funds  from  Al
           Baghdadi.

       vi. There are occasional reports of police attacks on Shia's.  There
           are no police chief in Pakistan who are Shia, a fact that limits
           the inclination of the police to offer protection.

      vii. Attacks on Shia are rarely if ever investigated

     viii. The attacks include targeted killings of notable members of  the
           Shia community

       ix. TTP appears to  target  individuals  and  section  of  the  Shia
           population, which they believe are opposed to the TTP and to its
           aims

The respondents country evidence


   18. Mr McVeety relies  upon  the  Home  Office  Country  Information  and
       Guidance, Pakistan: Shia Muslims dated February 2015.  Section  4  of
       this  report  specifically  considers  the  issue  of  violence   and
       discrimination against Shia Muslims in Pakistan.

   19. In section 4.1.2 of the report it is noted that in  2013,  the  South
       Asia Terrorism Portal (SATP) recorded more Shia  deaths  in  Pakistan
       than since their records began in 2001. The SATP listed 81  incidents
       in which 504 people died, and 965 were  injured.  Types  of  violence
       included   sectarian   clashes,   militant   attacks   and   targeted
       assassinations.

   20. The report does not support the claim that Shia are a  group  totally
       marginalise in Pakistan. In section 3.2.2 it is noted that 'Shias  in
       Pakistan are often employed in  Government  and  hold  high  offices.
       Notable examples include former Presidents and Prime Ministers. Shias
       are well represented in Parliament, the police, judiciary  and  other
       institutions. Shias are represented on Pakistan's Council of  Islamic
       Ideology,  the  Constitutional  body  that  provides  advice  to  the
       Government  of  Pakistan  on  issues  of  Islamic  jurisprudence  and
       practice. Shias also have representation in the Shariat Courts.'

   21. The issue of sufficiency of protection and State assistance is  noted
       at 4.1.6 and 4.1.7 in the following terms:

           '4.1.6 Attacks against Shias escalate  during  the  Muslim  holy
           month of Moharram,  particularly  on  Shia  processions  marking
           Ashura, the 10th day  of  Moharram.  In  2012  the  TTP  claimed
           responsibility for a number  of  attacks  during  Moharram  that
           killed more than 30 Shias and  wounded  around  200.   At  least
           eight people were killed and 30 injured when a  Shia  procession
           was attacked in Rawalpindi on 15 November 2013. Aside  from  the
           incident in Rawalpindi, Ashura passed peacefully in most of  the
           country on account of the security  measures  put  in  place  by
           Pakistan's  law  enforcement  authorities.   Several   suspected
           militants were arrested in Karachi, and security cameras  helped
           prevent terrorist activity in Lahore.

           4.1.7  According to sources, attacks against Shia Muslims  occur
           in all regions across Pakistan but are particularly prominent in
           Quetta, Balochistan. Other areas with notable levels of violence
           include Karachi, Gilgit Baltistan, and some cities in Pakistan's
           North  West  tribal  areas.   Shia  pilgrimage  routes   between
           Pakistan and Iran, travelling through Balochistan, were  subject
           to attack. In January 2014,  Dawn  reported  that,  following  a
           suicide bomb attack against Hazara Shia pilgrims  travelling  to
           Iran, security forces escorted the pilgrims'  coaches  on  their
           return journey.  When the road between Quetta  and  the  Iranian
           border was closed due to the  attack,  the  Pakistan  Air  Force
           airlifted 215 pilgrims back to Quetta.'

Discussion


   22. The first issue this tribunal is required to consider is  the  reason
       the appellant feels he needs/wants to speak out even if this  creates
       a risk for him and his family and  the  reasonableness/lawfulness  of
       requiring him to act discretely. This is relevant as it  is  accepted
       that if  he  will  not  act  in  a  way  which  invites  persecution,
       preferring to avoid persecution by concealing  fundamental  parts  of
       his identity and personality, then  he  is  entitled  to  asylum.  HJ
       (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31 considered.

   23. The appellant has not held a  prominent  position  in  Pakistan  that
       reflects a political opinion, actual or imputed, that placed  him  at
       risk or will do so on return. The risk is  said  to  arise  from  his
       comments in a  report  that  the  Taliban  are  involved  in  illegal
       deforestation of parts of the northern areas  of  Pakistan  which  he
       claims give rise to a well-founded fear of  torture,  kidnapping  and
       killing at the hands of the  named  group,  Lashkar-i-Jhangwi  if  he
       returned to Pakistan.

   24. I find the appellant has not established that his comments  represent
       a fundamental part of his personal identity. They were made  as  part
       of his employment. It has not been established that they represent an
       opinion the appellant will continue to voice on return, or that it is
       unlawful to expect him to avoid any such inflammatory  statements  if
       returned.  Although the appellant in his oral evidence spoke  of  his
       strong views against the Taliban and how he  would  speak  to  others
       about the same I find this in part is an  attempt  to  embellish  his
       claim. It was not made out that those he will speak to are those that
       will place him at risk. It was not established that  if  returned  to
       Pakistan his employment opportunities are limited to  any  task  that
       will require him to repeat his claims or make any  criticism  of  any
       group such as to place him at risk on return.

   25. It is accepted that if the appellant was to return to his  home  area
       where he will be known and where there is evidence he has  been  shot
       at on one occasion, if his presence becomes known to the Taliban that
       to the lower standard applicable to appeals of this nature there is a
       real risk of further harm. Paragraph 339K of  the  Immigration  Rules
       considered. This  answers  the  second  issue  the  Tribunal  are  to
       consider, the risk being that of revenge/punishment  for  the  report
       claiming  the  Taliban  are  raising  funds  by  illegal  means   and
       exploitation of the countries natural resources, even though this  is
       a matter that must be common knowledge as is the use of exploitation,
       kidnap, ransom, and other illegal activities.

   26. In assessing risk on return it  is  necessary  to  consider,  if  the
       appellant is unable to return to his  home  area,  whether  there  is
       another part of Pakistan  to  which  the  family  can  go.   This  is
       relevant for Paragraph  339O  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  is
       intended to incorporate the Directive, states that the  Secretary  of
       State will not make a grant of asylum or humanitarian  protection  if
       in part of the country of origin a person  would  not  have  a  well-
       founded fear of being persecuted, and the person  can  reasonably  be
       expected to stay in that part of the country.

   27. The evidence suggests the immediate risk to the appellant is  in  his
       home area. He claims that further threats have been received  by  his
       brother but it is noted they were not sent to the appellant  directly
       indicating the local connection and inability of  those  issuing  the
       threats to trace his movements.   Pakistan  is  a  large  country  of
       approximately 310,410 square miles (the UK is  94,060  square  miles)
       with a population of 185 million  (UK  population  64.5  million)  of
       which Pakistan's Shia population is estimated as 40 million  in  2015
       making Pakistan is the second-largest Shia country in the world after
       Iran.

   28. I find insufficient evidence has been made  available  to  support  a
       finding that, notwithstanding the incidents of violence  referred  to
       in the evidence, there is State sponsored persecution of the Shia per
       se on account of their faith in Pakistan. Each case of  a  member  of
       this sect claiming entitlement to international protection shall have
       to be assessed on a fact specific basis.

   29. I similarly find there is insufficient evidence to support a  finding
       that Shia in Pakistan are  prohibited  from  following  their  faith.
       There is no evidence of the State preventing the building of  mosques
       or worship within the same for the Shia minority.

   30. There  are  two  elements  to  consider  if  the  issue  of  internal
       relocation arises.  First, it is  necessary  to  decide  whether  the
       appellant will be safe in another part  of  their  home  country  and
       secondly whether the person could  reasonably  be  expected  to  live
       there. As stated, it has not been shown that Shia are at risk in  all
       of Pakistan and whilst here are some areas where the risk is greater,
       such as the tribal  areas  where  the  Sunni  dominated  Taliban  are
       strongest  or  areas  in  which  IS  may  be  seeking  to   establish
       themselves, it has not been shown such a degree of risk is present in
       all of Pakistan. Shia communities exist in  places  such  as  Quetta,
       Karachi, Parachinar, Islamabad, Peshawar and Rawalpindi. It  has  not
       been shown there is no area of Pakistan in which  the  appellant  and
       his family can relocate.

   31. In AMM and others (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
       Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) the Tribunal held that there is no
       legal burden on the Secretary of State to prove that there is a  part
       of  the  country  of  nationality  etc  of  an  appellant,  who   has
       established a well-founded fear in their  home  area,  to  which  the
       appellant could reasonably be expected to go and live. The  appellant
       bears the  legal  burden  of  proving  entitlement  to  international
       protection; but what that entails will  very  much  depend  upon  the
       circumstances of the particular  case.  In  practice,  the  issue  of
       internal relocation needs to be raised by the Secretary of  State  in
       the letter of refusal or (subject to procedural fairness) during  the
       appellate proceedings. It will then be for the appellant to make good
       an assertion that, notwithstanding  the  general  conditions  in  the
       proposed place of relocation, it would not be reasonable to  relocate
       there. In this case that burden has not been discharged.

   32. It has not been made out that relocating to another part of  Pakistan
       will result in deprivation of a human  right.  The  appellant  is  an
       educated person and it has not been shown he will be unable to secure
       work from which he is able to support his family.  It  has  not  been
       shown the best interests of any children are  other  than  to  remain
       with their parents and return  with  them.  It  has  not  been  shown
       education is not available in Pakistan or that  the  consequences  of
       having to resettle  elsewhere  are  such  as  to  make  the  proposal
       unreasonable. The appellants wife has medical needs but  it  has  not
       been shown this is a case in which  treatment  is  not  available  or
       which makes  the  expectation  that  treatment  will  be  sourced  in
       Pakistan unreasonable -  GS  (India);  EO  (Ghana);  GM  (India);  PL
       (Jamaica); BA (Ghana)  and  KK  (DRC)  v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40
       considered.

   33. In light of the country information it cannot be ruled out  that  the
       appellant as a Shia may experience difficulties, as with other member
       of this  religion.  If  so  the  issue  is  that  of  sufficiency  of
       protection.

   34. In AH (Sufficiency of Protection  -  Sunni  Extremists)  Pakistan  CG
       [2002] UKIAT 05862  , the Appellant  claimed  to  be  at  risk  as  a
       follower of the religious group, the Imamia Organisation,  which  was
       opposed by extremist Islamic Sunni movements, such  the  Sepai  Saba.
       There was no suggestion that he had any fear of  the  authorities  as
       such. The Tribunal accepted that the Sepai Saba  had  carried  out  a
       series  of  assassinations  of  those  to  whom  they  were  opposed,
       including both Shia Muslims, Ahmadi's and  Christians.  The  Tribunal
       bore in mind that there is  a  population  of  some  150  million  in
       Pakistan of whom 20 to 25 million are Shia Muslims and  the  recorded
       attacks of groups such as Sepai Saba must be looked at  in  terms  of
       the very small percentage of the Shia Muslim population  affected  by
       them.  The background evidence indicated that the State  was  acutely
       aware of the difficulties posed by extremists of both the  Sunni  and
       Shia Muslims and that they had taken steps to  pre-empt  violence  at
       particular  times  of  the  year  or  when  there   were   threatened
       demonstrations which they feared  would  breach  public  order.   The
       State was, therefore, not solely concerned  with  dealing  with  such
       matters under the criminal  process  but  in  fact  took  pre-emptive
       action to prevent trouble arising.  The Tribunal concluded that there
       was a sufficiency of protection for the appellant.

   35. In Naseem Gill [2002] UKIAT 05235 (not a CG case) the  Tribunal  said
       "It would be totally unreasonable to expect the Pakistan  police  and
       armed  forces  to  anticipate  every  action  against  these   highly
       organised and well financed Islamic fundamentalist groups.   To  that
       extent, therefore, protection cannot be 100% nor can it  ever  be  in
       any country.  The objective evidence quite clearly  indicates  to  us
       that there is an adequacy of protection against non-state  agents  in
       Pakistan."

   36. The schedule of issues refers to the decision in AW  (sufficiency  of
       protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31(IAC). This not a country guidance
       case but one in which a  Tribunal  composed  of  Lord  Bannatyne  and
       Senior Immigration Judge Storey (as he then was) recorded in the head
       note:

           "1.    At paragraph 55 of Auld  LJ's  summary  in  Bagdanavicius
           [2005] EWCA Civ.1605 it is made clear that the test set  out  in
           Horvath [2001] 1 AC 489 was intended to deal with the ability of
           a state to afford protection to the generality of its citizens.

           2. Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state  protection,  a
           claimant may still have a well-founded fear  of  persecution  if
           authorities know or ought to know of circumstances particular to
           his/her case giving rise  to  the  fear,  but  are  unlikely  to
           provide the additional protection the  particular  circumstances
           reasonably require (per Auld LJ at paragraph 55(vi)).

           3.   In   considering   whether   an   appellant's    particular
           circumstances give rise to a  need  for  additional  protection,
           particular account must be taken of past persecution (if any) so
           as to ensure the  question  posed  is  whether  there  are  good
           reasons to consider that such  persecution  (and  past  lack  of
           sufficient protection) will not be repeated."

   37. In paragraph 34 of the determination it was found:

           "34.   The starting point in  assessing  whether  the  appellant
           would be given sufficient protection if returned to Pakistan  is
           to consider whether there is  systemic  insufficiency  of  state
           protection.  In relation to Pakistan, having regard to the  case
           of AH and also to the case of KA and Others (Domestic Violence -
           Risk on Return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC), it cannot  be
           said that such a general insufficiency of state  protection  has
           been established.  Neither party submitted that there  was,  nor
           do we find, that the background evidence before us  demonstrates
           such as insufficiency."

   38. AW is not a country guidance case but a  reported  determination.   I
       find the evidence presented does not establish a lack of  suffice  of
       protection in Pakistan for members of the Shia  sect.   The  evidence
       shows the police are willing and able to take action.  The  appellant
       has provided in his bundle two letters,  one  said  to  be  from  the
       Police Department  of  the  Government  of  Khyber  Pakhtunkhaw,  the
       appellants home  area,  and  the  second  from  the  Frontier  Police
       Department based in Peshawar. This  city  is  near  the  border  with
       Afghanistan. The first letter, dated 3 March 2015, is  said  to  have
       been written to verify that an attempted murder case  was  registered
       against the appellant on 22 September 2006. A FIR was registered  and
       the crime scene visited, empty cartridge cases recovered  and  people
       interviewed. The appellant and his family were also  interviewed  and
       told the police they have no personal enmity with anyone. The  letter
       continues:

           "Following  the  initial  investigation,  this  crime  had  been
           reviewed to see  whether  there  are  viable  opportunities  for
           further investigation.  As a result, it has been concluded  that
           at this time unfortunately there is insufficient information  to
           proceed and also soon after this incident. [MA] and  his  family
           moved abroad so this case will be kept pending, this is not  the
           end of the police response to this case we have passed this case
           to the local police intelligence unit ..."

   39. The letter refers  to  the  appellant  as  being  a  religious/social
       activist who has been threatened by unknown people in the  past.  The
       second  letter  dated  4  October  2006  from  the  Frontier   Police
       Department claims they have received information a person  is  to  be
       assassinate  'the important person' on 13-20 October 2006 and that if
       any threatening calls are received the police are to be  informed  as
       soon as possible. The letter continues "In  the  interest  of  public
       safety we are working hard with the  partner  intelligence  agencies,
       utilising all available intelligence to reduce further  opportunities
       for crime and disorder to be committed"

   40. If the police are unaware of the identity of an assailant they cannot
       be expected to do more than undertake initial investigations. Even in
       the UK the police need evidence to connect a person with a crime. The
       police received the FIR, investigated, but  were  unable  to  proceed
       further. It also appears that having received evidence of a  possible
       threat, they wrote to the appellant warning  him  of  such  risk  and
       telling him to contact them if required. This evidence  is  supported
       by the other material showing a police force willing to  take  action
       if required.

   41. Although it is accepted there are incidence of the police not  acting
       as members of the Shia community might wish it has not been made  out
       that the state is unwilling or unable  to  provide  protection  where
       required. The appellant's evidence of individuals being  released  by
       the Supreme  Court  for  lack  of  evidence  is  in  accordance  with
       international judicial standards as a person cannot be prosecuted  or
       convicted without evidence, even if they  are  suspected  of  serious
       crimes. Similarly the fact no chief of police is a Shia has not  been
       shown to be determinative as the police are clearly willing and  able
       to act and have done so. It has not been  shown  that  a  person  who
       experiences a lack of willingness at a local level, due to corruption
       or for any other reasons, is unable to take the complaint higher  and
       get redress if required.

   42. Mr McVeety referred in his submissions to the fact Dr  Giustozzi  has
       relied on evidence which pre-dates AW which adds little  to  what  is
       already known of the situation in Pakistan.

   43. Having considered the evidence with the required  degree  of  anxious
       scrutiny I find that  whilst  accepting  the  evidence  of  sectarian
       attacks  and  acts  of  violence  within  Pakistan,  which  is   well
       documented as that country has to deal with  the  Taliban  and  other
       religious extremists, I do not find the appellant has proved his case
       to the required lower standard. Even if  the  Taliban  could,  if  it
       wished, track down the appellant (which has not been shown to be  the
       case if he relocated) and had the means to cause him harm,  the  real
       question was whether they would actually do so.

   44. The applicant is able to establish himself in  a  different  part  of
       Pakistan where nothing would be known  of  his  past  employment  and
       where there was therefore no real risk of persecution facing  him  in
       Pakistan and therefore no  need  for  international  protection.  The
       Pakistani authorities were ready and willing to respond  to  requests
       for protection and there is insufficient evidence to  show  that  the
       applicant would not receive adequate protection if he were to  return
       to Pakistan and sought the same. The appellant  is  an  Urdu  speaker
       which the official language in Pakistan which means he will  be  able
       to establish himself to another community away  from  his  home  area
       without drawing attention to himself in relation to language  issues.
       It has not been shown he will be  unable  to  follow  his  faith  and
       attend the mosque and be involved in activates related to  his  faith
       if he chooses.

   45. The appeal is  dismissed  on  all  grounds.  The  appellant  has  not
       discharged the burden of proof upon him to show he is entitled  to  a
       grant  of  international  protection  arising   from   his   previous
       employment  report,  his  religions  following  or  activities,   his
       political view, or on human rights grounds for himself or any  member
       of his family.

Decision

   46. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as follows.
       This appeal is dismissed.

  Anonymity.

   47. The First-tier Tribunal made make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)
       of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 26 January 2016
