

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03871/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester IAC               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st April 2016                     |On 12th April 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                              ALAS ADAM GULEED
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel, counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson &
Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the grounds  it  was
      arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  conduct  the  hearing   in   a
      procedurally fair manner and misapplied  what  was  then  the  country
      guidance AMM and others  (conflict:  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees:
      FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC).


   2. The Rule 24 response by the respondent was not  particularly  coherent
      and does not address the grounds as pleaded.


   3. Although the appellant's evidence taken at its highest may  not,  now,
      result in the appeal being allowed, it was  accepted  by  Mr  Harrison
      that the procedural unfairness should result in the decision being set
      aside to be remade, no findings retained. On this basis  I  set  aside
      the decision to be remade.

     4. When I have set  aside  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
        s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case to the First-
        tier with directions or remake it for ourselves. Where the error of
        law is such as in this case and the facts are disputed  or  unclear
        and reached following a procedurally unfair hearing I conclude that
        the decision should be remitted to a First-tier judge to  determine
        the appeal.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to be heard afresh  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal judge (not judge J D L  Edwards),  no  findings  of
    fact preserved.



[pic]

                                    Date 1st April 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
