
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03234/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 3 September 2013                           |On 30 September 2013         |
|Prepared 4 September 2013                     |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                   MR V D
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Shoeb, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Armenia born on  6  September  1986.   He
    appeals, with  permission,  against  the  determination  of  First-Tier
    Tribunal Judge Ross, dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the
    respondent made on 3 April 2013 to refuse him asylum and to remove  him
    from the United Kingdom.

 2.  On  26  April  2013,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Easterman   granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and  the  matter  then  came
    before me, sitting at Harmondsworth, on 14 May 2013.  For  the  reasons
    set out in the decision of 16 May 2013, annexed to this  determination,
    I was satisfied that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross did
    involve the making of an error of law, that it should be set aside  and
    should be remade on the basis that there were no findings of fact which
    could or should be preserved.

The Appellant's Case

 3. The appellant first  became  actively  involved  in  Armenian  politics
    during the February 2008 protests against what was  seen  as  a  rigged
    presidential election.   He  was  detained  by  the  authorities,  ill-
    treated, and later released without charge as part of the  presidential
    election protests on 1 March 2008.  Subsequent to  that  he  set  up  a
    group opposed to the current regime and from 2010 onwards was  involved
    with their group in  the  organising  of  meetings  and  demonstrations
    together with other opposition groups.   He  was,  on  account  of  his
    activities, detained, beaten and  ill-treated  by  the  authorities  on
    several occasions.  He continued  to  give  speeches  and  to  organise
    meetings and had also a presence on-line, setting up a profile for  his
    organisation on Facebook.  He still maintains  that  profile,  and  the
    name.

 4. In August 2011 the appellant travelled to the  United  Kingdom  with  a
    Tier 5 visa issued for him as a religious missionary.  He remained here
    for some three months, returning to Armenia in  October/November  2011.
    He did so as pressure had  been  put  on  his  family.   On  return  he
    continued his activities  and  continued  to  have  problems  with  the
    authorities.  He was followed, his phone was listened  to  and  he  was
    beaten on some occasions.

 5. Finally, as a result of a severe beating,  he  travelled  back  to  the
    United Kingdom on 12 March 2013, using his  own  passport  and  claimed
    asylum on arrival.  The appellant fears that if he returns to  Armenia,
    he will face persecution on account of his activism  in  opposition  to
    the current regime.

The Respondent's Case

 6. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter  dated  3  April
    2013 as supplemented by written submissions produced by Mr Melvin prior
    to  the  hearing.   In  summary,  although  accepting  the  appellant's
    identity and nationality the respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had participated in the protests on 1 March 2008 or  that  he
    held a political opinion.  He did not accept either  that  he  was  the
    founder  of  Freedom  of  Speech,  write  for  the  Freedom  of  Speech
    organisation  and  given  his  lack  of  knowledge   of   the   party's
    establishment, his inability to state whether it was legal or  not  and
    his vague answers given to whether the organisation kept records of the
    protests and meetings of its activities.

 7. The respondent did not accept  that the appellant had been arrested  as
    claimed given his unclear answers about the number of occasions that he
    had been beaten. She considered that his unproblematic  departure  from
    Armenia in August 2011, return later that year and departure  again  in
    March 2013 was inconsistent with his  claim  that  he  was  of  adverse
    interest to the authorities.

 8. The respondent considered also that, even if the appellant's account is
    true, there existed in Armenia a sufficiency of protection for him  and
    in any event, it would be reasonable to expect him to relocate  outside
    Yerevan where his difficulties had arisen.  The  respondent  considered
    also that the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would not  be
    in breach of Articles 2, 3 or 8 of the Human Rights Convention or  that
    he was entitled to remain in the United Kingdom under  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 9. In his response to the refusal letter the appellant  sets  out  in  his
    witness statement of 12 April 2013  that  he  had  not  given  a  vague
    description of the 2008 protest, had not given vague answers  since  he
    went to many meetings, that he was an  active  political  activist  and
    that he had worked in  different  roles  between  2008  and  May  2010,
    becoming more active from May 2010 attending meetings with other groups
    (42 to 45) and that he had given  information  about  this  during  his
    interview.  He stated also that in 2008, 2010  and  2011  he  sustained
    head injuries [53] and since then his memory has  been  very  bad.   He
    said that returned to Armenia because of the pressure put on him by the
    police.

Hearing on 3 September 2013

10. Immediately prior to  the  hearing  on  14  May  2013,  the  respondent
    released the appellant and thus he ceased to be  subject  to  the  Fast
    Track procedural rules.  He had been transferred to Manchester  and  it
    was therefore not possible to remake the  determination  on  that  that
    occasion.  Further, it appeared from the medical  reports  produced  at
    that hearing that the appellant may  not  be  capable  of  giving  oral
    evidence which, it now appears, is the case.  For that reason, although
    the appellant was present before me, he did not give evidence.

11. I heard submissions from Mr Shoeb and Mr Melvin.  In  addition,  I  had
    the following documents before me:

      a) The respondent's bundle ("RB").

      b) Appellant's consolidated bundle ("AB").

      c) Appellant's supplementary bundle ("ASB").

      d) Initial medical report of Dr Garwood, 5 August 2013.

      e) Respondent's written submissions.

      f) Appellant's skeleton submissions.

      g) Bundle  of  additional  articles  written  by  the  appellant  with
         translations (undated).

12. Mr Shoeb submitted that, in the light of the  medical  report  from  Dr
    Garwood, that it would not be appropriate to call the appellant to give
    evidence. He submitted that although the appellant  had  been  able  to
    give some details of what happened the fact that he could not give full
    details was not a matter which should be held against him; that he  had
    suffered serious injuries which, according to the doctor, had  occurred
    on different occasions; the objective evidence corroborates the  timing
    of the demonstrations and it was unreasonable to  expect  him  to  have
    produced photographic evidence of his presence at the demonstration  in
    2008.

13. Mr Shoeb submitted that the centrepiece of the  appellant's  activities
    are in relation to Facebook which has an  important  role  to  play  in
    Armenia and the fact that the appellant did not belong to  an  official
    party with a manifesto of policies did not preclude him from  being  an
    activist, it being credible that  Facebook  would  create  a  political
    profile such that the state would have an adverse interest in him.   Mr
    Shoeb submitted that even if the appellant's activities did not trigger
    adverse interest in him at the point  of  return,  his  willingness  to
    return in 2008 indicated that he would do so in future and  the  extent
    of his activities can be discerned from over 7,000  people  who  follow
    his Facebook page which is still active.

14. Mr Shoeb submitted that it was clear from the background evidence  that
    the state monitors activists,  including  telephones,  and  so  it  was
    possible that the appellant's identity was known  to  the  authorities.
    He submitted that the police were able to act with impunity  and  there
    is no possibility of redress  against  them.   He  submitted  that  the
    appellant had provided sufficient explanation for why he  had  returned
    to Armenia that if he were to return, and to  continue  campaigning  he
    would face difficulty.  He submitted that the appellant's  profile  had
    not gone away and that, given that the level of suppression in  Armenia
    ebbed and flowed, it is likely that the appellant would be at  risk  in
    any  future  crackdown.   He  submitted  that  the   appellant's   past
    persecution was indicative of future risk and that this was  consistent
    with the pattern of injuries occurring at different times in the  past.



15. Mr Shoeb did, however,  concede  that  the  articles  produced  at  the
    hearing were poorly translated and added little, after I pointed out to
    him that the translations did not bear any dates although the originals
    appeared to bear a date.

16. In reply, Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant was not  credible  and
    had failed to give sufficient evidence in support of  his  claims.   He
    submitted that the evidence of the organisation the  appellant  claimed
    to have founded is lacking and that there was nothing beyond the  7,000
    Facebook followers.  The articles concerned  migration  and  little  to
    show any specific political opposition to the Government of Armenia.

17. Mr Melvin submitted also that there is  a  healthy  opposition  now  in
    Armenia and that although there were violent demonstrations in 2008, it
    which it was possible that the appellant had been involved, there  were
    tens  of  thousands  of  people  in  the  street  at   the   time   and
    demonstrations since then had been mainly peaceful.  He submitted  that
    it cannot be said  that  the  appellant  was  a  famous  or  well-known
    activist when there was nothing to show that he was  the  head  of  the
    organisation who would have come  to  the  notice  of  the  authorities
    leading to his ill-treatment or detention.  He submitted  further  that
    if the appellant had been arrested on as many occasions as claimed,  he
    would not have been able to leave.

18. Mr Melvin submitted that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide  any
    evidence that he or his  followers  had  made  any  complaints  to  the
    authorities about his ill-treatment and arrests and the  fact  that  he
    now appears to be suffering from ill-health that he had been passed fit
    for missionary work (RB, C40,41) and that Dr Garwood's evidence  should
    be  viewed  with  a  degree  of  scepticism.   He  submitted  that  the
    photographs of  what  appeared  to  be  a  room  ransacked,  presumably
    belonging to the appellant or his  parents  was  of  little  evidential
    value given that there was no evidence to show what this was.  He asked
    me to note that not a single person has produced any  evidence  in  the
    form of a letter of support and that the appellant would not be at risk
    on return.

19. Mr Shoeb, in reply, agreed that Article 8 was not in  issue  submitting
    that it would be unreasonable to expect evidence to be adduced  by  the
    appellant in the form of statements or letters from people with whom he
    had associated given that this could be treated  as  self-serving.   He
    submitted that the people with whom he had been  associated  would  not
    have been able to give accounts of what the appellant had suffered  and
    submitted that I should take into account  the  practical  difficulties
    there had been, partly  as  a  result  of  funding,  in  the  appellant
    adducing evidence in support of his claim.

20. Mr Shoeb submitted that, as a political activist, the  appellant  would
    be compelled to act in a like manner on his return and that,  the  only
    reason he would not do so, was fear of persecution.  Thus, this  appeal
    ought to be allowed.

Determination and reasons

21. In coming to my determination I have considered  the  totality  of  the
    evidence before me and I have applied throughout the lower standard  of
    proof applicable to asylum claims, bearing in mind  also  the  guidance
    given at paragraph 210 of the UNHCR handbook, and bearing in mind  also
    that the appellant is, for the  reasons  set  out  below  [26]-[32],  a
    vulnerable adult.  The burden is on the appellant to show that he has a
    well-founded fear of persecution or that there are substantial  grounds
    for believing that his rights under the Human Rights  Convention  would
    be breached.  In order to  qualify  for  international  protection  the
    appellant must meet the requirements of the  Qualification  Regulations
    and the provisions set out in the Statement of Changes  in  Immigration
    Rules (CM6918, 18 September 2006),  both  of  which  implement  Council
    Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004  on  minimum  standards  for  the
    qualification and  status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
    persons as refugees or  a  person  who  otherwise  needs  international
    protection and the content of the protection granted.

22. Since it regained its independence in 1991 Armenia has  been  dominated
    by the Republican Party of Armenia and there  have  been  numerous  and
    significant flaws  with  the  presidential  elections.   The  US  State
    Department  Report  for  2012  (AB  15ff)  indicates  that   the   most
    significant human rights problems were  limitations  on  the  citizens'
    right to change their Government; freedom of speech; arbitrary  arrest;
    and the lack of independence of the judiciary.   The  report  indicates
    [16] that  the  police  reportedly  beat  citizens  during  arrest  and
    interrogation, that the authorities  continued  to  arrest  and  detain
    criminal  suspects  without  reasonable   suspicion   and   to   detain
    individuals arbitrarily due to opposition, affiliations or  activities.
    Torture, whilst prohibited by law, is employed regularly with few cases
    of police mistreatment being reported due to fear of  retaliation.   It
    appears elsewhere [18] that there was an atmosphere of  impunity  which
    contributes to the increase in abuses on the part of the police.   That
    said, it appears that  the  detention  of  individuals  with  political
    affiliations of those in activities perceived to be  in  opposition  to
    the Government appears to have declined [20] but it  appears  that  law
    enforcement  bodies  tapped   telephone   communications   and   e-mail
    correspondence of individuals whom the Government wished to keep  under
    scrutiny including human rights activists and the political  opposition
    [24].  There are significant restrictions  on  freedom  of  speech  and
    perhaps unsurprisingly on-line websites are said to  be  the  country's
    most independent information sources with social  media  such  Facebook
    and YouTube asserting a small but growing influence on social discourse
    [24].

23. It is evident from the material before me that  the  demonstrations  in
    February 2008 which were violently suppressed on 1 March 2008 are  well
    documented.  They began as a protest against alleged electoral fraud in
    the Armenian presidential elections of 19 February 2008.  Large numbers
    of people had been involved in  demonstrations  during  the  day,  with
    hundreds camping out overnight and an attempt was made on  the  morning
    of 1 March 2008 to disperse  the  several  7,200  people  who  remained
    overnight.  Subsequent to that a  demonstration  protesting  this  took
    place in front of the French Embassy.   That  too  was  suppressed  and
    later it appears that violence and looting erupted, possibly under  the
    influence of agent provocateur.

24. It appears that since the events of February/March 2008 there had  been
    further demonstrations as a result of the suppressions  of  2008,  most
    notably between 19 January and 25 November 2011.  Partly as a result of
    this, it appears that the 2013 elections were less  corrupt,  resulting
    in the election of a number of opposition parties  to  the  parliament.
    Nonetheless, serious allegations of electoral fraud have arisen.

25. The appellant has produced a number of photographs which appear in  the
    respondent's bundle.  He has also produced  evidence  of  his  Facebook
    account and that he has 7,000 followers; he has also produced  articles
    he has written. He did not, however, give oral evidence  before  me.  I
    draw no inferences adverse to him from that, and in the  light  of  the
    medical reports, his decision not to give evidence is understandable.

26. The medical reports on the appellant have been prepared  by  Dr  Alfred
    Garwood who is a qualified physician, a Member of the Royal College  of
    Surgeons and approved under Section 12 of the Mental Health  Act  1999.
    He  interviewed  the  appellant  for  an  hour  and   45   minutes   at
    Harmondsworth Detention Centre on 11 May 2013 finding  three  types  of
    scars: a temple bone injury, an injury to the  thigh  and  three  small
    scars to the skull.  In addition, Dr Garwood used the mini mental state
    examination, revealing significant memory impairment, noting that "this
    was global memory impairment but particularly more severe impairment of
    short term memory was noted".  There  appeared  to  be  less  cognitive
    dysfunction but he noted that the clinical presentation was familiar to
    him having been limited as he had seen it in a number of patients  with
    traumatic brain injuries.

27. Dr Garwood also noted that the appellant had symptoms of post-traumatic
    stress disorder concluding that the  scar  on  the  appellant's  temple
    showed the characteristics that it was caused by severe  force  from  a
    heavy man-made object, the force being required to cause  a  depression
    in the skull being of a high order and a blow  with  a  rifle  butt  as
    claimed by the appellant is highly consistent.

28. Dr Garwood noted that the  injuries  to  the  thigh  appears  to  be  a
    penetrative injury such as a bullet wound and the injuries to the scalp
    are diagnostic of injuries caused by splitting of the skin at the  same
    time caused by baton injuries.  Dr Garwood considered  the  memory  and
    cognitive impairment is diagnostic of brain  injury,  it  being  likely
    that the blow causing the temple scarring caused internal bleeding such
    as a subdural haemorrhage.

29. The updated medical  report  dated  12  July  2013  (AB,  149  to  163)
    addresses the questions:

      i) Does the claimant have the mental capacity to give evidence?

     ii) If the claimant would give evidence could this be relied upon?

30. Dr Garwood concluded that the appellant would not  retain  adequate  or
    accurate details of what he been  has  asked  or  his  answers  to  the
    questions as his impaired condition is of a nature and degree  that  he
    will not adequately understand some questions put to him and would  not
    reliably understand the content of the questions, and thus the accuracy
    of his answers would be unreliable.  He  concludes  "his  brain  injury
    causes him to be unfit to give evidence".

31. Finally, Dr Garwood explains in a supplementary report in  some  detail
    that palpation of the appellant's temple  scar  showed  an  indentation
    which is perfectly linear and the shape of an  inverted  regular  wedge
    and that the injury from which the appellant suffered was a  depression
    fracture.  In such injuries the fracture requires  the  nature  of  the
    causative object which in this case had a linear regular shape  as  not
    occurring in nature.  He notes also  that  a  neurological  examination
    listed a degree of loss of spatial awareness and fine  digital  control
    indicating likely damage to the brain and the mini mental state test is
    of a type undertaken by all general medical practitioners and those who
    care for the mental health of the elderly.

32.  In  the  light  of  these  details,  and  having  had  regard  to  his
    qualifications, I am satisfied that Dr Garwood  is  competent  to  give
    expert evidence both as to the  physical  injuries  the  appellant  has
    incurred and as to his cognitive ability.  The report gives significant
    detail as to the injuries to the appellant's skull and I  am  satisfied
    that this, together with the neurological examination, the difficulties
    identified both in terms of motor control and in recall are  consistent
    with the appellant having suffered a blow to the head from a weapon  as
    a result of which he suffered brain damage.  I  accept  that  this  has
    affected his recall, in particular short term memory.  I have no reason
    to doubt, given the doctor's findings, that the appellant is not fit to
    give evidence that would be reliable.

33. The difficulty with this conclusion for the appellant is that it  would
    tend to indicate that what he said in  interview  is  also  unreliable.
    While that is capable of explaining any ability to  recall  events  and
    inconsistencies, it also renders less reliable what he did say.

34.  Further,  the  same  concerns  apply  to  a  witness   statement.   No
    satisfactory basis has been put forward as to why what was said  in  an
    interview would be any more reliable than what was said in court.   If,
    then, the appellant's evidence is unreliable, there is little  reliable
    evidence as to what the appellant said had happened to him  in  Armenia
    and why he is at risk on return.

35. Given the appellant's lack of capacity to give evidence,  I  have  paid
    close attention to the guidance given in paragraph  210  of  the  UNHCR
    Handbook:

         210. It will, in any event, be necessary to lighten the  burden  of
         proof normally incumbent upon the applicant, and  information  that
         cannot easily be obtained from the applicant may have to be  sought
         elsewhere, e.g. from friends, relatives and other  persons  closely
         acquainted with the applicant, or from his  guardian,  if  one  has
         been  appointed.  It  may  also  be  necessary  to   draw   certain
         conclusions from the surrounding circumstances. If,  for  instance,
         the applicant belongs to and is  in  the  company  of  a  group  of
         refugees, there is a presumption that  he  shares  their  fate  and
         qualifies in the same manner as they do.

36. It is with that in mind that I have gave directions to the  appellant's
    solicitors that it may be appropriate and/or useful for contact  to  be
    made with the appellant's associates in Armenia with a view to  getting
    some degree of evidence about his activities,  the  organisations  with
    which he was involved and any indicators of difficulties he had had.  I
    have  also  taken  these  observations  into   account   in   assessing
    credibility and the claim as a whole.

37. Despite being given the opportunity to  obtain  material  of  the  type
    identified in paragraph 210, this has not been done.  I do  not  accept
    Mr Shoeb's submission that this would have been characterised as "self-
    serving" and I bear in mind that  it  was  his  firm  who  relied  upon
    paragraph 210 in their representations to the respondent.

38. The fact that in an adversarial  system  one's  opponent  may  describe
    evidence as self-serving is not a good reason not to seek to adduce it.
     Further, the explanation that there would  be  little  that  could  be
    adduced, given the informal nature of the appellant's organisation, and
    of the political opinions of opposition activists  in  Armenia  carries
    little weight.  In  his  interview  the  appellant  answers  at  length
    details about the organisation he had  founded  stating  (Q53)  he  was
    famous all over Armenia, that the group he had formed started  in  2010
    (Q21) and he describes his organisation organised demonstrations (Q58),
    that they were involved with  other  groups  (Q60),  several  of  which
    including Hak and Jarangut Yun being political parties.   He  describes
    his organisation as having a symbol, which he drew (Q63).  He also said
    (Q82) that he told these political parties about  the  difficulties  he
    had had and (Q109) that his organisation was not organising just  their
    own meetings  but  also  taking  part  in  other  meetings  with  other
    political parties with whom they cooperated.

39. In addition, the photographs which appear of the appellant with various
    different people (RB, C2  to  C21)  including  several  of  him  giving
    speeches also include photographs which he  says  (Q13)  "this  is  the
    office where I work for my group,  this  was  in  Yerevan,  I  was  the
    leader".

40. The picture  that  the  appellant  is  giving  is  of  an  organisation
    structured enough to have an office and a  leader.   This  is  entirely
    different from the picture painted by Mr Shoeb. I consider that it  was
    in all the circumstances of this case reasonable to have expected  some
    evidence from the appellant's organisation and/or  other  organisations
    with whom he had been involved.

41. The letter from the appellant's father is lacking in detail and  refers
    to him and his family being harassed and to the appellant  having  been
    beaten.  Again it contains no dates or any  details.  It  is  therefore
    difficult to attach much weight to it, and as a family  member,  it  is
    likely that he wishes to assist his son.

42. I accept that the appellant has started a Facebook page with over 7,000
    followers which is indicative that he has a profile which is more  than
    just having a lot of friends.  The content  of  the  Facebook  page  is
    unclear as there are no translations of, for example, his  comments  on
    demonstrations or calling people to attend them. Those  articles  which
    have been produced, very late in the day, and in what are  accepted  by
    Mr Shoeb to be  poor  translations,  add  little.   The  articles,  are
    relatively short, undated with the exception of one dated July 2013 and
    concern for the most part concerns economic migration from Armenia  due
    to the situation brought around by the current regime.

43. Whilst there were  documents  in  Armenian  also  at  Annex  C  of  the
    respondent's bundle, translations do not appear there although  one  of
    the documents appears to be a contract for the  provision  of  services
    but the appellant is employed  by  the  "Public  Journalist  Club"  his
    employment being to distribute within social networks,  media  centres,
    press releases and communications.  If, as it  appears,  the  appellant
    was employed by the media centre it is  perhaps  unsurprising  that  he
    appears in photographs taken at the media centre.  What he is doing  in
    the photographs is of course dependent  on  other  evidence  which  is,
    given the appellant's mental state, unreliable.  It is also  surprising
    that no attempt appears to have been made to ask the employer  for  any
    confirmation of his activities.

44.  Similarly,  the  appellant's  job  would   appear   to   involve   the
    dissemination of material in social networks which Facebook is.  It  is
    not possible to discern whether his page is being maintained as part of
    his job, or whether it is as a political activist, or whether he  would
    be so perceived by the authorities.

45. I accept that although poorly translated,  the  appellant  has  written
    some articles (see ASB)  which  appear,  in  a  general  sense,  to  be
    political. It is not, however, clear how wide is the circulation of the
    articles, or that they are of a  character  likely  to  arouse  adverse
    interest, given that they are general in nature, concerned for the most
    part with claims that the country is being run in such a way  that  its
    citizens are leaving for  economic  reasons.  These  are  not  articles
    making specific allegations against named individuals or organisations.



46. There are translations (AB pp63-64) of letters written by the appellant
    stating that he has been subject to interrogations and  persecution  in
    which [page 64] he appears to be saying  that  he  had  gone  into  the
    police to try to report things and he has  been  subject  to  blackmail
    (page 63).  This appears inconsistent  with  his  statements  elsewhere
    that he had not attempted to report things to  the  police.  Given  the
    documented unreliability of his evidence, an assertion he puts  forward
    supported by his own expert medical opinion, I draw no inferences  from
    this in terms of credibility, but does indicate difficulty in recall.

47. Taking these factors into account and treating the evidence as a whole,
    I consider that there is insufficient reliable evidence  to  show  that
    the appellant was a political activist either in 2008 or  subsequently.
    I accept that the appellant has been ill-treated in the past  in  light
    of the medical report and I accept also,  given  Dr  Garwood's  reports
    that the injuries occurred at different times.  He does not,  and  this
    is not a criticism of the doctor, give  any  timescale  for  the  scars
    indicating either their age, or how long may have elapsed between them.



48. As the appellant's evidence is not, it is not possible to conclude  how
    long ago the injuries occurred or more importantly, who inflicted  them
    or in what context. The evidence  of  detentions  and  consequent  ill-
    treatment  other  than  in  connection  with  the  February/March  2008
    incidents is vague and lacking in detail. That may well be due  to  the
    appellant's impaired recall, but even allowing for that, I consider the
    evidence of continued adverse interest is insufficient to  persuade  me
    that the authorities did continue to pursue him and I note he was  able
    to leave the country on two occasions using his own passport.  While  I
    accept that his injuries were inflicted while in detention,  I  am  not
    satisfied that this, given the lack of reliable evidence  of  continued
    interest in him, indicative that the appellant would now be at risk  on
    return to Armenia.

49. There is a significant absence of material relating to the organisation
    the appellant claims to have founded. As noted above, I do  not  accept
    the submission that this organisation is so unstructured

50.  In the absence of reliable evidence of continuing adverse interest  in
    him on the part  of  the  authorities  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant is or was a political activist nor over and above what he has
    placed on his Facebook  page.   Whilst  I  accept  that  he  has  7,000
    followers and it is  likely  that  his  page  will  have  come  to  the
    knowledge of the Armenian authorities, I am not satisfied that this  is
    in itself  sufficient,  absent  any  other  reliable  evidence  of  his
    activities, to bring him to the adverse attention of the authorities on
    return, particularly as the contents of the page are unclear,

51. Whilst I accept that Facebook is  important,  there  is  little  or  no
    evidence to show what steps the Armenian authorities take against those
    who maintain groups on Facebook or other social media, let alone  those
    who may be posting on Facebook as part of  their  professional  duties.
    Further, without any details of the content, it is difficult to make an
    assessment as to how this is likely, given the absence, for example, of
    specific allegations, that this is likely to incur adverse attention.

52. For these reasons, I consider the appellant has failed  to  satisfy  me
    that he will, on return to Armenia, be at risk of ill-treatment on  the
    part of the authorities.   Further,  I  do  not  accept  that  he  will
    continue his activism  in  such  a  way  as  would  incur  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities.  He may well continue his  Facebook  page
    but I am not satisfied that this is sufficient  to  bring  him  to  the
    attention of the authorities. I find further  that  he  has  failed  to
    demonstrate that the Armenian authorities maintain any adverse interest
    in him

53. For these reasons, I find that the appellant has failed to  satisfy  me
    that his removal to Armenia would be in breach of the United  Kingdom's
    obligations under the Refugee Convention or Articles  2  or  3  of  the
    Human Rights Convention.

54. Mr Shoeb conceded that Article 8 is not engaged in  the  facts  of  his
    case and accordingly, I am not satisfied on the evidence before me that
    removing the appellant to Armenia would  be  a  breach  of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention nor am  I  satisfied  that  it  would  be  contrary  to  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules.

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                        ANNEX -ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03234/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Harmondsworth                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 May 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                     V D
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant



                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Enright, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr G Phillips, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Armenia born on  6  September  1986.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge D Ross promulgated on  17  April  2013  dismissing  his
      appeal against the respondent's decision of 3 April  2013  to  refused
      him asylum and to remove him from the United Kingdom.

   2. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he is a political activist,
      opposed to the government of Armenia. He  was  first  detained  during
      demonstrations on 1 March 2008, and  has  been  arrested  on  numerous
      occasions since then, but always released.  He  has  suffered  serious
      head and other injuries whilst detained,  the  head  injuries  causing
      memory problems.  He has founded a group - Freedom of Speech  - and in
      2010 he set up a Facebook page  about  Freedom  of  Speech  which  was
      critical of the government and has over 7000 members. That has brought
      him to the adverse attention of the authorities.  In 2011 he  came  to
      the United Kingdom as a missionary, having obtained a tier 5 visa, but
      returned to Armenia after a few months due  to  threats  and  violence
      towards his family from the police. In 2013 the appellant returned  to
      the United Kingdom,  claiming  asylum  on  arrival,  as  he  had  been
      threatened by persons unknown.



   3. The respondent considered the appellant's claim within the Fast  Track
      procedure. She did not accept  the  appellant's  account,  finding  it
      evasive, inconsistent and lacking in detail particularly in respect of
      the organisation he claimed to have  founded.    She  considered  also
      that, if true, there was  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  him  in
      Armenia, or in the alternative, that it would be reasonable to  expect
      him to relocate within his own country.



   4.  On  3  April  2013  the  appellant's  representatives  wrote  to  the
      respondent requesting that the appellant  be  removed  from  the  Fast
      Track procedure. That request was  rejected,  the  respondent  stating
      that  no  diagnostic  findings  had  been  made  with  regard  to  the
      appellant's account of ill-treatment.



   5. The appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge
      D Ross, within the Fast Track procedure.   Immediately  prior  to  the
      hearing, the respondent served on  the  appellant   a  medical  report
      which discloses that the doctor had concerns that  the  appellant  may
      have been the victim or torture; that he had  scars;  and,  occasional
      amnesia following a head injury.



   6. The appellant then made an application for the appeal to be  adjourned
      in  order  for  a  detailed  medical  report  to  be  prepared.   That
      application was refused.



7. Judge Ross dismissed the appeal, finding that:

     i. He had sufficient evidence of the  appellant's  injuries  from  the
        doctor's report and that it as not likely that a new  report  would
        be able to add much [14];
    ii. The appellant had three separate injuries  to  hi  head  which  may
        explain why he was vague in his description of events [14];
   iii. The appellant had been present at the demonstration in  March  2008
        and had been arrested and injured following it [20],  but  that  he
        had not suffered other assaults,  given  his  inability  to  recall
        descriptive details
    iv. The appellant has a Facebook page "V  Freedom  D"  with  over  7000
        followers but which makes no reference to his political  activities
        [21];
     v. The appellant had not proved that he had  given  a  speech  at  the
        Media Centre [22], although it was clear that he had been there;
    vi. The appellant had not given a proper explanation for  his  returned
        to Armenia in 2011, noting he had done so without being stopped  on
        arrival [22]; that it  was  not  clear  why  the  authorities  were
        putting pressure on his family while he was  out  of  the  country;
        and, that he had not explained adequately why  he  had  decided  to
        leave in 2013 if, as before, the authorities were putting  pressure
        on his family.
   vii. There was a marked lack of evidence to show that the appellant  is,
        as he claims, an important anti-government activist [25];


   8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tier  on  the
      grounds that:




     i. It was procedurally unfair not to remove the appeal from  the  Fast
        Track and/or adjourn it to allow for an additional medical  report,
        given the report that indicated the appellant had been tortured and
        suffers from memory loss;

    ii. The judge had been inconsistent in accepting head  injuries  as  an
        explanation for vagueness [11] in description of events, but not in
        his description of other assaults [20];

   iii. The judge's findings  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  well-known
        political activist was contrary to the evidence before the court.




   9. Permission to appeal on all grounds was granted by First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Easterman on 25 April 2013. Subsequent to that, on 13 May  2013,
      the appellant was released from detention and  so  the  appeal  is  no
      longer subject to the Fast Track Procedure rules. The  appellant  was,
      it appears accommodated overnight with a view to being  sent  to  NASS
      accommodation  in  Liverpool  the  date  of  the  hearing  which,   of
      necessity, proceeded in his understandable absence.




Did the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making  of  an
error of law?



  10. Mr Enright submitted that on the basis of the medical report from  the
      detention centre doctor, it was apparent that he had concerns that the
      detained had been the victim of torture, suffered  from  memory  loss,
      and that this in itself indicated he should not  be  detained  or  the
      matter retained within the Fast Track.  He  submitted  also  that  the
      need for an appropriate  medical  report  was  shown  by  the  judge's
      inconsistent handling of the memory problems and the guidance  in  the
      UNHCR handbook.



  11. Mr Philips submitted that the medical report before the  judge  simply
      repeated  what  the  appellant  had  told  the  doctor,  and  that  an
      adjournment   would   have   been   speculative,    the    appellant's
      representatives having failed, contrary to the  Fast  Track  rules  to
      provide a date within which the appeal could be relisted. He submitted
      further that the delay in serving the doctor's report had been due  to
      the appellant on whom it had been served failing to  pass  it  to  his
      representatives.



  12. Mr Philips submitted further that the judge's findings  had  not  been
      inconsistent with respect to the findings as to the appellant's memory
      loss as an explanation for different events.



  13. Whether or not to adjourn the appeal or to take it  out  of  the  Fast
      Track was a matter for the judge's discretion, but the question to  be
      asked is was the decision not to do so fair?  Where an appellant seeks
      to be allowed to establish by contrary evidence that the case  against
      him is  wrong,  the  question  will  always  be,  whatever  stage  the
      proceedings have reached, what does fairness  demand?  In  this  case,
      discrepancies in this evidence  had  been  held  against  him,  and  a
      medical report, indicating he may be the victim of torture and that he
      may suffer from memory problems had been adduced.



  14. As was noted in SH (Afghanistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 [15]:



      .......Tribunals, like courts, must set aside a determination reached
      by the adoption of an unfair procedure unless they are satisfied that
      it would be pointless to do so because the result would inevitably be
      the same. Both Simon Brown LJ and Dyson LJ reminded themselves, as all
      faced with the argument that the result would inevitably be the same
      must remind themselves, of Megarry J's evocation of the essence of
      justice in John v Rees [1970] Ch 345,402:-
  15. The report from the detention centre doctor was  prepared  under  rule
      35. While it is based on what the appellant told the doctor, it  would
      not be proper to consider it simply as a record of  that,  given  that
      the doctor gives his professional evaluation at section 3 that he  has
      concerns that the appellant  had  been  the  victim  of  torture.  The
      wording mirrors that of rule 35 which  places  him  under  a  duty  to
      report such concerns.



  16. The respondent' policy is, as is set out in the refusal  letter,  that
      those in respect of whom there  is  independent  evidence  of  torture
      should not be kept within the Fast Track.



  17. It is in the circumstances  difficult  to  see  the  detention  centre
      doctor's  report  as  anything  other  than  independent  evidence  of
      torture, indicating that the matter  should  not  have  been  retained
      within the Fast Track.



  18. I note Mr Philips' submission that the report in question  was  served
      on the appellant under cover of a letter dated 10 April 2013, but that
      does not take account  of  the  difficulty,  the  appellant  being  in
      detention, of him passing it to his representatives.



  19. The Fast Track rules permit an  adjournment  only  if  a  future  date
      within 10 days is identified, and as Mr Philips submitted, it  is  not
      clear that this was done. While I note Mr Enright's submission that he
      had undertaken  to  do  so,  it  is  not  clear  from  the  record  of
      proceedings that his had been noted.



  20. That said, the report  did  indicate  head  injuries,  and  the  judge
      appears to direct himself [11] that this may account for vagueness  in
      description. The determination does therefore show that the judge  was
      aware of the possible problem yet it appears [20] that he has confined
      himself to considering that only recall of  dates  would  be  affected
      rather than other details. The determination  does  not  disclose  any
      proper evidence for  such  a  conclusion.  Having  accepted  that  the
      appellant's head injuries may account for problems in recall,  it  was
      incumbent  on  him  to  explain  adequately  why  he   accepted   that
      explanation for some problems but not others. I consider that  he  has
      not done so.



  21. In addition, in the light of the report from Dr Garwood, it could  not
      reasonably be said that adjourning  the  appeal  would  have  made  no
      difference.



  22. For these reasons, I  am  satisfied  that  in  this  case,  there  was
      procedural unfairness in refusing to adjourn the appeal or take it out
      of the fast track procedure in order that a full medical report on the
      appellant could be undertaken.  I am satisfied that the lack of such a
      report was material, given that the appellant's  inability  to  recall
      details may be due to head injuries, and as that inability  gave  rise
      to adverse credibility findings.



  23. I consider that in the circumstances, the determination  must  be  set
      aside and  re-made.  Given  that  the  errors  identified  affect  the
      credibility findings, there are no findings of  fact  which  could  or
      should be preserved but nonetheless,  given  the  appellant's  medical
      condition it is not apparent that  he  will  be  giving  further  oral
      evidence.





Signed                                  Date:  16 May 2013


J K H Rintoul
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

