
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03525/2014
                                                               AA/03526/2014
                                                               AA/03527/2014
                                                               AA/03568/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2015                  |On 18 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    M J J
                                     R J
                                    H J J
                                    M J J
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Davison instructed by Lawland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the child appellants.   This  order  prohibits
    the disclosure directly or indirectly (including by the parties) of the
    identity of any of the appellants.  Any disclosure and breach  of  this
    order may amount to a contempt of court.  This order  shall  remain  in
    force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.

Introduction

 2. The appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka who were born respectively  on
    9 June 1971, 7 December 1977, 21 January 2004 and 15 April  2009.   The
    first and second appellants are married and are the father  and  mother
    respectively of the third and fourth appellants who are their  son  and
    daughter.

 3. The second appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  10  April  2007
    accompanied by the third appellant.  She had leave as  a  student.   In
    November 2007, the first appellant, her husband, arrived in the  UK  as
    her dependant.  Their leave was subsequently extended until  May  2009.
    Thereafter, the second appellant was granted leave to remain as a  Tier
    1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant until 31 March  2011  and  that  leave  was
    later extended to 28 July 2013.  The leave of  the  family  (which  now
    included the fourth appellant) was extended in line with  that  of  the
    second appellant.

 4. On 13 May 2013 an application  for  further  leave  was  made  but  was
    subsequently rejected on 22 May 2013 as no fee had been  paid.   On  20
    January  2014,  the  appellants  were  issued  with  form  IS.151A   as
    overstayers.  In April 2014, the first appellant  claimed  asylum  with
    the remaining appellants as  his  dependants.   On  9  May  2014,  that
    application was refused and on 13  May  2014  decisions  were  made  to
    remove the appellants as overstayers by way of directions to Sri  Lanka
    under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

The Appeal

 5. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
    promulgated on 10 July 2014,  Judge  Troup  dismissed  the  appellants'
    appeals on asylum, humanitarian protection grounds and under Arts 2 and
    3 of the ECHR.  He also dismissed their appeals under Article 8 of  the
    ECHR.

 6. The appellants appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission was  granted
    by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt) on 28 July 2014.

 7. The appeal was first listed for hearing on  26  September  2014  before
    DUTJ Zucker.  Before Judge Zucker the appellants accepted  the  judge's
    decision  to  dismiss  their  appeals  on  refugee   and   humanitarian
    protection grounds and under Articles  2  and  3  of  the  ECHR.   They
    pursued their appeals only on the basis of Article 8.

 8. In his decision promulgated on 10 October 2014, Judge Zucker  concluded
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  in  dismissing  the
    appellants' appeals under  Article  8.   He  set  aside  Judge  Troup's
    decision on that ground only and adjourned the hearing  for  a  resumed
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal.  Following a number of adjournments,
    the resumed hearing was listed before me on 2 September 2015.

The Resumed Hearing

 9. At the resumed hearing, the appellants were represented by  Mr  Davison
    and the respondent by Mr Richards.

10. At the outset, the issues relevant in the appeal were clarified.

11. First, Mr Richards, having been given the  opportunity  to  interrogate
    the appellant's Home Office files, informed me that the First Appellant
    had been in contact by telephone with the Home Office on 8 April  2014.
    As a result of that, an appointment had been  made  to  deal  with  his
    "asylum claim" on 15 April 2014.  Mr  Richards  informed  me  that  the
    records showed that the first appellant's "asylum claim" had been  made
    on that day.  In the light of that, Mr Richards indicated that  he  had
    no argument to contradict the conclusion that the  appellant  had  made
    his "asylum  claim"  on  15  April  2014.   In  my  judgment,  that  is
    undoubtedly the date on which the first appellant made his asylum claim
    rather than the day on which he  telephoned  in  order  to  fix  up  an
    appointment to make, as is required in the usual case by the  Secretary
    of State, an appointment to make an asylum claim in person.

12. Secondly, as a consequence of that, since the third  appellant  arrived
    in the UK on 10 April 2007, at the date of the  application  namely  15
    April 2014, he had continuously resided in the UK for  at  least  seven
    years.  The effect of that is that the third appellant may  potentially
    fall within para 276ADE(1)(iv) of the  Immigration  Rules  (HC  395  as
    amended) and s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  In relation to the former, he would  be  entitled  to  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his private life providing that it "would not be
    reasonable to expect [the third appellant] to leave the UK". In respect
    of the latter, given that both the first and second  appellant  have  a
    "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with the third appellant
    who is a "qualifying child" (within the definition in s.117D(1):   "the
    public interest does not require [the parents] removal  where  ....  it
    would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom."

13. Both Mr Richards and Mr Davison accepted that the single issue I had to
    decide was whether it would be reasonable to expect the third appellant
    (aged 11) to leave the  UK  and  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   Mr  Richards
    accepted that if that  would  not  be  reasonable,  then  none  of  the
    appellants could be removed and their appeals should  be  allowed.   On
    the other side of  the  coin,  Mr  Davison  accepted  that  if  it  was
    reasonable for the third appellant to leave the UK and  return  to  Sri
    Lanka, none of the appellants could succeed under Article 8.

14. As a  consequence,  the  sole  issue  addressed  in  the  evidence  and
    submissions was whether, in all the circumstances, it was reasonable to
    expect the third appellant to leave the UK and return to Sri Lanka.

Discussion and Findings

15. On behalf of the appellants, Mr Davison  principally  relied  upon  the
    evidence of the first appellant in his two witness statements dated  27
    June 2014 and 1 September 2015 which the first appellant adopted in his
    oral evidence.  In addition, he relied upon two witness  statements  of
    the third appellant dated 14 April 2015 and 1 September 2015 which  the
    third appellant adopted in his oral evidence before me.

16. The appellants' international protection claims having  been  rejected,
    the focus of the evidence and the representatives' submissions were the
    impact upon the third appellant of having to leave the UK.

17. The third appellant is 11 years of age. He came to the UK when he was 3
    years old.  He has, therefore, lived in the UK for  over  seven  years.
    He is in school.  I accept that he has established himself as a student
    within the British educational system.

18. The third appellant's parents  are  ethnically  Malay.   The  principal
    issue explored in the evidence of both the first and  third  appellants
    was what language was spoken by the third appellant and, as  an  aspect
    of that, what language was spoken by the  first  and  third  appellants
    particularly in the home context.  Mr Davison  submitted  that  on  the
    basis of the evidence it was established that the third appellant  only
    spoke English.  That would put him at a  considerable  disadvantage  if
    returned to Sri Lanka as he did not speak one of  the  main  languages,
    namely Tamil or Singhalese, which were the languages in the educational
    system.  It has never been suggested that  the  third  appellant  could
    attend a fee paying international school in Sri Lanka where English was
    spoken.  Mr Davison submitted that the Secretary  of  State's  position
    was in effect that the third appellant should learn a new  language  in
    Sri Lanka, returning at the age of 11 and complete his schooling up  to
    the compulsory age of 14 years.  Mr Davison submitted that was  neither
    in the third appellant's best interests nor reasonable.

19. Mr Richards  submitted  that,  on  the  evidence,  it  was  simply  not
    believable that the third appellant did not speak any of the indigenous
    languages of Sri Lanka given that his parents did not speak in  English
    to each other at home.

20. The evidence of the first appellant given orally  at  the  hearing  was
    that he spoke a number of languages including English, Singhalese,  and
    Tamil.  His evidence was that he and his wife  (the  second  appellant)
    spoke Malay at home to each other when they did not wish  the  children
    to  understand.   However,  they  communicated  with  the  children  in
    English.  None of the children were able to speak any languages  except
    English.  He said that he and his wife did  not  communicate  in  Malay
    very often, though they did speak every day.   He  said  they  did  not
    speak Tamil at home.

21. Mr Richards put to the first appellant that in his screening  interview
    he had said that his main language was Tamil and  that  he  also  spoke
    Singhalese and English.  Mr Richards asked him why he had not mentioned
    that he spoke Malay.  The first appellant said that  he  had  not  said
    that Tamil was his main language.  He had said that he communicated  in
    Singhalese and English and that he was comfortable in  Tamil.   He  had
    said that he was able to speak in Tamil; he had not mentioned Malay  as
    he was not sure they could provide a Malay interpreter.

22. I interpolate that the Tribunal has been  unable  to  provide  a  Malay
    interpreter with a Tamil dialect or accent for these proceedings.

23. In his evidence, the third appellant also told me  about  the  language
    spoken by his family.  He told me that he spoke English  and  no  other
    languages.  He told me that he did speak to  family  in  Sri  Lanka  on
    occasions such as birthdays but that he spoke in English.  He said that
    he did not know any words in any other languages.  He told me that  his
    mother and father did speak to each other in other languages but he did
    not know what they were and he had not picked up any of the words.   He
    said they spoke to each other  in  another  language  "nearly  all  the
    time".

24. Mr Richards submitted that the first  appellant  was  not  telling  the
    truth.  He submitted that it was  inconceivable  that  a  couple  would
    speak a language virtually all  the  time  in  their  home  that  their
    children did not understand.  He  submitted  that  it  was  simply  not
    believable that the third appellant did not speak one of the  languages
    spoken at home.  Mr Richards submitted, in effect, that the  first  and
    second appellants spoke in Tamil at home and that the  third  appellant
    (like the first appellant) was not telling me the truth that the  third
    appellant could only speak English.

25. I have to say that I do not find the evidence of the first appellant to
    be as inconsistent as Mr Richards' submission  would  suggest.   It  is
    quite easy to imagine that a couple who are able to speak a language or
    languages different from their children would use  those  languages  in
    order to communicate with  each  other  when  they  did  not  wish  the
    children to understand.  It is also entirely possible that  they  would
    tend  to  use  their  "first"  language  rather   than   English   but,
    nevertheless, when speaking to the children who are  living  and  being
    brought up in a community speaking English that they adopt  English  as
    the language of communication.  Likewise, it is entirely plausible that
    at his screening interview the first appellant  indicated,  in  effect,
    that the language he would prefer the interview to be conducted in (his
    "main language") was Tamil which, it was quite clear  at  the  hearing,
    the first appellant  was  perfectly  able  to  communicate  in  to  the
    Tribunal interpreter.

26. Significantly, however, Mr Richards' submissions have  embedded  within
    them the premise that the third appellant was lying to me  as  to  what
    languages he spoke.  The third appellant is 11 years old.   I  had  the
    advantage of hearing him give his evidence and  he  was  an  impressive
    witness whom I have no doubt was telling me the truth.  I bear in  mind
    the possibility that a child could be coached  to  lie  but  I  saw  no
    suggestion that the third  appellant  was  doing  anything  other  than
    seeking to tell me the truth.  His answers were clear and given without
    hesitation.  His evidence, which I  accept,  is  that  he  only  speaks
    English.  I find as  a  fact  that  the  third  appellant  only  speaks
    English.

27. With that finding in mind, I now turn to consider whether it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the UK and return  to
    live in Sri Lanka.

28. In reaching a finding on that issue, I take into account as  a  primary
    consideration the "best interests" of the third appellant.  Mr  Davison
    referred me to the Upper Tribunal's decision in Azimi-Moayed and Others
    (Decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC).
     Mr Davison relied upon the  Upper  Tribunal's  identification  of  the
    principle  applicable  in  appeals  dealing  with  children  which  are
    summarised in para 1 of the headnote as follows:

         "(1) The  case  law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the
         following principles to assist  in  the  determination  of  appeals
         where children are affected by the appealed decisions:

         i)   As a starting point it is in the best interests of children to
             be with both their parents  and  if  both  parents  are  being
             removed from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

         ii)  It is generally in the interests  of  children  to  have  both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.

         iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of  origin
             can lead to development of social cultural  and  education  al
             ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence
             of compelling reason to the contrary.  What amounts to lengthy
             residence is not clear cut but past and present policies  have
             identified seven years as a relevant period.

         iv)  Apart from the terms of  published  policies  and  rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to  be
             more significant to a child that  the  first  seven  years  of
             life.  Very young  children  are  focussed  on  their  parents
             rather than their peers and are adaptable.

         v)   Short periods of residence, particularly ones without leave or
             the reasonable expectation of leave to enter or remain,  while
             claims are promptly considered, are unlikely to give  rise  to
             private  life  deserving  of  respect  in   the   absence   of
             exceptional factors.  In any event, protection of the economic
             well-being of society amply justifies removal in such cases."

29. In this case, the third appellant came to the United  Kingdom  aged  3.
    He is now aged 11 and has spent those formative years in the UK.  He is
    integrated in school and, no doubt, has developed friendships and links
    within his social  community.   He  only  speaks  English.   The  third
    appellant told me, and  I  accept  this,  that  he  does  not  remember
    anything about Sri  Lanka.   Whilst  I  accept  that  it  would  be  in
    principle in the third appellant's best  interests  to  live  with  his
    parents, that does not, however, answer  the  question  of  whether  it
    would be in his best interests to do that in the UK or  in  Sri  Lanka.
    Mr Davison took me to paras 60-63 of the respondent's decision of 9 May
    2014  dealing  with  Section  55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009 and the children's "best interests".  It is  clear
    that education is free and compulsory until the age of 14 in Sri  Lanka
    and, no doubt, the third appellant could attend school.   However,  and
    it is not challenged by  Mr  Richards,  that  education  would  not  be
    conducted in English.  The third  appellant  would,  as  a  result,  be
    required to learn a new language, perhaps Tamil or  Singhalese,  whilst
    at school in order to complete his education.  Of course, children  can
    adapt and can learn new languages.  But, to borrow Mr Davison's word in
    his submissions, that would be a "big ask" for the third appellant  who
    has spent over seven years in the UK using only  the  English  language
    and has been in full-time education here for the last six years.   This
    is not a case, as in a deportation case, where it is necessary to  show
    that the impact upon the third appellant would  be  "unduly  harsh"  of
    returning to Sri Lanka.  What has to be established is that it  is  not
    "reasonable" to expect him to return to Sri Lanka.

30. Given the third appellant's age, the time he has spent in  the  UK  and
    the fact that he has been embedded in the educational  system  for  the
    last  five  years,  speaks  only  English,  together   with   all   the
    circumstances, leads me to conclude that it would be both  not  in  his
    best interests to  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   Also  that  would  have  a
    sufficiently serious impact upon him by uprooting him that  I  conclude
    that to leave the UK and return to Sri Lanka would not be reasonable.

31. For these reasons, the third appellant has established  that  he  meets
    the requirements  of  para  276ADE(1)(iv)  and  the  first  and  second
    appellants satisfy the terms of s.117B(6) of the NIA Act 2002.  On that
    basis, Mr Richards accepted that all  the  appellants'  appeals  should
    succeed under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

32.  Consequently,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellants' appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection grounds and under
    Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR stands.

33. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appeal  under  Art  8
    has been set aside.

34. I remake the decision under Art 8  allowing  each  of  the  appellants'
    appeals on that basis.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
