
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03643/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 30 November 2015                  |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                             MANJIT SINGH SIDANA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Patel of Lei Dat Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Malik promulgated on 14 May  2015  which  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a refusal of asylum on all grounds .

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on  1  September  1980  and  is  a  national  of
    Afghanistan and a Sikh.

 4. On 5 March 214 the Appellant applied for asylum with his wife and child
    as his dependents.

 5. On 17 February 2015 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) The Appellant's nationality and religion were accepted.

      b) The Appellant had failed to demonstrate  that  the  authorities  in
         Afghanistan would be unable or unwilling to offer him protection as
         he had never sought their help.

      c) If the Appellant felt  unable  to  return  to  Jalalabad  he  could
         relocate to Kabul.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Malik ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision. The Judge found ;

      a) The Judge relied on the SL and Others (Returning Sikhs and  Hindus)
         Afghanistan CG [2005] UKAIT 00137 summarising it  that  members  of
         the Sikh and Hindu communities in Afghanistan did not face  a  real
         risk of persecution or ill-treatment such as to entitle them  to  a
         grant of international protection on the basis of their  ethnic  or
         religious identity, per se. Neither  could  it  be  said  that  the
         cumulative impact of discrimination suffered by the Sikh and  Hindu
         communities in general reaches the threshold of persecution.

      b) The Judge then analysed in paragraph  25  onwards  the  Appellant's
         claim. She found  that  there  was  an  inconsistency  between  his
         claimed fear for his family's safety and the fact that he waited  a
         number of years after  his  relative's  death/disappearance  before
         leaving. She found that his fears of serious threats and harm  were
         not borne out in reality or followed through.

      c) She found that no particular incident precipitated their flight but
         more a concern as to what might happen in the future.

      d) She considered the experts report at paragraph 26, 27 and 29.

      e) She found that if they were fearful of living in Jalalabad it would
         not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for them to relocate  to  Kabul
         as she found the Appellant to be a man who  had  previously  worked
         and he was also a man of some means.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that;

      a) The judge failed to make findings in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
         credibility.

      b) It was perverse for the Judge to find that the Appellant  had  left
         Afghanistan in anticipation of persecution.

      c) The Judge failed to consider more up to date material  in  relation
         to relocation to Kabul and give sufficient weight to what was  said
         in Dr Giustozzi's report.

 8. On 8 June 2015 first-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Levin  gave  permission  to
    appeal.

 9. There was a Rule 24 response which stated :

      a) SL was still good law and therefore the correct starting point.

      b)  The  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  no  specific   incident
         precipitated the Appellant's flight from Afghanistan.

      c) The Judge adequately addressed the experts report.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Ms  Patel  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) She relied on the grounds.

      b) The Judge had failed to make a clear credibility assessment in that
         she sets out the facts but not whether she believes them.

      c) There was  a  contradiction  in  relation  to  credibility  between
         paragraph 25 and 28.

      d) She relied on SL which was old caselaw without considering  the  up
         to date country material submitted by the Appellant.

      e) Her assessment of relocation  to  Kabul  was  flawed  in  that  she
         preferred the 2013 report to the more up to date material  from  Dr
         Guistozzi.

      f) The Judge criticizes the experts report for being  generic  without
         specifying the reasons  for  this  given  that  the  Appellant  was
         referred to specifically in a number  of  places.  Also  failed  to
         consider that the Appellant lacked expertise and would therefore be
         unlikely to be able to find employment.

      g) The Judge referred to the Appellant obtaining assistance  from  the
         Voluntary Returns Scheme but there  was  no  evidential  basis  for
         this.

11. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Harrison submitted that :

      a) He relied on the Rules 24 notice.

      b) SL was still good law  and  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  consider
         whether sufficient evidence had been adduced for her to depart from
         it.

      c) Credibility was not put in issue in  the  refusal  letter  but  the
         argument was that there was no real  risk  of  persecution  on  the
         basis of the past treatment and therefore the Judges findings  were
         sustainable.

      d) The most recent CG case of TG and others (Afghan Sikhs  persecuted)
         Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595 does not assist the  Appellant  as
         it reaffirms that Afghan Sikhs are not at risk per se.

      e) The Judge considered Dr Guistozzi's report and gave it  the  weight
         she felt was appropriate which was a matter for her.

      f) She considered relocation and stated why in this  Appellant's  case
         it was not unduly harsh: these were findings open to her.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. The Appellant's claim for asylum was explicitly based on  his  fear  of
    the Taliban: that he and his family were at risk  of  being  killed  by
    them unless he gave them money or converted. The refusal letter  stated
    that in essence there was no reasonable degree of  likelihood  that  he
    was  at  risk  of  persecution  based  on  his   previously   described
    experiences.

14. In determining whether the Appellant's fear  of  persecution  was  well
    founded the Judge was obliged to consider his previous  history.  I  am
    satisfied that she was entitled to consider that  history  against  the
    background of the case of SL as that was still good law at the time  of
    her decision unless there was persuasive evidence that allowed  her  to
    depart from its conclusions . That cases ratio that Sikhs  are  not  at
    risk per se has been more recently confirmed in the case of TG, a  case
    in which Dr Guistozzi also gave evidence. So there can be no suggestion
    that the Judge was in error for taking as her starting point  the  fact
    that simply being an Afghan  Sikh  did  not  entitle  an  applicant  to
    refugee status.

15. I am satisfied that when read as a whole that the Judge  accepted  that
    while the Appellant for himself and family feared harassment or  kidnap
    and being killed for money she was  obliged  to  assess  whether  these
    fears were well  founded.  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is  implicit  in
    paragraph 25 that she accepted that his wife had her shawl  pulled  and
    threats had been made for money but his fears  were  unfounded  as  she
    found that he was able to attend Gurdawara each  week  and  indeed  was
    able to find work despite there being discrimination against Sikhs. She
    accepted that threats were made for money but they  were  not  followed
    through. She also found that there was  an  inconsistency  between  his
    claimed fears and the fact that he waited so long to leave Afghanistan.
    I am satisfied therefore  that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  conclude
    against this background that in determining whether the Appellant had a
    well founded fear of persecution that his claim to face serious threats
    or to have been at serious risk of harm was not borne out in reality.

16. It was argued that the Judge placed insufficient weight on  the  report
    of Dr Guistozzi. I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  clearly  read  and
    analysed Dr Guistozzi's report as she referred to it at paragraphs  26,
    27 and 29. She gave cogent reasons why she placed limited weight on  it
    at paragraph 29 in that she found it was largely generic:  this  was  a
    conclusion she was entitled to reach given that the report was at pages
    22-51 of the  bundle  and  contained  only  two  very  brief  one  line
    references  to  the  Appellant  at  page  36  and  44  before  he   was
    specifically referred to in the rather succinct conclusion at page  51.
    She also noted that that some of the information he provided was  based
    on old data. Having read  the  report  I  am  satisfied  that  she  was
    entitled to state this as a matter of fact there was  reliance  on  old
    information: the Judge does not say 'all' the information he  provided,
    just some . These are factors however which the Judge was  entitled  to
    weigh in the balance in  assessing  the  weight  she  attached  to  the
    report.

17. In assessing the Judge's assessment of relocation to Kabul I take  into
    account that the Judge found that the Appellant's fear  of  persecution
    was not well founded in Jalalabad  and  therefore  she  was  implicitly
    finding it was open to him to return there and therefore any  error  in
    relation to relocation cannot be material as relocation  was  a  choice
    not a requirement of return. I am nevertheless satisfied that the Judge
    gave cogent reasons at paragraph 28 and 29 as to why  moving  to  Kabul
    was 'open' to the Appellant. She took into account country information,
    her findings that the Appellant was a man of means who  had  previously
    found employment.

18. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

19. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

20. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 5.12.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
