
[pic]
IAC-UT

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03282/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 February 2016                       |On 21 March 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)



                                   Between

                                    [N K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Bird) dismissing her appeal on  asylum  and  human
    right grounds against the respondent's decision dated 10th of  February
    2015 refusing her leave to enter and seeking to remove her from the UK.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on [ ] 1989.  The  basis  of
    her claim can briefly be summarised as follows. Her family lived in the
    Hamar Weyne district in Mogadishu. She had paternal aunts who lived  in
    the same area. The appellant left Somalia in 1992 with her  mother  and
    siblings because of the civil war. Three other brothers  remained  with
    her father who was the Imam of the local mosque. A paternal  aunt  also
    stayed but the remainder of the family left and went  to  Yemen,  where
    they were  issued  refugee  cards  and  supported  financially  by  the
    government.

3.   Her father died in 2010 and her three brothers came to live  in  Yemen.
    None of her family went back to Somalia apart from her mother who  went
    to collect documents following her father's death. Her family including
    her husband, who had refugee status,  remained  in  Yemen  as  did  her
    mother-in-law. The appellant described problems in Yemen and there came
    a time when her mother-in-law, who  worked  in  the  UN  looking  after
    children,  decided  that  the  appellant  should  leave.  She  and  the
    appellant's siblings financed her trip to the UK where she had a sister
    as well as two brothers. She arrived in August 2012 and claimed asylum.
    She claimed that she could not return to Somalia because  the  war  was
    still going on; she was in fear of the people and the government and in
    particular she feared that the war leaders would keep her as a slave.

4.   The respondent accepted that the appellant was a Somali  national  from
    the Reer Aw Hassan clan and her account of what had happened  to  cause
    her family to leave Somalia in 1992.  However, taking into account  the
    country guidance in MOJ &  others  (Return  to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG
    [2014] UKUT 442, it was the respondent's view that the appellant  could
    return to Mogadishu and it would not be unduly harsh to expect  her  to
    do so.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge

5.   The appellant's appeal against this decision was heard  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 10 July 2015. The appellant was not  represented.  She
    and one of her brothers gave oral evidence recorded  by  the  judge  at
    [13]-[21]. There was no issue with the appellant's claim to be a member
    of a minority clan or that she had left Somalia  with  her  mother  and
    siblings in 1992. The judge identified the question for her as  whether
    there would be any  risk  of  the  appellant  being  persecuted  for  a
    convention reason on return  or  subjected  to  treatment  contrary  to
    article 3 of the ECHR.

6.   The judge identified a number of inconsistencies in the evidence  about
    whether her father had  remained  in  Somalia  or  travelled  to  Yemen
    towards the end of his life, whether all the  siblings  had  gone  with
    their mother to Yemen and whether her father had sisters in Somalia. At
    [34] the judge said:

         "I find that the evidence as to when her father came  to  live  in
        Yemen and also who he had been living with in Somalia has  been  in
        conflict which could not be explained. I have formed the view  that
        perhaps the relationship between the witnesses was not as claimed -
        one of siblings. The appellant had her own family living  in  Yemen
        as she has claimed. She also has aunts living in Somalia. There  is
        nothing to show that if this appellant is returned to  Somalia  now
        that she will be at any risk."

7.   The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  did  have  some  family  still
    remaining in Somalia and that she and the witness had not been truthful
    in saying that everyone had now left [37]. She said that the  appellant
    was a member of a minority clan and would be able  to  seek  assistance
    from her clan members who may not be close relatives. Referring to  the
    country guidance in MOJ, the judge said that it  was  accepted  that  a
    person facing a return to Mogadishu after a period of absence  who  had
    no nuclear family or close relative in the  city  to  assisted  in  re-
    establishing himself on return would need to  show  that  circumstances
    exist which would make his return there unduly harsh and cause  him  to
    be living in circumstances, falling below that which was acceptable  in
    humanitarian protection terms [38].

8.   The judge went on  to  find  the  appellant  would  have  prospects  of
    securing a livelihood in Somalia, the evidence showing  that  this  was
    now possible. She would also be able to receive remittances from family
    abroad as happened when she was living in Yemen. The  evidence  pointed
    to returnees being able to take jobs offered, even at  the  expense  of
    those who had never been away. The appellant was therefore someone  who
    had failed  to  show,  if  returned  to  Somalia  with  the  change  of
    circumstances there particularly in the light of the  country  guidance
    decision in MOJ, that she would be likely to face persecution  for  her
    clan membership [39]. The judge further noted that the appellant had  a
    husband who remained in Yemen and with the changed circumstances, there
    was nothing to stop him now returning to Somalia  and  re-uniting  with
    the appellant [41]. For these reasons the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

9.   The grounds argue that the appellant was not represented  and  received
    limited assistance from the respondent's representative particularly in
    relation to the  respondent's  own  guidance  post-dating  the  country
    guidance decision in MOJ. It is further argued that there  was  a  need
    for a nuanced and cautious approach to that decision  as  none  of  the
    appellants were women. The grounds refer to the Country Information and
    Guidance issued February 2015 and March  2015  and  argue  that  it  is
    difficult to see how a sustainable decision in  relation  to  a  female
    Somali appellant could be made without a proper and  detailed  analysis
    of those reports. It is further argued that the  judge's  finding  that
    the appellant would be safe in Mogadishu because she  had  aunts  there
    was unreasoned and unsustainable as was the finding that she would have
    prospects of securing a livelihood there. Finally, it  is  argued  that
    the judge took into account an irrelevant consideration: when the  risk
    had to be assessed the fact was that the  appellant's  husband  was  in
    Yemen and not Somalia.

10.  Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis
    that the grounds raised an arguable error of  law  in  respect  of  the
    judge's finding that the appellant would not be at risk of  persecution
    as a result of her clan membership or gender or a breach of  article  3
    if removed to Somalia.

11.  In his submissions, Mr Collins argued that it was reasonable to  expect
    that in an asylum appeal an unrepresented appellant would receive  help
    from the respondent. The two CIG reports on minority clans  and  gender
    violence had not been produced at the hearing. Mr Collins highlighted a
    number of passages in those reports to support his  argument  that  had
    they been produced, they could have affected the outcome of the appeal.
    These were two comprehensive reports specifically  dealing  with  women
    and without them the  judge  could  not  make  a  properly  sustainable
    decision. It had been accepted the appellant was a member of a minority
    clan but that issue, so he submitted, had  not  been  adequately  dealt
    with. The judge had failed to give adequate reasons  for  her  decision
    and there had been no proper assessment of the appellant's profile.  He
    submitted that when the decision was read as a whole, the reader  could
    not  be  confident  that  an  unrepresented  woman   had   obtained   a
    sufficiently safe analysis of the risk on return.

12.  Mr Avery submitted that MOJ was good law and the CIGs referred  to  did
    not undermine it. The key issue had  been  whether  the  appellant  had
    family support in Mogadishu. The judge had not been satisfied with some
    aspects of the evidence and had explained why. He argued that  she  had
    been entitled to conclude that there  were  family  members  who  could
    support the appellant: this was a finding of fact properly open to her.
    In the light of the judge's findings, any issue of a risk arising  from
    the appellant's clan membership was covered by MOJ.

13.  In reply Mr Collins submitted that the judge should have carried out  a
    more nuanced assessment of the evidence. The CIGs post-dated and  added
    to MOJ.  The overall gist  was  that  women  throughout  Somalia  faced
    endemic gender-based violence. The judge had failed, so he  argued,  to
    make adequately clear findings and her decision should be set aside

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

14.  The issue for me at this stage of hearing is whether  the  judge  erred
    in law such that the decision should be set aside. The country guidance
    in MOJ includes the following in the italicised summary:

         (vii)    a person returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence
        will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,
        for  assistance  in  re-establishing   himself   and   securing   a
        livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance  from  his
        clan members who are not close relatives, such help is only  likely
        to be forthcoming for majority clan members as minority  clans  may
        have little to offer.


         (viii)    the significance of clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
        changed. Clans now provide, potentially, social support  mechanisms
        and assist  with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a
        protection function than previously. There are no clan militias  in
        Mogadishu, no  clan  violence,  and  no  clan-based  discriminatory
        treatment, even for minority clan members."

     In the light of this  country  guidance  it  is  clear  why  the  judge
    focused on whether the appellant had close family members in  Mogadishu
    and whether she would be able to secure a livelihood.

15.  It is argued that as the appellant  was  not  represented,  she  should
    have received more assistance from the respondent's representative  and
    in particular that the CIGs of February and March 2015 should have been
    produced at the hearing. It has not been argued  that  these  documents
    show that there were "Robinson obvious" issues which should  have  been
    identified by the respondent or the judge. It is  argued  in  substance
    that, had the judge been made aware of these  reports,  it  would  have
    provided evidence capable of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.
    However, it was for the judge to decide the appeal on the basis of  the
    evidence before her. There was a full and comprehensive decision letter
    and she heard oral evidence from the appellant and a witness. I am  not
    satisfied that the failure by the respondent's  representative  or  the
    Tribunal to seek out and provide this evidence amounted to an error  of
    law. There was no obligation to do so, absent it being shown that there
    was a "Robinson obvious" point needing further investigation.

16.  It is only rarely that evidence produced after a hearing  can  be  used
    as the basis for making a finding that there has been an error of  law.
    This is not a case where it has been argued that the Tribunal proceeded
    on any mistaken view of  the  facts  so  as  to  bring  into  play  the
    principles set out by the Court of Appeal in E & R [2004] EWCA Civ  49.
    Mr Collins accepted that  the  CIGs  did  not  contradict  the  country
    guidance decision but post-dated and added to it. His argument was that
    it provided clear evidence that throughout Somalia women faced  endemic
    gender-based violence but there is no reason to believe that the  judge
    would not have been aware of the general background relating  to  women
    in Somalia but it was for her to assess the risk to this  appellant  in
    the context of her particular circumstances.

17.  I am not satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in  her  approach  to  the
    evidence. She  identified  the  core  issues  and  reached  a  decision
    properly open to her. The key issue was whether the appellant would  be
    at real risk in the light of the guidance set out  in  MOJ.  The  judge
    found that she came within the head note at (vii).  The  arguments  put
    forward in relation to this issue are essentially an attempt to re-open
    findings of fact, which were properly open to the judge. It  is  argued
    that the findings of the judge at [37] that the appellant had a  family
    in the Mogadishu and at  [39]  that  the  appellant  had  prospects  of
    securing a livelihood were not adequately reasoned. However, these were
    findings of fact properly open to the judge, who  rightly  focussed  on
    the appellant's particular circumstances. The reasoning is  clear  when
    the determination is read as a whole. The judge is  further  criticised
    for referring to the fact that she had a husband remaining in Yemen. It
    is contended that this was an irrelevant  consideration  but  it  is  a
    point, which it was open to the judge to make and,  in  any  event,  it
    followed on from her  finding  in  the  preceding  paragraph  that  the
    appellant would not be at real risk in Mogadishu.

18.  Permission to appeal was granted specifically in  relation  to  whether
    there was an error in the judge's finding that the appellant would  not
    be at risk as a result of her clan membership or gender. However, I  am
    satisfied that on the basis of the evidence before the  judge  and  the
    current country guidance that she did not err in law on  these  issues.
    It is of course open to the appellant to make  further  representations
    if there is now further evidence not before the judge, which might cast
    a different light on her claim for asylum.

Decision

19.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and its decision stands.  No
    anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal and no  application
    has been made to the Upper Tribunal.





Signed   H J E Latter

H J E  Latter                                           Date:   29  February
    2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




















