
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03076/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reason Promulgated      |
|On 3 November 2015                   |On 9 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               AMAZZAL EL-ARBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A MacKay, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Morocco, born on 7 September  1983.   The
    respondent refused his asylum claim on  6  February  2015.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Farrelly allowed his appeal by determination promulgated
    on 6 August 2015.

 3. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

      1. The Judge has inadequately reasoned his findings on the appellant's
         risk on return by failing to make a clear finding on  the  veracity
         of the appellant's claimed detentions.

      2. The judge has erred in  law  by  not  explaining  clearly  why  the
         appellant's delay in claiming asylum  has  adversely  affected  his
         credibility (30), particularly in the circumstances  where  he  was
         clear that he was troubled by his claim, overall (eg 26-29).   This
         amounts to inadequate reasoning.

      3. ... given the judge's concerns, the  assessment  of  the  claim  as
         believable to the low standard is irrational ...  the  construction
         "... there is a possibility  (his  account)  might  be  true"  (33)
         misstates the law.

      4. The cumulative  effect  of  these  errors  (or  any  one  taken  in
         isolation) is such that  the  decision  should  be  set  aside  and
         remade.

 4. Neither party mentioned the point, but I think ground 2 was intended to
    read that the judge "... erred in law by not explaining clearly why the
    appellant's delay in claiming asylum has  not  adversely  affected  his
    credibility.

 5. Mrs Saddiq submitted that the determination lacked findings,  and  that
    the judge misapprehended the  case.   The  appellant  claimed  to  have
    founded an  organisation  known  as  AMEM,  but  the  only  documentary
    evidence was produced by him and had been doctored.  There was no other
    evidence that the organisation existed.  The judge said  at  paragraphs
    17 and 32 that the respondent took a neutral stance on the existence of
    AMEM, but that was not the line taken in the refusal letter or  at  the
    hearing,  as  recorded  at  paragraph  7  of  the  determination.   The
    appellant's claim was challenged, and his entire account  was  disputed
    in cross-examination.  The determination contradicted itself about  the
    case put by the respondent.  The burden of proof had remained with  the
    appellant.  The findings in  the  determination  were  almost  entirely
    against him, including 6 or 7 key  points.   No  finding  was  made  on
    whether he had been detained.  The overall conclusion which should have
    followed was that the appeal was dismissed, not allowed.  There  should
    be a rehearing.

 6. Mr MacKay submitted  that  the  respondent's  refusal  letter  said  at
    paragraphs 24 and 25 that  the  existence  of  AMEM  could  be  neither
    confirmed nor rejected.  That was a neutral standpoint.  The  Secretary
    of State had not taken the position  that  AMEM  did  not  exist.   The
    grounds did not amount to more than disagreement with the outcome.  The
    judge had carefully weighed everything on both sides  and  this  was  a
    good example of an appellant  benefiting  appropriately  from  the  low
    standard of proof, despite legitimate concerns there might be over  his
    account.  The positive elements were at paragraph 19,  nothing  in  the
    respondent's contention that the appellant's account was implausible or
    vague; paragraph 20, consistency  with  background  evidence  regarding
    treatment of activists over the Western Sahara; paragraph 21, rejection
    of the  respondent's  criticisms  as  speculative;  paragraph  23,  the
    appellant's mention of his membership of AMEM on his visa  application;
    paragraph 30, the appellant  said  he  wished  to  take  advice  before
    seeking asylum, and not a long delay, so no  adverse  inference  to  be
    draw from it; 31, no real inroads made during assessment or  in  cross-
    examination; 32, nothing implausible in the accounts  of  detention  to
    defeat the  claim.   Those  reasons  were  sufficient  to  justify  the
    conclusion.  There was no error in saying there was  a  possibility  an
    account might be true, that was simply  one  way  of  stating  the  low
    standard of proof.

 7. Mrs Saddiq in  response  submitted  that  given  the  several  findings
    against the appellant, it was incorrect to say at paragraph 31 that  no
    real inroads had been made in challenging his account.  While paragraph
    32 might be an implicit acceptance of  the  account  of  detention,  it
    lacked reasoning.

 8. I reserved my determination.

 9. The refusal letter leaves the existence of AMEM as  an  open  question.
    It so happened that both representatives were also  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and they were at odds  over  whether  the  respondent's  line
    there had been that the appellant had to prove, but  failed  to  prove,
    that AMEM existed.  They came away with different impressions.

10. The respondent's attack on credibility may well have been broad  enough
    to go beyond neutrality on that particular issue, but I do not think it
    is necessary, or even possible, to resolve this fine  area  of  dispute
    any further.

11. Plainly, this was a finely balanced case.  If the judge had  said  that
    his adverse points added up to the failure of the appeal, it might have
    been difficult for the  appellant  to  complain.   However,  I  am  not
    satisfied that the grounds amount to more than  disagreement,  or  that
    they show error of law.  It is commonplace for there to  be  reasonable
    points in favour of each side.  The judge made findings along  the  way
    which went against the appellant, and some in his favour, as summarised
    above.

12. The eventual finding about the detentions is that they are  established
    to the lower standard.  That is the effect of the judge's statement  at
    paragraph 32  that  he  "cannot  see  anything  in  relation  to  those
    incidents which would defeat the appellant's claim", and  at  paragraph
    33 that it "might be true".  In other words, the evidence is  probative
    to the lower standard, if only just.  The matter is not left open.  The
    judge was entitled to come down on the side he did, and explained why.

13. To state a possibility that an account might be true is no more than an
    ordinary representation of the lower standard of proof,  which  can  be
    and often is stated in various ways.

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           6 November 2015
