
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03916/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 November 2016                           |On 8 December 2016            |
|Prepared 11 November 2016                     |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                     W V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel, instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The  Appellant,  a  national  of  Sri  Lanka,  appealed  against   the
    Respondent's decision, dated 6 August 2015, to  refuse  an  application
    based on Refugee Convention and other similar grounds.  The appeal came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mackenzie  (the  judge)  who,  on  23
    September 2016, dismissed the appeal.  Permission to appeal  was  given
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish on 18 October 2016.

2.   Mr Coleman succinctly argued that the judge particularly [D  paragraphs
    41, 42, 43 and 44] made a number of adverse findings which  formed  the
    basis of the judge's view that was quite clear that the  Appellant  was
    not a credible witness.

3.   The Appellant had claimed to be physically ill-treated by the  security
    forces in Sri Lanka and had suffered mental heath problems as a result.
     The judge received medical evidence from Mr Mason,  a  specialist  who
    was called to give  evidence  concerning  scarring,  and  a  Dr  Obuaya
    concerning the Appellant's mental health.

4.   It is clear from the decision at paragraphs 66 and 68  that  the  judge
    having reached the view that  the  Appellant  was  not  a  reliable  or
    credible witness concluded that for that  reason  her  credibility  and
    reliability was not enhanced  by  the  medical  evidence  that  he  had
    received from Mr Mason or Dr Obuaya and  it  is  clear,  as  Mr  Walker
    wholly correctly accepts, that the way the judge has set the matter out
    confounds the approach that has long been established in  the  case  of
    Mibanga and Others [2005] EWCA Civ 367 and particularly as  Mr  Coleman
    highlights [D paragraphs 20, 24, 25 and 30].

5.   In the circumstances it is with significant regret that there is  going
    to be further delay but I  am  satisfied  that  in  the  light  of  the
    Presidential Statement and the unreliability of the judge's findings on
    the Appellant's credibility that the only course is for the  matter  to
    be returned to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   The Original Tribunal  decision  cannot  stand.   The  matter  will  be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


Directions

    (1)  List for hearing 2 hours
    (2)  Tamil interpreter
    (3)  Any further documents relating to the claim  for  Article  8  ECHR
         consideration that may arise to be served not less than 10  working
         days before the further hearing.


    An anonymity order was made and that should be continued.

Signed                                  Date 30 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 30 Novrmber 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

