
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/03498/2014
                                                               AA/01057/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 July 2015                       |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                SITTING AS DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between
                               MR SHAMAL SHAH
                             (AKA: SHUJAAT KHAN)
                                 MR ZEB SHAH
                            (AKA: MOSHIN HASSAN)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr H Malik, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellants and the circumstances of the appeal

 1. The appellants are nationals of Pakistan and  their  claimed  birth  of
    dates are disputed. They are two brothers. They  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Khawar
    dated  28  April  2015  refusing  their  appeals  against  the  current
    decisions of the respondent dated  24  January  2014  and  8  May  2014
    respectively refusing them asylum and humanitarian  protection  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on 5 June 2015  by  designated  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McDonald on the basis that it was arguable that the
    Judge did not take into account the pictures provided by the  appellant
    which were taken from the  public  website  which  show  the  appellant
    taking part in a charity event of the Ahmadi community.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in his determination found the  following
    which I summarise. The principal issue in the case is  the  credibility
    of both appellants. The respondent does not accept that the  appellants
    have told a truthful account of events and does  not  accept  that  the
    appellants are Ahmadi Muslims. Having considered all the  evidence,  in
    the  round,  and  by  virtue  of  various  significant  contradictions,
    inconsistencies  and  highly  improbable  events  the  Judge  was   not
    satisfied that the appellants have provided a truthful account.  Indeed
    the Judge reached his conclusion that the appellants have  proffered  a
    wholly propagated account not only of their  background  but  also  the
    alleged fate of their mother and elder brother and their family alleged
    faith in order to substantiate an earlier false asylum claim.

 4. The Judge took into account the  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  in
    respect of the appellants' dates of birth in the various documents. The
    appellants have provided an entirely false account of their  names  and
    dates of birth. They have also provided an entirely  false  account  of
    their claim that they came to the United Kingdom with the  wife  of  an
    agent. The Judge did not accept that the appellants were of the  Ahmadi
    faith or generally involved in Ahmadi activities in the United Kingdom.
    The appellant's  complete  lack  of  credibility  as  set  out  in  the
    respondent's refusal letters and  in  the  determination  impacts  upon
    their claim to  be  involved  in  religious  activities.  There  is  no
    independent objective  evidence  other  than  a  brief  letter  in  the
    respondent's bundle relating  to  the  second  appellant  which  simply
    asserts that the second appellant attended the mosque referred  to.  On
    the totality of the evidence before the Judge, he do  not  accept  that
    the appellant are generally involved in the Ahmadi  faith  and  or  are
    involved in proselytising the faith and that upon  return  to  Pakistan
    they would wish to continue to do  so.  The  letter  clearly  does  not
    provide adequate independent evidence of any  such  activities  on  the
    part of the appellants.

 5. The grounds of appeal  state  the  following  which  I  summarise.  The
    appellants entered the United Kingdom as minors and  were  entitled  to
    have their cases considered under  Paragraph  350  of  the  Immigration
    Rules  and  more  weight  should  have  been  given  to  the  objective
    indication of risk. The  Judge  failed  to  provide  any  reasons  from
    departing from this view. At paragraph 36  of  the  determination,  the
    Judge states that there is no reliable  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claimed faith. However the Judge  failed  to  consider  the
    pictures of the first appellant at page  78  which  are  taken  from  a
    public Ahmadi public website. The pictures show  the  appellant  taking
    part in a charity event of the Ahmadi community and confirm that  their
    members are taking part (in captions). The Judge failed to mention this
    evidence and proceeded to find the appellant not to be an  Ahmadi.  The
    Judge was bound to provide reasons for not considering this evidence in
    his  determination.  If  the  immigration  Judge  had  considered  this
    evidence, he would have found the appellants to be Ahmadi and  as  such
    further assessment under MN and others would have  been  required.  The
    failure of the Judge to do so is a material error of law.

    Discussion and findings whether there is an error of law

 6. I have given  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Khawar  and  have  taken  into  account  the   parties
    submissions at the hearing, the full notes of which are in my Record of
    Proceedings.

 7. The Judge in his determination gave many credible reasons  for  why  he
    did not find the  appellants  evidence  credible.  He  found  that  the
    appellants were not credible in respect of  the  evidence  about  their
    names and ages. He found that the appellants, in relation  to  the  age
    assessment  report  from  the  London  Borough  of  Croydon,    clearly
    establishes why first appellant was assessed  as  being  a  16-year-old
    child with the date of birth of 10 December 1993 (as  at  August  2010)
    the  appellant  did  not  provide  any  evidence  to   challenge   this
    assessment. Their birth certificates which were produced,  appeared  to
    have been obtained on or about 15  July  2010  by  their  father.  Both
    appellants claim that their father passed away in  or  about  2000/2001
    although  the  second  appellant  states  that  it  was  in  2002/2003.
    Therefore the information on the  birth  certificates  is  clearly  not
    reliable. On the evidence before him, the  Judge  was  entitled  to  so
    find. This  inconsistency  in  their  ages  materially  impact  on  the
    appellant's credibility and the Judge was entitled to  find  that  this
    compromises their claim.

 8. The Judge took into account the inconsistency in the evidence when  the
    first appellant maintains that his real name is Shujat Hussain and that
    his real date of birth is 15 January 1995. His visit  visa  application
    forms indicates that his name is Shamal Khan and his date of  birth  to
    be 10 December 1993 which is the date stated in  his  passport.  During
    the second appellant's oral evidence, the second appellant referred  to
    his brother, the first appellant as Shamal and not Shujat and  gave  no
    credible explanation for why he  called  his  brother  Shujat  and  not
    Shamal which the first appellant claims is his  real  name.  The  first
    appellants name is, in fact Shamal Khan and his date  of  birth  is  10
    December 1993. This demonstrated to the Judge that the appellants  were
    not telling the truth about their names and it is within the bounds  of
    common sense that anyone lying about their name and date of  birth  and
    attempting to get protection in the United Kingdom based on  untruthful
    identities and the  Judge  took  that  into  account  in  reaching  his
    decision and was entitled to do so.

 9. In relation to the second appellant his visa application form  declared
    him as being Zeb Khan with a date of birth  of  4  February  1995.  The
    appellant now claims that his real name is Moshin Hassan  and  that  he
    was born on 24 September 1996. The appellant's  claim  that  the  visit
    visa application forms were the product of an  agent  who  fraudulently
    falsified their details. The judge was entitled to find that  this  was
    not a credible explanation for the difference in their names and  their
    ages. Furthermore, the Judge also took into  account  that  the  report
    also notes that the birth certificates produced by the  appellants  are
    clearly and wholly unreliable because they  purport  to  include  their
    father CINIC number which contains 13 digits and such numbers were only
    issued after 2001/2002. Therefore their father would have been provided
    in an NIC number containing only 11 digits.

10. The appellant is further stated that of  Ms  Praveen  Ajmal  was  their
    mother. Such claim was clearly contradicted by the  evidence  of  their
    sponsor Mr  Tarik  Mahmoud  who  was  contacted  by  the  Pladin  Child
    Protection Team for their visit visa  applications  said  that  Praveen
    Ajmal was the mother of the appellants and they had stayed with him for
    a week and left and as far as he was concerned the appellants  had  all
    returned to Pakistan following their visit here. The Judge was entitled
    to rely on the Paladin Child Protection Team report prepared by Colin A
    Smith which clearly demonstrates  that  Tarik  Mahmoud  confirmed  that
    Praveen Ajmal is his sister and that he had sponsored her and her three
    children which included the  two  appellants  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom and that they stayed with him for a  week.  The  appellant  had
    claimed that Ms Praveen Ajmal was the agent's wife.

11. The Judge was entitled to  take  into  account  this  very  significant
    discrepancy  in  the  evidence  about  the  woman  Praveen  Ajmal   who
    accompanied them to Pakistan was said to be by Mr Tarik Mahmoud  to  be
    his sister and not the agent's wife as claimed by the  appellants.  The
    Judge noted that the appellants did not ask Mr Tarik  Mahmoud  to  give
    evidence or provide any other evidence about the  relationship  between
    them and Praveen Ajmal.

12. The Judge was entitled to find  that  if  agent  had  brought  the  two
    appellants to the United Kingdom as claimed, he would not have had made
    two separate applications for a visit visas and an appeal  against  the
    second refusal. The Judge was correct in not holding that it is not  in
    the least credible that an agent would have made two  applications  and
    appealed against the refusal and run the risk of  being  detected.  The
    Judge was entitled to  find  this  evidence  not  to  be  credible  and
    compromise the appellants claim.

13. The Judge found that both appellants have  fabricated  their  claim  in
    relation to being Ahmadi Muslims. He also  found  that  the  appellants
    have fabricated their claim that their mother and  elder  brother  were
    killed. The Judge  found  that  they  had  clearly  manufactured  their
    account in order to substantiate a false asylum claim. This  was  based
    on the fact that the appellants were even inconsistent as to  the  date
    on which  their  mother  and  elder  brother  were  killed.  The  first
    appellant states it was in September  2009  in  his  witness  statement
    dated 14  February  2011  and  at  his  asylum  interview.  The  second
    appellant however states that it  was  approximately  one  and  a  half
    months after their grandfather died in 2008 at  his  asylum  interview.
    When confronted with this contradiction during the oral  evidence,  the
    Judge noted that, the first appellant said that it was  "around  2008".
    The Judge was entitled to find  that  the  appellant's  inconsistencies
    about when their mother and older brother were  killed  goes  to  their
    credibility and to the truth of their claim.

14. The first appellant stated that the grandfather who he alleged  was  an
    Ahmadi community  leader  was  his  paternal  grandfather.  The  second
    appellant however stated in his witness statement dated  24  July  2012
    that it was their maternal grandfather. The Judge found  that  for  the
    appellants to be contradictory about such basic  family  history  shows
    that they are not credible and are not telling the truth. He took  into
    account that the second appellant  when  he  was  questioned  in  court
    distanced himself from his earlier evidence and stated that his  father
    had converted from Sunni to Ahmadi and this is why he was not in  touch
    with him and when his father passed away his paternal  family  did  not
    keep in touch with his mother and brothers. The  Judge  properly  found
    that the second appellant was clearly attempting to link  his  father's
    alleged conversion to Ahmadi as being the reason for why  his  father's
    family including his uncle who assisted him in finding  an  agent,  had
    distanced themselves from the appellants. If the  grandfather  was  the
    paternal grandfather, the appellant's father would also have been  born
    and grown up as an Ahmadi and therefore the  uncle  would  also  be  an
    Ahmadi and thus he would not  have  had  any  interest  in  seeking  to
    distance himself from the appellants' family. The Judge was entitled to
    find that this inconsistency in the evidence goes to their  credibility
    into the credibility of their claim.

15. The Judge also took into account  that  in  complete  contrast  to  the
    evidence above, the first  appellant  claims  at  paragraph  9  of  his
    written statement dated 14 February 2011  that  his  uncle  is  not  an
    Ahmadi and therefore he did not want to be linked with the  appellant's
    due to alleged potential risk to the uncle's own family. Indeed  during
    his oral evidence the first appellant claimed that his uncle  had  said
    that the appellants are in a safe place and  not  to  "disturb  me  and
    don't put my life in danger". The first appellant claimed that he  only
    spoke to his uncle a couple of times after they arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom in July 2010 and never again thereafter. This the Judge said is
    wholly lacking in credibility especially in view of the fact  that  the
    appellants produced  birth  certificates  which  appear  to  have  been
    obtained in or about July 2010. The second appellant  in  contradiction
    to the evidence of the first appellant suggested that his uncle's  wife
    is a non-Ahmadi which is why he has changed his faith. The  first  time
    that the second appellant mentioned  this  was  in  his  oral  evidence
    because it had never been suggested that their uncle who assisted  them
    in coming to the United Kingdom had changed his religion  in  order  to
    coincide with that of his wife.

16. The Judge was entitled to find that all these  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence go to the credibility of the appellants and their claims.

17. The Judge found that the appellants when they were interviewed did  not
    have significant knowledge of the  Ahmadi  fate.  The  first  appellant
    conceded as much during his asylum interview and said this  is  because
    of lack of education which is why he does not  have  knowledge  of  the
    Ahmadi fate. The Judge found that if their  grandfather  had  generally
    been in Ahmadi community leader and involved in protest exercising  and
    given that the appellant's claim that they lived with their mother  and
    grandfather their father having  passed  away  in  about  2002,  it  is
    inconceivable that the  appellants  would  not  have  been  taught  the
    significant features  of  the  Ahmadi  fate  within  the  family  home,
    especially in view of the fact that the second  appellant  claims  that
    the Ahmadi mosque in their village was in fact in their own home.

18. This evidence that the appellant's had very little knowledge about  the
    Ahmadi faith led the Judge to conclude that  the  appellants  were  not
    Ahmadi. This is a sustainable conclusion on  the  evidence  before  the
    Judge. The very fact that the Judge did not  specifically  mention  the
    photograph of the second appellant taken at an Ahmadi Convention on the
    Internet  does  not  detract  from  the  Judge's  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  Ahmadi  faith  goes  to  the
    credibility of their claim that they are an  Ahmadi.  The  Judge  found
    that  the  appellant's  are  trying  to  bring  themselves  within  the
    parameters  of  the  country  guidance  case  and   are   clearly   and
    opportunistically attempting to rely upon a sur plus claim.  The  Judge
    even if  he  did  not  specifically  mention  the  photographs  on  the
    Internet, it is implicit in his determination that given  the  enormous
    credibility issues in the appeals, a photograph on a website  does  not
    in itself cure all the inconsistencies or explain them.

19. The findings of the Judge after considering all  the  evidence  in  the
    round that the appellants are not Ahmadi is sustainable. It is implicit
    in the determination that the appellants are pretending to be Ahmadi in
    order to lay a false basis of an asylum claim and their involvement  in
    Ahmadi activities and photographs is opportunistic. The  Judge  clearly
    found that the appellants were not credible in the least and gave  very
    good and cogent reasons for the conclusion that  he  came  to,  on  the
    evidence before him.

20. A Judge does not have to  set  out  every  piece  of  evidence  in  his
    determination. It is clear from the determination that the  Judge  took
    into account  all  the  evidence  in  the  appeal  and  stated  in  his
    determination that he has  come  to  his  decision  based  on  all  the
    evidence before him.

21. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982 Brooke LJ commented on that analysis as follows:

         "15. It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls used the words
         "vital" and "critical" as synonyms of the word "material" which  we
         have used above. The whole  of  his  judgment  warrants  attention,
         because it reveals  the  anxiety  of  an  appellate  court  not  to
         overturn a judgment at  first  instance  unless  it  really  cannot
         understand the original Judge's thought processes when  he/she  was
         making material findings."

22. I find that I have no difficulty in understanding the reasoning in  the
    Judge's determination for why he reached his conclusions. I  find  that
    the Judge did take into account all the evidence in the appeal and come
    to conclusions  which  are  free  of  error;  I  therefore  reject  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal in their entirety.

23. I find that no error of law has  been  established  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's determination. I find that he was entitled to conclude
    that the appellant's not entitled to be recognised as a refugee  or  to
    be granted humanitarian  protection  in  this  country.  I  uphold  the
    decisions

DECISION

I find that there is no error of law and I dismiss the appeal


      Dated this 5th day of September 2015

.............................................
Signed by

Mrs S Chana
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

