
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03127/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd September 2015                         |On 6th October 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                        Mr Sutharsan Balasubramaniam
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant complains of error of law in  the  determination  of  his
    appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp.  The primary ground of
    his challenge is that the Judge's approach to the medical  evidence  is
    legally flawed, having regard to the  guidance  given  in  JL  (medical
    reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC) and  the  guidance  on
    self-infliction  by  proxy  of  scarring  in  KV  (scarring  -  medical
    evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 230 (IAC).





The law

 2. The guidance given in JL  is  set  out  in  the  judicial  headnote  as
    follows:

         "(1) Those writing medical  reports  for  use  in  immigration  and
         asylum appeals should ensure where possible  that,  before  forming
         their opinions, they study any assessments that have  already  been
         made of the appellant's credibility by the immigration  authorities
         and/or a tribunal judge (SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ  155  [30];
         BN (psychiatric evidence discrepancies)  Albania  [2010]  UKUT  279
         (IAC) at [49], [53])). ...

         (3)   The authors of such medical reports also need  to  understand
         that what is expected of them is a critical and objective  analysis
         of the injuries and/or symptoms displayed. They need to be vigilant
         that ultimately whether an appellant's account  of  the  underlying
         events is or is not credible and plausible is a question  of  legal
         appraisal and a matter for  the  tribunal  judge,  not  the  expert
         doctors (IY [47]; see also HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306  [17]-
         [18]).

         (4)   For their part, judges  should  be  aware  that,  whilst  the
         overall assessment of credibility is for them, medical reports  may
         well involve assessments of the compatibility  of  the  appellant's
         account with physical marks or symptoms, or mental  condition:  (SA
         (Somalia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1302). If the  position  were  otherwise,
         the central tenets of the Istanbul Protocol would be  misconceived,
         whenever there was a dispute about claimed causation of scars,  and
         judges could not apply its guidance,  contrary  to  what  they  are
         enjoined to do by SA (Somalia). Even  where  medical  experts  rely
         heavily on the account given by the person concerned, that does not
         mean their  reports  lack  or  lose  their  status  as  independent
         evidence, although it may reduce very considerably the weight  that
         can be attached to them."

 3. In KV, the Upper Tribunal gave the following guidance, encapsulated  in
    its judicial headnote:

         "1.      When preparing medico-legal reports doctors should  not  -
         and should not feel obliged to - reach conclusions about  causation
         of scarring which go beyond their own clinical expertise.

         2.      Doctors preparing medico-legal reports for  asylum  seekers
         must consider all possible causes of scarring.

         3.      Where there is a presenting feature of the case that raises
         self-infliction by proxy (SIBP) as a more than fanciful possibility
         of the explanation for scarring:-

              (i)  a medical report adduced on behalf of a claimant will be
             expected to engage with that  issue;  it  cannot  eliminate  a
             priori or routinely the possibility of SIBP; and

             (ii) a judicial fact-finder will be expected  to  address  the
             matter,  compatibly  with  procedural  fairness,  in  deciding
             whether, on all the evidence, the claimant has discharged  the
             burden of proving that he or she was reasonably likely to have
             been scarred by torturers against his or her will.

         4.      A lack of correlation between a claimant's account and what
         is revealed by a medical examination of the scarring may  enable  a
         medico-legal report to shed some clinical light  on  the  issue  of
         whether SIBP is a real possibility.

         5.      Whilst the medical literature continues  to  consider  that
         scarring  cannot  be  dated  beyond  6  months  from  when  it  was
         inflicted, there is some medical basis for considering in  relation
         to certain types of cases that its age can be determined  up  to  2
         years.

         6.      Whilst if best practice is  followed  medico-legal  reports
         will make a critical evaluation of a claimant's account of scarring
         said to have been caused by torture, such reports cannot be equated
         with an assessment to be undertaken by decision-makers in  a  legal
         context in which the burden of proof rests on the claimant and when
         one of the purposes of questioning is to test a claimant's evidence
         so as to decide whether (to the lower standard) it is credible."

Factual background

 4. The present appeal arises out of events which occurred during  a  visit
    by the appellant to  Sri  Lanka  in  February  2014  for  his  sister's
    wedding, from which he returned with what he said  was  fresh  scarring
    from torture by the Sri Lankan authorities.  The  appellant  had  flown
    here directly from Sri Lanka on his own passport, and  on  his  account
    went to his GP within a week of arrival with pain and wounds which  had
    not healed. The respondent refused leave to remain on asylum grounds on
    5th February 2015 without raising any issue as to the  scarring  having
    potentially been self-inflicted by proxy (SIBP).

 5. The appellant has an accepted history of having been, at least at a low
    level, involved with the LTTE, which the  respondent  accepted.   Other
    members of the appellant's family are said to have been  involved  with
    the LTTE and it is accepted by the judge that one of his brothers  died
    in 1995 in combat, having joined the LTTE of his own volition.  Two  of
    his brothers are in Australia where they have refugee status.

 6. The appellant produced medical reports from Mr Andres  Izquierdo-Martin
    FRCSEd FCEM,  Consultant  in  Emergency  Medicine  at  the  Royal  Free
    Hospital in London, and Dr Saleh  Dhumad  MBChB  MRCPsych  MSc  CBT,  a
    consultant psychiatrist at Central and North West London NHS Trust.  Mr
    Izquierdo-Martin examined the appellant on 13 April 2015 and Dr  Dhumad
    examined him on 28 April 2015: only Dr Dhumad had a copy of the refusal
    letter to assist him. Dr Dhumad also had sight of Mr Izquierdo-Martin's
    report.

 7.  In  his  report  on  the  appellant's  scarring,  Mr  Izquierdo-Martin
    indicated that he had taken account of the requirements in  KV  and  he
    did consider whether the injuries could  have  been  self-inflicted  by
    proxy.  His report says this:

         "Caused by a third party - This is the most likely cause,  however,
         from inspection of the scars it  is  scientifically  impossible  to
         differentiate self-infliction of  injuries  by  proxy  (SIBP)  from
         injuries caused by torture.  It is important to  consider  that  in
         the case of burns inflicted by a third party it would be  necessary
         for the subject to hold or be held still for the duration  of  each
         episode of burning otherwise the edges of the scarring  would  tend
         to be blurred or not just completely straight;  the  scars  on  the
         claimant's back showed some of the margins to be slightly undulated
         and slightly wider and this could be due to the claimant  flinching
         during the burning of the body.  Although SIBP as a possible  cause
         cannot  be  discarded  and  has  been  considered,  there  is   not
         presenting fact making it more than  a  remote  possibility.   Also
         these are not scars that are typical of any religious  or  cultural
         rituals and they were not caused by any surgical procedure."

 8. He set out why he considered that the wounds in question were  unlikely
    to have been either self-inflicted or SIBP and also a number  of  other
    means of ill-treatment which the appellant said had occurred to him  in
    detention.  Mr  Izquierdo-Martin  concluded,  applying   the   Istanbul
    Protocol analysis at paragraph 188 thereof,  that  the  wounds  overall
    were 'typical' of the events the appellant described and were likely to
    have been caused by a third party and as described by the appellant.

 9. At paragraphs 47 - 48 the judge analysed that evidence thus:

         "47. ...Dr Izquierdo-Martin considered the possibility of SIBP  but
             concluded that as there were no relevant presenting  facts  to
             indicate that the injuries may have been caused by  SIBP  then
             the appellant's  account  was  the  most  likely  explanation.
             However,  Dr  Izquierdo-Martin  did  not  have  sight  of  the
             relevant Home Office documentation and therefore I  find  that
             his conclusions were based upon a one-sided account  presented
             to him by the appellant.   I  also  note  that  Dr  Izquierdo-
             Martin, on the evidence before  him,  did  not  rule  out  the
             possibility of SIBP."

    Pausing there, that is  an  inaccurate  description  of  Mr  Izquierdo-
    Martin's report, which  made  it  very  clear  that  the  scarring  was
    'typical of' marks caused in the  way  the  appellant  described.   The
    Judge continued:

         "48. Further, when questioned about the injuries  he  had  suffered
             during his time in  detention  the  appellant  was  unable  to
             remember if he had sustained other injuries besides  those  on
             his back.  I do not find it plausible that  if  the  appellant
             had been detained and tortured as he describes that  he  would
             be unable to remember the other  injuries  he  suffered  as  a
             result of the beatings inflicted upon him.  Therefore  I  find
             that this adversely impacts upon the  appellant's  credibility
             on this point and so when taking all the evidence in the round
             I am not  satisfied,  even  to  the  low  standard,  that  the
             injuries were inflicted upon the appellant in the manner  that
             he describes."

10. The Judge did not take into account the fragility  of  the  appellant's
    mental health, as evidenced in Dr Dhumad's report, when assessing  what
    the appellant would now be able to remember.  In both  of  the  medical
    reports the appellant was able  to  describe  other  unpleasant  things
    which had happened to him during his detention at Veppamkulam CID camp,
    which it is not necessary to repeat in this decision.

11. As already stated, the record of the appellant's asylum  interview  and
    the respondent's refusal letter do not put SIBP in issue in relation to
    the injuries found on his body.  The evidence  of  Mr  Izquierdo-Martin
    was that the likelihood of  the  scarring  being  caused  by  SIBP  was
    remote.  The First-tier Tribunal appears  to  have  misunderstood  that
    evidence when considering credibility and the effect of that error  was
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

12. When preparing his medical report, Dr Dhumad had the benefit of  seeing
    both Mr  Izquierdo-Martin's  report  and  the  respondent's  letter  of
    refusal.  He concluded that the appellant was experiencing  a  Moderate
    Depressive Episode as defined in ICD-10  F  32.1  and  also  had  post-
    traumatic stress disorder (ICD-10 F43.1)  and  an  adjustment  disorder
    (ICD-10 F43).  The psychiatric evidence was taken into account only  to
    the extent that it indicated whether this  appellant  could  be  safely
    returned from the support of the UK health system to the support of the
    Sri Lankan health system, having regard to his depression  and  various
    other problems such as posttraumatic stress  disorder.  In  reaching  a
    conclusion as to credibility, the  Tribunal  took  no  account  of  the
    discussion in Dr Dhumad's report  of  the  origin  of  the  appellant's
    symptoms or of his account: that is a plain error of law,  because  the
    Tribunal  should  have  weighed  all  the   evidence,   including   the
    psychiatric evidence, before finding the appellant's  account  to  lack
    credibility.

13. Accordingly I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  its
    approach to both medical reports, as to the weight given to that of  Mr
    Izquierdo-Martin and the admissibility of the evidence of Dr Dhumad  in
    assessing credibility.  The error is material and the decision must  be
    set aside and remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

14. Any further directions will be made by the First-tier Tribunal when the
    file is received there.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  I have not been asked to make any anonymity order and I do  not
consider it necessary to do so.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


