
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03420/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 20th November 2012                           |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                            chipo susan mapurisa
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Nnamani of Counsel instructed by Howe & Company
For the Respondent:    Ms F Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  Immigration
    Judge Youngerwood made following a hearing at Taylor House on  2nd  May
    2012.



Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on  12th  June  1984.   She
    arrived in the UK on 18th April 2001 as a visitor and  overstayed.   In
    2011 she made an application under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  which  was
    rejected on 14th July 2011. She applied for asylum on 3rd March 2012.

 3. The  Immigration  Judge  stated  that  the  issue  of  credibility  was
    borderline but he was just about persuaded that the core account of the
    appellant's family history in Zimbabwe was accurate.

 4. It is the appellant's case that her father was actively  involved  with
    the MDC from its formation until 2009 when he fled the country.  He was
    attacked on two occasions in 2000 and 2008.  The appellant also claimed
    that  her  family  had  been  harassed  on  account  of  her   father's
    activities. The appellant herself became a member of the  MDC  in  June
    2011 at the south east London branch and attends regular meetings.

 5. The judge recorded that even in relation to her father there  had  been
    long gaps on her account between the  incidence  of  ill-treatment  and
    that at interview and in her witness statement  she  had  claimed  that
    ZANU-PF had visited her family enquiring about her father but  did  not
    assert that any real ill-treatment  was  inflicted  on  her  mother  or
    brother.  The appellant claimed in court that threats had been made  to
    kill them but the judge rejected her evidence as  an  embellishment  of
    her account. The judge found that the appellant's failure to  make  any
    mention of her core history in 2011  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant herself never believed subjectively that she was at any  real
    risk of persecution or ill-treatment.

 6. The judge applied the  then  country  guidance  case  of  EM  &  Others
    (returnees) [2011] UKUT 00098 and concluded that  the  appellant  would
    not be at risk on return in her home area and  even  if  she  was,  she
    could reasonably relocate.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that an appeal
    against EM was allowed by consent in the Court of Appeal on  13th  June
    2012 and remitted for further hearing to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the Secretary of State  had  failed  to
    make proper disclosure to the Tribunal in EM and the  Tribunal  was  in
    error in relying on anonymous evidence contained in the report  of  the
    Secretary of State's Fact-finding Mission to Zimbabwe in August 2010.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted for the reasons stated in the  grounds
    on 30th May 2012 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish.

 9. At the hearing both representatives agreed that there was an  error  of
    law in  this  determination  in  that  the  judge  had  relied  on  the
    conclusions of a country guidance case  which  has  been  found  to  be
    flawed.  Both Ms Saunders and Ms Nnamani agreed that the proper  course
    would be for this case to be re-decided on the basis of the findings of
    fact reached by the First-tier Tribunal, which have not been subject to
    any challenge, in the light of the forthcoming  country  guidance  case
    which is due to be promulgated by the Upper Tribunal imminently.

10. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Youngerwood was set aside and
    the following directions were given.

      i)  Both  the  respondent  and  the  appellant  are  to  file  written
         submissions within 14 days of the promulgation of  the  forthcoming
         country guidance case on Zimbabwe setting out why it is  considered
         that the appeal should be either allowed or dismissed on the  basis
         of  the  findings  of  fact  as  set  out  by   Immigration   Judge
         Youngerwood.  A decision will then be made on the  basis  of  those
         submissions. If either party considers  that  an  oral  hearing  is
         necessary they are to say so and to provide proper reasons.

11. Following the directions, the appellant served her written submissions,
    on 12th February 2013 and  the  respondent  on  6th  March  2013.   The
    appellant sought permission to reply to  the  respondent's  submissions
    within ten days of their receipt.  Permission was granted on 12th March
    2013 and the parties told that if no further submissions were  received
    the appeal would be determined without a hearing after ten days of  the
    date of the directions.  No further submissions were received.

The appellant's case

12. The basis of the appellant's claim is that she was born  and  lived  in
    Mashonaland West where she lived with her parents and younger  brother.
    Her father was involved  with  the  MDC  from  its  inception  and  was
    chairman for the MDC for the Chinhoyi branch between 2000 and 2002.  He
    was  attacked  on  two  occasions  in  2000  and  2008  and  physically
    assaulted.  The family moved home to avoid harassment  and  persecution
    from the ZANU-PF firstly within Chinhoyi  and  then  to  a  village  in
    Hurungwe where they remained for a year.  During that period they  were
    subjected to further harassment and the appellant's father subsequently
    left Zimbabwe and fled to South Africa in 2008.

13. The appellant arrived in the UK on 18th April 2001 having been  granted
    a visit visa and overstayed.  On 8th March 2011 she made an application
    under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  which  was  refused.   A   subsequent
    application for asylum was submitted on 18th January 2012  and  refused
    on 24th March 2012. She had always supported the  MDC  but  decided  to
    join the South East London branch in June 2011  and  began  to  support
    Zimbabwe vigils from January 2011.  In May  2012  she  became  the  MDC
    branch women's secretary.

14. The appellant says that she has lived with her aunt and cousins in  the
    UK with whom she has formed a significant bond.

Submissions

15. First-tier Tribunal Judge Youngerwood  said that there would be no risk
    to the appellant in her home area since  her  mother  and  brother  had
    lived in that community  without  significant  difficulties  which  had
    stemmed from her father's role in the MDC.   In  any  event  she  could
    relocate to Bulawayo or Harare.

16. The appellant's representatives make a number of submissions  attacking
    the determination of the First-tier Judge, the thrust of which are that
    the appellant would be at risk even if she was not a genuine member  of
    the MDC or if her activities  were  simply  undertaken  to  bolster  an
    asylum claim and the question which needs to be addressed is whether  a
    political neutral would be forced to feign support for  the  regime  in
    order to avoid persecution, in line with the principles in RT  Zimbabwe
    v SSHD [2012] UKSC 38.

17. The appellant's role within the MDC was not limited to having her  name
    on the website as branch  women's  secretary  and  she  relies  on  the
    present country guidance case of CM (EM  country  guidance  disclosure)
    Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 which held, at paragraph 215, that

         "The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case of  a
         person without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from  the  United
         Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
         other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South.  Such a person
         may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
         serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those
         they control.  The adverse attention may well involve a requirement
         to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the  prospect  of  serious
         harm in the event of failure.  Persons who  have  shown  themselves
         not  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  ZANU-PF  are   entitled   to
         international protection, whether or not they could  and  would  do
         whatever  might  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  such  loyalty  (RT
         (Zimbabwe))."

18. The Tribunal is obliged to consider what  risk  would  be  faced  by  a
    person who will be obliged to pretend to support ZANU-PF  in  order  to
    avoid persecution if his or her political neutrality is disclosed.  The
    appellant's father was a prominent MDC member which  would  demonstrate
    that she was not in any way aligned with the regime.

19. The appellant also  relies  on  paragraph  189  of  EM  whose  guidance
    regarding risk on return was not disturbed by the Tribunal decision  in
    CM which held as follows:

         "Although as a general matter the risk  of  persecution  and  other
         serious ill-treatment in Zimbabwe including  the  rural  areas  has
         significantly declined as at 28th January 2011  compared  with  the
         position under review in RN the evidence before us  raises  serious
         concerns as to the position of a Zimbabwe citizen  without  ZANU-PF
         connections returning from the UK after a  significant  absence  to
         live in Mashonaland West, Mashonaland  Central,  Mashonaland  East,
         Manicaland, Masvingo or Midlands Province.  Such a person returning
         to a rural part of such a province where the chief  or  headman  is
         likely to be an acolyte of ZANU-PF may well find  it  difficult  to
         avoid adverse attention amounting  to  serious  ill-treatment  from
         ZANU-PF authority figures and those they control unless  of  course
         the Immigration  Judge  is  entitled  to  conclude  that  that  the
         returnee is likely to be associated with  such  elements...   Apart
         from this category however we  conclude  that  returnees  to  these
         areas would face a real risk of persecution because of a continuing
         risk of being required to demonstrate loyalty.  In the light of the
         judgment of the Court of Appeal in RT Zimbabwe [2010] EWCA Civ 1285
         we recognise it is no  answer  to  a  loyalty  challenge  that  the
         returnees could be expected to mislead  the  enquiry  as  to  where
         loyalties lay."

20. The fact that the appellant's mother and brother live in  Chinhoyi  and
    have not yet been physically harmed does not  exclude  the  possibility
    that the appellant, whose circumstances are significantly different due
    to her length of absence from the area and her own activities  for  the
    MDC genuinely undertaken or not, would face persecutory treatment.

21. In relation to internal  relocation,  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  and
    unreasonable to expect her to go to Bulwayo or Harare.

22. The appellant relies on CM which held

         "A  returnee  to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no   significant
         difficulties if going to a low  density  or  medium  density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there including a loyalty test unless
         he or she has a significant MDC profile which might  cause  him  or
         her to feature on a list of those targeted for harassment or  would
         otherwise engage in political  activities  likely  to  attract  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF  or  would  be  reasonably  likely  to
         engage in such activities but for a fear of thereby coming  to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

         A returnee to Bulawayo will  in  general  not  suffer  the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF including the security forces even  if  he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.

         The issue of what is a person's home for the purposes  of  internal
         relocation is to be  decided  as  a  matter  of  fact  and  is  not
         necessarily to be determined by reference to  the  place  a  person
         from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  As  a  general
         matter it is unlikely that a person with  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in a major urban centre such  as  Harare  will  have  a
         viable relocation alternative  to  a  rural  area  in  the  eastern
         provinces.  Relocation to Matabeleland including  Bulawayo  may  be
         negated by discrimination where the returnee is Shona.

         Internal relocation from a rural area to Harare or (subject to what
         we have just said) Bulawayo is in general more realistic;  but  the
         socioeconomic circumstances in which persons are reasonably  likely
         to find  themselves  will  need  to  be  considered,  in  order  to
         determine whether it would  be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  to
         expect them to relocate."

23. It was highly likely that the appellant would  find  herself  within  a
    high density community if returned to Harare  where  she  would  be  at
    risk.  There was nothing in her history or financial  circumstances  to
    indicate that she could relocate within a low density area.

24. The Secretary of State also made written submissions and  continues  to
    rely on the reasons for refusal letters.  The  written  submissions  on
    behalf of the appellant were an attempt to reargue the case,  an  error
    only having been agreed on the  basis  of  the  reliance  on  EM.   The
    Secretary of State does not accept that it is appropriate  to  consider
    the findings of fact made by Judge Youngerwood at this stage.

25. Judge Youngerwood gave reasons for not accepting that  Appellant  would
    come to the attention of the regime on the basis of her activities  and
    for finding that the regime would not consider  her  to  be  a  genuine
    enemy as it would be apparent that her activities  were  for  the  sole
    basis of enabling her to remain in the UK.   Those  findings  have  not
    been deemed to be vitiated by any error of law and still stand.

26. The respondent also relies on the paragraphs in  the  country  guidance
    case in EM as modified with respect to  internal  relocation.   It  was
    accepted that she comes from Chinhoyi but her family members have,  she
    says, been actively associated with the MDC and have not  come  to  any
    adverse attention.  In any event, since she does not have a significant
    MDC profile, she would not be at risk even in a high  density  area  of
    Harare.

27. Finally it was not accepted that on return the appellant would need  to
    feign any association with ZANU-PF.

Findings and conclusions

28. The submissions attacking  the  First-tier  Judge's  determination  are
    misconceived since it was accepted at the hearing on 20th November that
    the  sole  issue  upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was  sought  and
    permission granted was that the judge had erred in law in relying on  a
    flawed country guidance case.

29. Accordingly the findings of the judge  stand  as  the  basis  for  this
    decision.  The judge accepted that, although borderline, that the  core
    account of the appellant's family history  in  Zimbabwe  was  accurate.
    However her failure to make any mention of it in 2011 was  due  to  the
    fact that the appellant herself never subjectively  believed  that  she
    was at any real risk of persecution or ill-treatment.  The  application
    for asylum followed the rejection of the claim which she had  made  for
    leave to remain in the UK on human rights grounds.  It  was  only  when
    she failed in that application that she then decided to make an  asylum
    claim, based in significant part on activities  undertaken  in  the  UK
    which she did in order to bolster any future claim for status.

30. The judge's findings that she had undertaken the activities claimed but
    that she was not a  genuine  and  committed  MDC  supporter  who  would
    undertake MDC activities in Zimbabwe stand.

31. The judge also found that the appellant's activities would not  be  the
    subject of active monitoring by the CIO  and  would  not  be  known  on
    return to Harare Airport.  Her activities on any basis were  relatively
    low key even though she had been named in one of the MDC websites.  The
    CIO would be aware that  the  appellant  had  been  in  the  UK  for  a
    considerable  number  of  years  before  she  undertook  any  political
    activity and it was apparent that her very late  claim  to  asylum  and
    late activities from 2011 were designed to provide her with  the  basis
    to remain here and that she was not a truly committed MDC member.

32. Even if her father's profile was known to the CIO, his  activities  had
    ceased  from  the  perspective  of  the  authorities  from  2008.   The
    appellant's  mother  and  brother  have  not  been  subjected  to   any
    persecution or ill-treatment notwithstanding his former activities  for
    the MDC in their home area.

33. Judge Youngerwood said

         "I would add that I would expect the  appellant,  were  she  to  be
         questioned about her sur place activities to admit to the truth  as
         I have found it, namely that these were not  sincere  but  designed
         merely to support her claim for  remaining  in  the  UK.   In  this
         respect there is all the difference in the world  between  a  truly
         committed political activist who will either reveal  his  political
         beliefs or will be too  afraid  to  reveal  his  political  beliefs
         because of  the  fear  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment  and  the
         position of an appellant who has decided to  bolster  a  claim  for
         asylum by pretending to be committed to a political cause."

34. Accordingly on the basis of the unchallenged findings there is no  risk
    to the appellant on return in respect of her activities in the  UK  nor
    those of her father in her home area.  Furthermore, even if there  was,
    she  could  plainly  relocate  to  Harare  where  she  would  face   no
    significant difficulties in either a low  density  or  a  high  density
    area.  There is absolutely no evidence that  she  would  be  reasonably
    likely to engage in activities so as to attract the  adverse  attention
    of ZANU-PF because she has not done so in the past save for the purpose
    of trying to remain in the UK.

35. With respect to the RT Zimbabwe point, the Tribunal in CM held that the
    evidence does not show that, as a  general  matter,  the  return  of  a
    failed asylum seeker from the UK  having  no  significant  MDC  profile
    would result in that person facing a real risk of having to demonstrate
    loyalty to the ZANU-PF save for  persons  without  ZANU-PF  connections
    returning from the UK after a significant absence to a  rural  area  of
    Zimbabwe.

36. This appellant has been away from Zimbabwe for a very lengthy period of
    time and she does not have significant ZANU-PF  connections  since  her
    father was active for the MDC.  Her mother and brother  have  not  been
    subject to any difficulty but the appellant has the  additional  factor
    of having been away for a lengthy period of time and it  therefore  may
    be that local ZANU-PF figures would require her to demonstrate loyalty.
     The principal in RT Zimbabwe protects  her  from  having  to  feign  a
    loyalty that she does  not  believe  in  order  to  avoid  persecution,
    holding that there is no scope for an application of the  core/marginal
    distinction which the Secretary of State sought to rely  upon  in  that
    case. The situation  in  Zimbabwe  was  not  that  the  right  to  hold
    political beliefs was generally accepted, subject only to some arguably
    preferable or minor restrictions.  It is that anyone who is not thought
    to  be  a  supporter  of  the  regime  is  treated  harshly  which   is
    persecution.  The HJ Iran principle applies  to  applicants  who  claim
    asylum on the grounds of a fear of persecution on the grounds of a lack
    of political belief regardless of how important their lack of belief is
    to them.

37. It follows therefore that the appellant may find herself at risk in her
    home  area  from  local  figures  in  her  home  area  if  required  to
    demonstrate loyalty, but she has a viable relocation alternative,  such
    as Harare or Bulaweyo.

Decision

The decision of the judge has been set aside.   It  is  remade  as  follows.
The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to
refuse her asylum is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

