
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03105/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th October, 2015                |On 13th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Jones, Counsel instructed by Tower Hamlets Law
Centre


                                  Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008) and consequently, this  determination  identifies  the
appellant by initials only.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Zambia, born on 23rd  March,  1989.   She
    appeals the decision of the respondent taken on 6th February, 2015,  to
    refuse to vary her leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  and
    the decision to remove her.

Immigration history

2.   Her immigration  history  starts  on  11th  February,  2008,  when  she
    applied for a visa at the British High Commission in Lusaka.   She  was
    granted a multi-student visa that day, which expired on  3rd  November,
    2011.  On 16th February, 2008, the appellant flew from  Zambia  to  the
    United Kingdom and on 5th December, 2008, she returned to Zambia  on  a
    visit returning to the United Kingdom on 10th February, 2009.  On  25th
    December, 2010, she again returned to Zambia on a visit leaving on 31st
    January, 2011 and returning back at Heathrow via Kenya on 1st February,
    2011.  On 29th November, 2011, she applied  for  an  extension  of  her
    student visa and  was  granted  limited  leave  to  remain  until  13th
    January, 2012.  On 2nd April, 2012, the appellant applied for leave  to
    remain on the basis of her Tier  1  Highly  Skilled  Post-Study  leave.
    This was granted until 4th September, 2014.  On 14th August, 2014,  the
    appellant claimed asylum at the Asylum Screening Unit in Croydon.   The
    respondent concluded that the appellant was not a refugee and  was  not
    entitled to asylum.

Appeal to the First Tier Tribunal

3.   She appealed that decision and  her  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oakley, sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  1st  July,  2015.
    Judge Oakley describes the appellant as coming from Kitwe and a  member
    of a strict Muslim family.  He noted that she attended boarding  school
    in Zambia, and now claims to be a  born  again  Pentecostal  Christian.
    Her family do not know that she has converted from Islam.  She was  the
    only member of her family who had been sent abroad  to  study  and  her
    other siblings were supported in their education  by  their  father  in
    Zambia.  Her father agreed to  support  her  education  in  the  United
    Kingdom, although she has subsequently discovered from  her  father  in
    turn that he was receiving assistance from someone called, Mohammed, to
    whom she was subsequently being forced to marry.  It  is  not  entirely
    clear why  the  appellant's  father  should  be  relying  on  financial
    assistance of Mohammed and that is not dealt with by Judge Oakley.

4.   Having completed her studies in 2011, the appellant visited her  family
    when she was told about the  marriage  to  Mohammed  and  although  she
    initially agreed to marry him, this was because she did  not  want  her
    father to stop funding her education because  she  intended  to  obtain
    post-study work in the United Kingdom.  While she was  on  a  visit  to
    Zambia, she made contact with a friend she knew there with whom she had
    kept in contact while she was in the United Kingdom called Mark and  he
    came to see her.  He would come when her  parents  were  out,  but  her
    father found out about Mark's visits and was furious and directed  that
    a guard be placed at the gate to  prevent  the  appellant  leaving  the
    house.  As a result, the appellant became angry and went to stay with a
    friend of hers in Lusaka.  She had only been away for a few days before
    three of her brothers located her at her friend's address and  demanded
    that she should return.  When she returned home she was locked  in  her
    room for some days to teach her a lesson.

5.   When Mohammed visited her, he was furious with her and  assaulted  her,
    slapping her  on  the  face  and  burning  her  thigh  with  a  lighted
    cigarette.  Her face became swollen, her nose bled  and  she  was  told
    that she should not mess with him, because he had already spent  a  lot
    of money on her.  The appellant  complained  to  her  father,  who  did
    nothing and said that Mohammed had the right to do what he did.

6.   Subsequently the appellant was informed that, as Mohammed's  wife,  she
    would be expected to undergo female circumcision  as  Mohammed's  other
    wives had undergone circumcision.  She stated that Mohammed wanted  her
    to undergo circumcision while she was  there,  but  she  could  not  go
    through with it because she was coming back to the  United  Kingdom  to
    finish her course, although  what  that  had  to  do  with  it  is  not
    explained.

7.   She states that while she was in Zambia she went to  a  police  station
    in Kitwe to report  the  fact  that  she  was  being  forced  to  marry
    Mohammed, but the police said that she was old enough  to  get  married
    and that this was only a domestic issue between her and her family  and
    not to waste the police's time.

8.   The judge said at paragraph 45:

         "On the issue of  persecution  and  ill-treatment  overall,  having
         considered the appellant's evidence both in the papers and her oral
         evidence I find that the appellant has been generally consistent in
         her responses and I accept  that  she  is  being  forced  to  marry
         Mohammed if she is to return to Zambia.  I accept that  it  is  the
         appellant's case that she is being forced to marry a  Somali  where
         FGM is practised more than in Zambia and it is more likely than not
         that he has requested that she undergoes FGM as stated by her,  the
         information having been provided by her mother." [My emphasis]

    That suggests that the judge was  not  actually  applying  the  correct
    standard of proof, but it is a finding that the judge accepts that  the
    appellant was being forced to undergo a marriage with Mohammed.

9.   The next finding is slightly confusing because it says: "I also  accept
    that in the appellant's case she is being  forced  to  marry  a  Somali
    where FGM is practised more than in Zambia."   The  judge  went  on  at
    paragraph 46 to note that the  respondent  had  accepted  part  of  the
    appellant's account  and  had  rejected  the  fact  that  Mohammed  had
    demanded that the appellant underwent FGM and that he had already  paid
    a bride price.

10.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  member  of  a
    particular social group and went on to consider Articles 2 and  3.   He
    referred to the report of the Special Rapporteur on violence  published
    in 2011 and referred also to the fact that the appellant had approached
    the police when she was being forced into a marriage and concluded that
    there would be no sufficiency of protection for her.  The  judge  noted
    that Zambia while  being  geographically  large  has  a  population  of
    10,000,000, although in fact, I am told  that  the  objective  evidence
    suggests that it is nearer 13,000,000.  Nonetheless the judge noted the
    appellant's evidence that  her  father  was  a  well-known  businessman
    having an engineering company and asserts that he is well-known out  of
    his hometown of Kitwe.  The judge said that "that may well be so but  I
    need to consider  whether  the  appellant  herself  could  relocate  to
    another area where it would be unlikely that her father would be  known
    at all in Zambia."

11.  At paragraph 60 the judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had  previously
    moved out of the house, but that her  brothers  had  located  her.   He
    referred to an important aspect of the appellant's  application,  being
    that if her father is, as she claims, a successful businessman he would
    have access to funds and  to  therefore  paying  for  investigators  to
    locate her within Zambia if he wished to do so.  He did not, therefore,
    consider it would be reasonable in the  appellant's  circumstances  for
    internal relocation to be an answer to her problems.

12.  The judge dismissed the appellant's asylum claim and allowed her  claim
    under Article 3.  Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin  granted  permission  to
    appeal, pointing out that it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  had  not
    adequately  reasoned  his  findings  as  to  internal   relocation   or
    sufficiency of protection and she added that  when  the  appellant  was
    discovered before she was studying at a friend's house and had not left
    the area.  It is also unclear on what basis the judge found her  father
    to be of such influence as to trace her anywhere in  Zambia  or  if  he
    would even know she had returned.

13.  In preparing the hearing I noticed that the judge had not dealt with  a
    second aspect of the appellant's asylum claim, namely the fact that she
    had changed her religion.  This was in  the  evidence  before  him.   I
    pointed out to her representative that as a Muslim who had converted to
    Christianity even in a comparatively Christian country like Zambia,  it
    might be suggested that the appellant would be at risk from the  Muslim
    population, even if it were in fact her father that  she  was  at  risk
    from.  The judge has made no findings on that claim at all.

14.  In addressing me today Mr Jarvis pointed out that the judge had  failed
    to engage with whether or not the appellant could live in another  part
    of Zambia.  In her refusal letter the  Secretary  of  State  had  given
    examples of other towns and cities where she might be able to  relocate
    but the judge had not considered any of them, simply saying because she
    was found having moved that she could not live anywhere.

15.   The  appellant's  father's  claimed  high  profile  was   specifically
    disputed by the Secretary of State in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    but the judge has failed to give any reasons for accepting that part of
    the appellant's case.  He also suggested that  the  appellant's  father
    would have access to funds and to therefore paying for investigators to
    relocate the appellant within Zambia, but that relies on speculation.

16.  The respondent also pointed out in her grounds  that  the  judge  found
    that the appellant could not go to the police in Zambia, because it was
    unlikely in her case that she will be able to call upon the  protection
    of the police but this misapplies the test.  In particular 57 the judge
    said this:

         "The appellant has provided evidence that  she  reported  the  fact
         that she was being forced into a marriage when  she  went  back  to
         Zambia several years ago.  The police were not interested  in  this
         matter stating that she was of an age when she could marry and that
         it was a family matter and they declined to  intervene.   From  the
         objective  evidence  and  from   the   appellant's   own   previous
         experiences of seeking the protection of the police it is  unlikely
         in the appellant's case that she will be  able  to  call  upon  the
         protection of the police in the circumstances in  which  she  finds
         herself in the family and being forced to marry that she  does  not
         want undergo marriage with as well as  being  required  to  undergo
         female circumcision."

17.  The judge went on at  paragraph  58  to  conclude  that  there  was  no
    sufficiency of protection to which the  appellant  could  turn,  having
    already experienced an insufficiency in the past.

18.  I was urged to find that there were no errors of law in this  decision.
     The appellant had, in fear, fled her home and  gone  to  stay  with  a
    friend.  She had been living with a friend when she was  found  by  her
    brothers.  The fact that she was found  by  her  brothers  demonstrates
    that the family does have influence and  would  be  able  to  find  the
    appellant were she to relocate to another part of Zambia.

19.  However, it was to a friend that the appellant went to stay and it  may
    well have been that the friend  was  known  to  the  appellant's  other
    family members who simply guessed that she had gone to stay  with  this
    particular friend.  It is not clear from the evidence how far away this
    friend lived from the appellant's own home.

20.  The judge makes no finding  at  all  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    father, other than what he says in paragraphs 59 and 60.  In  paragraph
    60 he noted that the appellant's father  is  a  well-known  businessman
    having an engineering company and the appellant's assertion that he  is
    well-known outside the town of Kitwe.  The judge merely says "that  may
    well be so but I need to consider whether the appellant  herself  could
    relocate to another area where it would be  unlikely  that  her  father
    would be known at all in Zambia."

21.  He then refers to the fact that it is claimed  that  her  father  is  a
    successful businessman and says he would have access to  funds  and  to
    therefore paying investigators to locate her within Zambia if he wished
    to do so.  That does not appear to be based on any evidence at all  and
    it is certainly not based on any finding that he has  made.   It  would
    appear to be contradicted by the fact  that  Mohammed  had  funded  the
    appellant's education, rather than the appellant's father.

22.  I have noted that the appellant referred  to  having  reported  to  the
    police in Kitwe the fact that she was being forced to  marry  Mohammed,
    but the police responded by saying that she was not old enough  to  get
    married and that this was only a domestic issue  between  her  and  her
    family and not to waste the police's time.

23.  It may well be, I do not know, that  the  police  were  not  interested
    simply because she was not old enough to get married.  I  do  not  know
    whether she made a formal complaint.   The  judge  has  looked  at  the
    Special Rapporteur's report on violence against women  in  Zambia,  but
    does not refer to the more recent U.S. State country  report  on  human
    rights practices which was in the bundle.  That  talks  about  the  law
    providing for prosecution of most gender-based crimes and penalties for
    assault ranging from fines to 25 years' imprisonment depending  on  the
    severity of injury.  It  referred  to  domestic  violence  as  being  a
    serious problem  and  spousal  abuse  being  widespread,  but  it  also
    referred to the  government  launching  projects  during  the  year  to
    prevent abuse.

24.  The penal code was said by the 2013 country report to  prohibit  female
    genital  mutilation  cutting  and  it  was  said  it  rarely  occurred.
    Although there were no cases reported during the year it  was  believed
    to occur in small communities of immigrants from other parts of Africa.
      According  to  the  2009  Zambia  sexual  behaviour  survey  the  FGM
    prevalence rate was 1%.

25.  I believe that the judge erred when he said  at  paragraph  57  of  the
    determination that it is unlikely in the appellant's case that she will
    be able to call upon the protection of the police in the  circumstances
    in which she finds herself in the family and being forced to marry that
    she does not want undergo marriage with as well as  being  required  to
    undergo female circumcision.  I believe that the  evidence  before  him
    required him to look with very much greater care at all  the  objective
    evidence and not simply at the report published in 2011.

26.  I further believe  that  he  erred  when  finding  that  there  was  no
    sufficiency of protection  to  which  she  could  turn  having  already
    experienced that insufficiency in any event and in simply accepting the
    evidence of the  appellant  without  making  any  specific  finding  in
    relation to the appellant's father or his extent of influence.

27.  The issue of the father's profile was specifically  challenged  by  the
    Secretary of State and yet the judge makes no finding on it at all.   I
    am also still troubled by the fact that part of the  appellant's  claim
    is that she has  converted  from  Islam  to  Christianity.   I  believe
    therefore that these matters do need to be considered again and I remit
    this appeal for hearing afresh by the First-tier Tribunal  by  a  judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Oakley.  Clear  findings  of  fact
    are required on all aspects of the appellant's claim.

28.  The respondent has accepted part  of  the  appellant's  claim  and  the
    judge appeared to have accepted part of the evidence that he  had  been
    given in relation to the appellant's father.  I believe, however,  that
    clear findings need to be made in order that the risk to this appellant
    can be properly assessed.  I  also  believe  also  that  the  objective
    evidence will need to be carefully examined to see whether or  not  the
    authorities in Zambia are willing and able  to  protect  her  from  the
    risks that she claims to have.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that is it remitted for  hearing  afresh
by a judge other than First Tier Tribunal Judge Oakley

  Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
                            Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

