
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/03001/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On December 5, 2016             |On December 9, 2016             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                  MRS O O A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mair, Counsel, instructed by GMAU
For the Respondent:    Ms Peterson (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and she was born on August 14,
       1971. She arrived in the United Kingdom  on  August  8,  2008  as  a
       highly skilled migrant and applied in time for leave  to  remain  on
       April 3, 2010. Her application was refused  due  to  an  error  with
       payment. She then submitted an out of time applications  on  May  6,
       2010 and June 26,  2010  but  both  applications  were  refused.  On
       September 1, 2010 she was served with Form IS 151a on  September  1,
       2010 as an overstayer. On January 23, 2012 she  applied  for  asylum
       but this was refused by the respondent on April 20, 2014. Her appeal
       came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Haney on  November  12,
       2014 and in decision promulgated on November 28, 2014 he refused her
       appeal and those  of  her  three  dependants  on  all  grounds.  The
       appellant appealed  that  decision  and  permission  to  appeal  was
       granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Kimnell.  Deputy  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Birrell found on September 13, 2015 there had been an
       error in law and remitted the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal
       on the grounds of procedural unfairness.

    2. The appeal then came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  M
       Davies on March 11, 2016. In a decision  promulgated  on  March  21,
       2016 he dismissed the appellant's appeal.

    3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on April 1, 2016 against that
       decision.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal MacDonald on April 14, 2016 and the matter came before
       me on the above date.

    5. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
       Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings
       shall directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their
       family.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the
       Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to
       contempt of court proceedings.

SUBMISSIONS

    6. Ms Mair acknowledged  that  her  article  8  ground  of  appeal  was
       stronger  than  the  remaining  two  grounds  but  nevertheless  she
       submitted there was an error of law for all of the reasons stated in
       the grounds of appeal. The Judge had failed to properly consider the
       best interests of the children because he failed to have  regard  to
       the  substantial  bundle  of  evidence  submitted   concerning   A's
       (appellant's child)  special  needs.  The  Judge  failed  to  attach
       sufficient weight to the A's subjective fear of his father's  family
       and failed to consider all the evidence in the appellant's bundle of
       documents. The appellant's husband had been convicted of child abuse
       in respect of the children and the  Judge  failed  to  carry  out  a
       detailed section 55 assessment as he failed to consider the position
       based on the evidence served after the  respondent's  decision.  The
       Judge failed to attach sufficient weight  to  the  seven  years  the
       child had lived in the United Kingdom or the fact that  one  of  the
       appellant's other children had given birth to a child  with  an  EEA
       national as a father.

    7. Ms Mair also submitted that the Judge considered the section 8 issue
       too early in his decision. The Judge did not have regard to why  she
       had not claimed asylum earlier and this amounted to an error in law.




    8. Ms Mair further argued that that the Judge  should  have  considered
       the expert report as part of the overall claim and not after  making
       findings about the appellant's claim.

    9. Ms Peterson adopted her colleague's Rule 24  statement  dated  April
       21, 2016. She submitted that contrary to Ms Mair's  submissions  the
       Judge  did  have  regard  to  the   appellant's   son's   individual
       circumstances but went on to make findings open to him on the facts.
       The Judge demonstrated in his decision an understanding of  all  the
       facts and there is no error of law because the Judge  did  not  list
       everything. As for Section 117B(6) it was not sufficient  to  merely
       show seven years residence as there was also a reasonableness  test.
       The Judge did  not  find  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
       appellant's claim but he did find there was  no  credible  evidence.
       The Judge had regard to the A's fear  of  his  father's  family  but
       rejected the claim he would be at risk on return. The Judge also had
       regard to the other family members and  his  findings  in  paragraph
       [117] of his decision were open to him.


   10. Ms Peterson further submitted that the Judge had properly considered
       the appellant's delay in claiming asylum earlier  and  had  rejected
       her explanation and given reasons in paragraph [96].


   11. Ms Peterson went onto argue that the Judge had made findings on  the
       appellant's account and the expert evidence would not have  assisted
       him. The Judge gave reasons for rejecting the appellant's  case  and
       found she had fallen out with family  and  consequently  the  report
       took matters no further.


   12. Ms Mair responded to these submissions and submitted that there  was
       credible evidence before the Judge and he had failed to have  regard
       to it. IN considering the best interests of the children  the  Judge
       failed to have regard to the effect on the  child's  father  if  the
       appellant and her children were forced to leave.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   13. Permission to appeal was given in this case  primarily  because  the
       Judge may not have made a clear assessment of  the  children's  best
       interests or apply correct case law. Permission  was  given  on  the
       other grounds  but  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       MacDonald indicated he found little  in  either  of  the  other  two
       grounds.

   14. This case has a regrettable history. I say regrettable  because  the
       case finds its way before me following two  substantive  appeals  in
       the First-tier Tribunal and I am  the  second  Judge  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal having to decide if an error in law has been made.


   15. Her leave as a highly skilled migrant was coming to an end  and  she
       applied unsuccessfully on  three  occasions  to  extend  her  leave.
       Following the last of those  applications  she  was  served  with  a
       notice as an overstayer.


   16. The appellant married MO in an arranged marriage in 1992.  She  then
       met EA and lived with him between 1993  and  2000  and  during  that
       period she gave birth to her four children. They separated  in  2000
       but she regained contact with him in 2003. However,  they  were  not
       together as a family and in 2008 she came to the United Kingdom with
       her  children  and  her  husband  as  a   dependant.  However,  this
       complicated family matrix  became  more  complicated  because  after
       arriving in the United Kingdom she and her husband separated and she
       went to live with EA with the children.


   17. It is not disputed that EA assaulted the  children  and  received  a
       suspended prison sentence and the  children  were  taken  into  care
       albeit they were returned to her.


   18. The appellant's asylum claim  was  based  on  threats  made  by  her
       husband's family in  Nigeria  and  she  also  received  threats  and
       abusive letters in the post. She claimed her brother was visited  by
       EA's family and she feared that if she returned to Nigeria she would
       face persecution. The respondent rejected her claim  and  the  Judge
       had to deal with this claim first and foremost.


   19. In a detailed decision the Judge set out the factual background  and
       detailed the oral evidence that was given on this issue by both  the
       appellant  and  her  witness.   The   Judge   also   set   out   the
       representative's submissions and then at paragraph  [96]  the  Judge
       set out his findings.


   20. Ms Mair raised two errors of law that are unconnected to her article
       8 argument.


   21. Ms Mair argued the first error concerned  the  Judge's  approach  to
       Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
       etc.) Act 2004. The Judge began his consideration  of  the  evidence
       with this very issue. He wrote, "I firstly conclude that  the  delay
       in the appellant claiming asylum does have the  effect  of  damaging
       her credibility." The Judge continued in paragraph [96] and gave his
       reasons why he felt it damaged her credibility.


   22. Section 8(4) of that Act makes clear-


    "This section also applies to failure by the claimant to take advantage
    of a reasonable opportunity to make an asylum  claim  or  human  rights
    claim while in a safe country."



   23. Section 8(5) of that Act also states-

    "This section also applies to failure by the claimant to make an asylum
    claim or human rights claim before being  notified  of  an  immigration
    decision, unless the claim relies wholly on matters arising  after  the
    notification."


   24. The Judge did not reject the  appellant's  claim  for  delaying  her
       application but simply made, as he was required to do, an assessment
       about her delay in making the application.

   25. Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal MacDonald did  not  find
       this to be a strong argument and I am satisfied there was  no  error
       in law on this issue.


   26. The second error raised by Ms Mair related to the Judge's  treatment
       of the expert's evidence. The appellant's fear was based on what her
       husband's family were said to have done. The Judge  was  obliged  to
       consider her account and  make  findings.  The  Judge  accepted  the
       appellant's husband's cousin  may  well  be  the  Governor  of  Ogun
       Province but he rejected the appellant's oral and  written  evidence
       of written and physical threats. The findings he made in  paragraphs
       [97] to [100] explain why  he  then  went  on  to  find  the  expert
       evidence did not help him. The expert evidence could not assist  him
       with  the  appellant's  explanation  of  what  happened   and   more
       importantly why she did not report the incidents to the police.  The
       Judge gave detailed reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim  and
       he then went on to give reasons why the expert evidence did not help
       him. No error in law is revealed by this second ground.


   27. The final and Ms Mair's own words the strongest  ground  centred  in
       the Judge's approach to article 8 and  the  best  interests  of  the
       children. She submitted the Judge's consideration of article  8  was
       inadequate and failed to address all the issues raised.


   28. The Judge's article 8 findings appear to commence  around  paragraph
       [115] and conclude at paragraph  [124].  The  Judge  refers  to  A's
       particular problems but found that the appellant would have recourse
       to both education and health care in Nigeria.  The  Judge  also  had
       regard to the fact that A had lived here  for  seven  years.  A  was
       three years of age when he came to the United Kingdom and  when  the
       application was submitted he was almost seven years of age.


   29. It seems there was no responsibility upon the Judge to consider  A's
       situation having regard to paragraph 276ADE(iv) HC  395  because  at
       the date of his mother's application he had not lived here for seven
       years but under his article 8 assessment it would  be  incumbent  on
       him to have regard to Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act  because  that
       is concerned with  the  date  of  hearing.  The  test  in  paragraph
       276ADE(iv) HC 395 and Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act are  the  same
       and  both  require  a  seven  year  continuous  stay  here  plus  an
       assessment of whether it would be reasonable to expect the child  to
       leave the United Kingdom.


   30. The Judge clearly had regard to A's situation. At paragraph [92]  he
       referred to Ms Mair's submission, " I should take into  account  the
       trauma that he has faced and his special  educational  needs.  Those
       needs are met by specialist care  in  the  United  Kingdom.  As  the
       evidence indicates in the supplemental bundle A is  fearful  of  any
       change which would cause him extreme anxiety and it would not be  in
       his best interest to remove him to Nigeria...."


   31. Quite clearly, the Judge was alert to the evidence relating to A but
       Ms Mair argues that he failed to deal with the abundance of evidence
       presented. Whilst I accept the Judge's assessment of  A  is  not  as
       detailed as it could have been the  issue  for  me  is  whether  his
       approach to the evidence was one that was open to him. Article 8  is
       a discretionary ground and it follows that a different  case  worker
       or Judge may have attached more weight to aspects of the appellant's
       claim than was done in this case. Miss Peterson  has  submitted  the
       Judge's approach does not amount to an error in law.


   32. It cannot be shown the Judge ignored the evidence.  He  was  clearly
       aware of it as he set it out in some detail and I find that  he  has
       considered the evidence and Ms Mair's arguments on this  element  of
       her grounds is a further attempt to litigate the issues afresh to  a
       different audience.


   33. The Judge was clearly conscious of Section 117B(6) as he  refers  to
       the wording of the test  in  paragraph  [116]  of  his  decision.  I
       conclude  his  assessment  of  the  evidence  in  respect  of  A  is
       sustainable. I will return to the overall position in due course.


   34. The Judge's approach to daughter A and her child was also raised  in
       the grounds of appeal. Ms Mair appeared to accept daughter A's child
       was not a British subject because she referred to the fact  she  was
       an EEA national. A was 21 years of age at the hearing and there  was
       limited  evidence  before  the  Judge  about  her  child   and   the
       involvement of the father. Clearly, A is an adult and as the  mother
       of an EEA family member she would have certain rights. It seems that
       the Judge is being criticised for not dealing with a matter that was
       not before him. His comments at paragraph [117] are not misplaced.


   35. Having made findings of fact the Judge then returned to the issue of
       proportionality from paragraph [119] onwards. Nothing  contained  in
       paragraphs [120] to [124] is misplaced or wrong in law.


   36. Ultimately, the Judge was dealing with an appellant  and  one  child
       under the age of eighteen plus two children over the age of eighteen
       and one grandchild. The Judge was not required to set out each piece
       of evidence  as  long  as  he  demonstrated  an  engagement  and  an
       understanding of the evidence presented. I am  satisfied  the  Judge
       did just that. The Judge is not required to set out  each  piece  of
       case law. Case law sets out how the law  should  be  considered  and
       applied.


   37. The  Judge  was  aware  of  his  responsibilities  and  applied  the
       principles to the facts. His conclusions were open to him and  there
       is no error in law.

DECISION

   38. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  uphold  the
       decision in so far as article 8 ECHR is concerned.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award because I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


