
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03312/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 15 July 2013                                 |On 30 September 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                          Mam Sainey Efficeny Njie
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss M Anderson, Immigration Legal Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mam Sainey Efficeny Njie, was born on 1 September  1990.
    She entered the United Kingdom as a student on 28 September 2009.   She
    subsequently submitted three applications for further leave  to  remain
    as a student (on 27 August 2010, 26 October 2010 and  19  January  2011
    respectively) which were refused.  She claimed asylum on 11 April 2011.
     On 10 May  2011,  a  decision  was  made  to  refuse  the  appellant's
    application for asylum and to remove her from the United Kingdom.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hemingway)  which,
    in a determination promulgated  on  2  September  2011,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  refused.   The
    appellant was detained and served with removal directions.

 2. The appellant subsequently made an application for judicial review and,
    on  29  February  2012,  the  respondent  decided  to   treat   further
    submissions made by the appellant as a fresh claim  for  asylum.   That
    fresh claim was refused by the respondent in a decision dated 18  March
    2013.  On the same date, a decision was made to  remove  the  appellant
    from the United Kingdom by way of directions under Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Birkby)  which,
    in a determination promulgated on 22 May 2013, dismissed the appeal  on
    asylum and human rights grounds but allowed it to  the  limited  extent
    that the decision to  remove  under  Section  47  be  remitted  to  the
    respondent for reconsideration.  The appellant appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal which granted permission to appeal on 11 June 2013.

 3. The grounds of appeal are brief:

         "The  Immigration  Judge  has  assessed  the  appellant's  evidence
         (namely the report of Dr Lord and the GAMCOTRAP report) using too a
         high a standard of proof.  His reasoning at  paragraph  49  of  the
         appeal determination is indicative of a higher  standard  than  the
         established 'reasonable degree of  likelihood'  test.   The  report
         from Dr Lord was also  not  considered  to  the  full  and  correct
         extent.

         The Immigration Judge  failed  to  consider  Miss  Fishwick's  oral
         submissions regarding the future risk the appellant faces by virtue
         of the tribal scarification marks on her  chest  and  back.   These
         marks provide a very clear visual marker  to  anyone  viewing  them
         that the appellant is Mandinka, even if it is not accepted that she
         is ethnically so.  These marks  put  her  at  future  risk  of  FGM
         [female genital mutilation] as she  would  be  perceived  to  be  a
         Mandinka, affecting  her  future  marriage  prospects  and  overall
         quality of life."

 4. Granting permission, Judge J M Lewis wrote:

         "From the judge's Record of Proceedings this submission [i.e.  that
         made by Miss Fishwick - see above] seems to  have  been  made.   At
         paragraph 50 the judge did not accept that  the  appellant's  scars
         were Mandinka scars.  At paragraph 51 he adopted  the  findings  of
         his predecessor Judge Hemingway, including  specifically  those  at
         paragraph 44 to similar effect.  However, it does seem that he  did
         not go on to consider whether, whatever the nature  and  source  of
         the scars, they were sufficient to  place  the  appellant  at  real
         risk.  It is arguable that this is an error of law.  Permission  to
         appeal is granted."





Judge Birkby's Determination

 5. Judge Birkby at [17] noted that the appellant claimed that:

         "If she were returned to Gambia she would face mistreatment as  she
         would be forced to undergo female genital mutilation (FGM) and  she
         would be forced  into  a  marriage  and  to  change  her  Christian
         religion to that of Muslim.  The appellant's claim was that she  is
         of Woloff ethnicity and she is a Christian.  Her father was also  a
         Woloff Christian.  He had a relationship with the appellant's birth
         mother when he lived in  Lower  River  Division.   The  appellant's
         mother's family disapproved as they were Mandinkan  Muslims.   They
         arranged for the appellant's mother to give  up  the  appellant  at
         birth to her father.  Her father returned to live  in  the  Western
         Division."

     When she was about 17 years of age, the  appellant  had  re-established
    contact with her birth  mother  and  began  to  visit  her  during  the
    holidays.  The appellant had claimed that, in the summer of  2009,  she
    was forcibly marked with Mandinkan scars on her body "by an  old  lady"
    and told by her mother that she would be forced to  marry  a  Mandinkan
    man.  The appellant was also told that she would have to  undergo  FGM.
    The appellant's father "came to collect her and was angry when  he  saw
    the marks on [the appellant's] chest" [22].  However, the appellant and
    her father were told that the appellant's  birth  mother's  uncle  (Waa
    Juwara) was "a political  figure  who  was  friends  with  the  Gambian
    President.  He would make her mother's wishes  happen."   Subsequently,
    the police came looking for the appellant in order  to  compel  her  to
    comply with her birth mothers  wishes.   By  that  time,  however,  the
    appellant had already left using her  own  passport  to  study  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 6. Following the principles set out in the case of Devaseelan [2004] UKIAT
    000282, at [46] Judge Birkby adopted Judge Hemingway's findings as  the
    basis for his own analysis  of  the  evidence.   He  noted  that  Judge
    Hemingway had been "unable to accept that the appellant has provided  a
    truthful account of events in Gambia."  At [34], Judge Birkby quoted in
    full Judge Hemingway's summary of his findings of fact:

         "(a) I find that the appellant is a national of Gambia.   This  had
             been accepted by the respondent.

         (b)  I find that the appellant is of Woloff ethnicity.  I find  she
             is not of mixed Woloff and Mandinka ethnicity.

         (c)  I find the appellant does not have a mother who is a member of
             the Mandinka tribe.  I do not believe that, when she was  aged
             17, she came into contact with her real mother.

         (d)  I find that the appellant has not been  threatened  with  FGM.
             This is not something practised by the Woloff tribe and I find
             she has not come under the influence of the Mandinka tribe.

         (e)  I find that the appellant has not been threatened with  forced
             marriage.

         (f)  I find that when the appellant came to  the  UK  she  was  not
             fleeing for her safety in the Gambia.  Had she been she  would
             not have willingly returned to that country as she did.

         (g)  I find that the appellant was motivated to come to the UK  for
             the purposes of study which she has subsequently decided,  for
             reasons unconnected with her personal safety,  and  she  would
             prefer to remain in the UK.

         (h)  I find the appellant does live with her aunt as is  indicated.
             I also find that she has undertaken some  studying  whilst  in
             the UK."

 7. At [33] Judge Birkby summarised  the  fresh  submissions  made  by  the
    appellant subsequent to Judge Hemingway's  determination.   First,  the
    appellant sought to rely on a report  from  Dr  Lesley  Lord  dated  21
    February 2012.  Secondly, she had submitted a  report  from  GAMCOTRAP,
    and thirdly a newspaper article from the  Freedom  Newspaper  entitled,
    "Governor Waa Juwara Promoted To Ministerial Position".   Judge  Birkby
    indicated that he had "considered carefully the  report  of  Dr  Lesley
    Lord".  He noted that Dr Lord considered  that  the  appellant's  scars
    "had the typical appearance  of  tribal  marks."   He  quoted  in  full
    paragraphs 15 and 16 of Dr Lord's report:

         "15. Miss Njie's scars have the typical appearance of tribal marks.
               Although  the  pigmentation  is  fading  the  characteristic
             prominence of the scars is  still  present  and  will  persist
             (note the fine lines in photo 16).  They do not look like  the
             scars typical of traditional healing methods.  Her  father,  a
             Christian, was more religious than traditional and they  lived
             in a city where such practice was not done.

         16.  As stated above, once the wounds are healed it is not possible
             to say when they occurred and therefore it is not possible  to
             say whether these marks  were  made  all  at  the  same  time.
             Because of how these cuts are made, pinching the  skin  before
             the cut, it is not possible that she could have made the marks
             on the back of her neck herself."

 8. As Judge Birkby recorded at  [49]  Dr  Lord  had  not  excluded  "other
    possibilities as to how the marks were made".

 9. The GAMCOTRAP (Gambia Committee on Traditional Practices Affecting  the
    Health of Women and Children) report is entitled "Scarification in  the
    Form of Tribal Marks (The Gambia)". The report notes  that  the  Gambia
    has a population of 1.7  million  and  a  "variety  of  ethnic  groups"
    including the Fula, Woloff, Jola, Serhule, Serers, and Bianunkas.   The
    largest group is the Mandinka.  Scarification is generally practised by
    the two largest ethnic groups, the Mandinkas and the Fulas.  The report
    states that "the tribal marks of the Mandinka are a stroke of three  to
    five lines on their chest, both breast and back."

10. Judge Birkby considered the evidence regarding Governor Waa  Juwara  to
    be "generic in essence".  He did not  consider  that  it  assisted  the
    appellant's claim [47].  That finding is not challenged in the  grounds
    of appeal to the Upper Tribunal so we shall make no  further  reference
    to it.

11. At [50-51] Judge Birkby concluded:

         "50. Immigration Judge Hemingway's analysis and  rejection  of  the
             Appellant's credibility in his determination at paragraphs  32
             to 47 is particularly detailed.   I  adopt  that  analysis  of
             Immigration Hemingway (sic).  Such lack of credibility as  has
             been found by Immigration Judge Hemingway leads me now to  the
             conclusion in spite of the new evidence that it  is  certainly
             possible that  the  appellant  has  arranged  for  someone  to
             inflict those scars on her in order to make it appear that she
             has Mandinkan scars.  The credibility of my judgment has  been
             so undermined by Immigration Judge  Hemingway's  findings  and
             analysis that I cannot accept the appellant's assertions  with
             regard  to  the  scarification  and  the   origins   of   that
             scarification, even  though  there  is  no  more  evidence  to
             associate it with the Mandinka.  I do  not  accept  the  scars
             were inflicted on her in the way that she has stated.

        51. Although there has been new evidence I do not conclude that such
            evidence is sufficient to undermine any of  Immigration  Judge's
            Hemingway's findings and conclusions  which  I  adopt  in  their
            entirety and in particular as stated above at paragraphs 34  and
            35 of this determination and with the section of paragraph 44 of
            the Immigration Judge's determination which I have cited  above.
            I have furthermore found the respondent's conclusions as  stated
            in the most recent refusal letter to have been sound and I adopt
            those conclusions."

Discussion

12. Miss Anderson submitted that  Judge  Birkby  had  applied  too  high  a
    standard of proof in his analysis of the evidence.  In  particular,  he
    had been "seeking perfection" as regards  evidence  of  scarring.   She
    also submitted that Judge Hemingway had  made  "plausibility  findings"
    rather than proper findings of fact.  We asked  Miss  Anderson  if  she
    could direct us to  photographs  of  the  appellant's  scarring;  those
    photographs  contained  within  the   appellant's   bundle   had   been
    photocopied so poorly that they are unintelligible.   Mr  Diwnycz,  for
    the respondent, referred to a number of other photographs which  appear
    to have been before Judge Hemingway but Miss Anderson did not  seek  to
    rely upon those photographs nor are they contained  within  the  bundle
    she had prepared for the hearing.  We were left, as a consequence, with
    no  clear  idea  whatever  of  the  appearance  of  the  scars  on  the
    appellant's body although we  accept  that  she  has  been  scarred  as
    recorded by Dr Lord who had to opportunity of examining her.

13. Miss Anderson submitted that Judge Birkby had  failed  to  consider  Dr
    Lord's report and that from GAMCOTRAP together and that,  had  he  done
    so, he would have concluded that  the  appellant  would  present  as  a
    Mandinkan female who would be at risk of FGM and forced marriage.   She
    acknowledged that she had no evidence of  the  scarification  generally
    employed by members of the Woloff tribe.  She was aware that the Woloff
    did not practise FGM.

14. We reject all of Miss Anderson's submissions.  Dr Lord has recorded the
    scarring on the appellant's body but, other than observing that it  was
    likely, in her opinion, to be of a tribal  nature,  she  quite  rightly
    offered no further opinion given that  she  has  no  expertise  on  the
    subject of the tribal scarring of Gambian  females.   No  evidence  has
    been adduced by the appellant to indicate what scarring is employed  by
    the Woloff tribe.   Further,  no  evidence  has  been  adduced  by  the
    appellant from any expert who would be able to offer  an  opinion  that
    the appellant's scars would be likely to mark out the  appellant  as  a
    member of any particular tribe in the Gambia.  Contrary  to  what  Miss
    Anderson told us, the GAMCOTRAP report is of  little  assistance.   The
    authors of that report have, of course, offered  no  opinion  regarding
    this particular appellant's scarring and the  report's  description  of
    Mandinkan scarring ("a stroke of three to five lines  on  their  chest,
    both breast and back") is somewhat vague and arguably at odds  with  Dr
    Lord's observation that the appellant had  been  scarred  on  her  neck
    (rather than her back).  Miss Anderson appeared to wish us  to  proceed
    on the basis that, because Dr Lord had indicated that the scars had not
    been self-inflicted, the appellant must necessarily have  been  scarred
    by members of the  Mandinkan  tribe.   In  light  of  our  observations
    recorded above as to the  inadequacy  of  the  evidence  adduced,  that
    submission is wholly without foundation.  We accept that the scars have
    not been self-inflicted  and  are  probably  not  accidental,  but  the
    evidence which has been adduced takes us  no  further  than  that.   We
    repeat that there was no evidence which can lead us  to  conclude  that
    the scars on the appellant's body link her to any particular  tribe  in
    Gambia or elsewhere.

15. We reject  also  Miss  Anderson's  submission  that  Judge  Hemingway's
    findings  of  fact  were  not  reliable.   Judge  Hemingway's  findings
    (paragraph 6 supra) are not  in  any  way  inconsistent  with  the  new
    evidence  which  the  appellant   has   adduced.    Judge   Hemingway's
    determination was not successfully challenged by the appellant  and  we
    consider that Judge Birkby acted properly in starting his own  analysis
    of the evidence upon the basis of Judge Hemingway's findings  of  fact.
    We consider that Judge Birkby was entitled to find that "the scars were
    [not] inflicted on [the appellant] in the way  that  she  has  stated."
    [50]. If anything, we find that Judge Birkby has taken too  generous  a
    view of the appellant's new evidence; his statement at [50] that "there
    is now more evidence to associate [the appellant's scarring]  with  the
    Mandinka" is, for the reasons we have set out above, not  supported  by
    the evidence.

16. We were concerned that  Miss  Anderson  made  no  attempt  whatever  to
    address the basis upon which permission to the Upper Tribunal had  been
    granted, that is "whether, whatever the nature and source of the scars,
    they were  sufficient  to  place  the  appellant  at  real  risk"  [our
    emphasis].  It was open to the appellant to  seek  expert  evidence  to
    show how her scars (however they may  have  been  inflicted)  would  be
    perceived by different tribal groups in Gambia  and  whether  any  such
    group would be likely to harm her.  The evidence which has been adduced
    does not enable us to reach any sensible conclusion on that matter.  As
    we remarked at the hearing, we regard with  the  greatest  concern  the
    type of persecution which the appellant claims may threaten  her.  That
    does not, however, mean that cases should be determined otherwise  than
    in accordance with the evidence.

17. At the end of the hearing, we notified Miss Anderson  of  our  concerns
    regarding the preparation of the appellant's appeal.   The  appellant's
    representatives have failed to take  the  obvious  steps  of  providing
    clear and unambiguous photographs of the appellant's scars.  They  have
    failed to obtain expert evidence which  might  indicate  whether  those
    scars would reveal the appellant as being a member of the  Mandinka  or
    any other tribe and whether that, in turn, would expose her to  a  real
    risk of harm. It is not for the Tribunal to fill in  the  gaps  in  the
    evidence created by poor preparation.  In this appeal, we are concerned
    only with considering whether Judge Birkby erred in law such  that  his
    determination falls to be set aside.  For the reasons we have given, we
    have concluded that he did not.  It may be that the appellant will wish
    to take further action in the light of what  we  have  said  about  the
    preparation of her appeal  but  that  is  a  matter  for  her  and  her
    advisers.

DECISION

18. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 31 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
