
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03979/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 February 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                  K.S.A.A.
                              (ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Collins, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Ms K.S.A.A., a citizen of Somalia, against
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her  asylum  and
         humanitarian protection appeal.

      2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.

    Background

      3. The appellant was born on 20 September 1985.  She arrived in the UK
         on 28 August 2006 presenting a false identity.  She  was  convicted
         of possession of a false instrument with intent and  was  sentenced
         to 12 Months imprisonment.  On 27 February 2007 a decision was made
         to deport the appellant and her appeal against  that  decision  was
         dismissed on 13 September 2007 with an application for a High Court
         review being refused on 5 October  2007.   On  19  April  2007  her
         asylum claim was refused.  On 19 March 2008 a deportation order was
         made against the appellant.  Representations submitted on 30  April
         2008 were treated as  an  application  to  revoke  the  deportation
         order, which was refused.   The  appellant's  appeal  against  that
         decision was dismissed on 23 June 2011.   However  the  appellant's
         appeal was allowed by the Upper Tribunal on 30  November  2011  and
         the appellant was granted six months' discretionary  leave  with  a
         further six months granted on 15 October 2012.  On 3 April 2013 the
         appellant's representatives made an  application  for  humanitarian
         protection or for a longer period of discretionary  leave.   On  26
         February 2015 the respondent refused the appellant's application to
         vary her leave to remain and made  a  decision  to  remove  her  to
         Somalia.

      4. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Youngerwood heard the  appellant's
         appeal on 29  July  2015  and  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  11
         September 2015, Judge Youngerwood allowed the appellant's appeal on
         the basis that the decision breaches the appellant's European Union
         rights and was therefore not in accordance with the  law  and  also
         allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  (Article  8).   The
         appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  was
         dismissed.

      5. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  by  the
         appellant, in relation to the dismissal of the  appellant's  appeal
         on asylum and human rights grounds, on the following  grounds:   1.
         The Judge erred in his approach to the appellant's  credibility  on
         the issue of what if any contact she has had  with  any  person  in
         Somalia and in requiring 'relatively  compelling  evidence';  2.The
         Judge disbelieved the appellant's husband,  a  British  citizen  of
         unblemished character, because his wife had been found  not  to  be
         credible; 3. The Judge  erred in respect  of  risk  to  Somalia  to
         women  generally.   Permission  was  granted  to   the   appellant.
         Although the respondent also sought permission to appeal permission
         was not granted.

      6. The hearing came before me.  At the end of the hearing  I  reserved
         my decision which I now give.

    Grounds 1 and 2

      7. Mr Collins briefly summarised the appellant's proceedings  to  date
         and relied on the findings of Upper Tribunal Judge Manuel dated  17
         November 2011 where he referred to the  approach  of  the  previous
         panel who 'had approached its tasks  conscientiously  when  dealing
         with a dishonest claimant, but their view of the real risks  facing
         the Appellant (a lone female) returning to southern Somalia after a
         long absence were  in  the  tribunal's  view  too  optimistic  when
         examined  against  the  objective  evidence  available  to   them'.
         However Mr Collins accepted that the appellant cannot go behind the
         findings of the Tribunal in 2007 (and which  were  adopted  by  the
         Tribunal in June 2011) that the appellant was 'not credible in  any
         of her accounts'.  They found, as did the previous panel:

             '... that she has not proved that she is not in  contact  with
             her family in Somalia.  She has many connections with  Somalis
             living in the UK.  If her account were  true,  she  must  have
             been gravely concerned  as  to  the  welfare  of  her  mother,
             brother, and aunt.  The aunt is said to have a daughter living
             abroad who sent her mother money.   The  aunt  must  therefore
             have had some stability in her life.  The  evidence  that  the
             appellant gave us as to her inability to find her  family  was
             deeply unconvincing'.

      8. Mr Collins relied on the witness statement and oral evidence before
         Judge Youngerwood that her partner met her in March 2010  and  that
         they had lived together since 10 September 2011,  which  was  after
         the last findings of credibility in relation to  the  appellant  in
         June 2011.  Mr Collins submitted that  the  Judge  had  applied  an
         incorrect standard of proof in requiring 'compelling  evidence'  to
         overturn the previous findings, given Devaseelan.  He  argued  that
         the Judge had also erred in that Devaseelan could not apply to  the
         husband's unchallenged evidence.  In effect the Judge  was  finding
         that the appellant was not credible in perpetuity.

      9. The respondent was not represented before the First-tier  Tribunal.
         Judge Youngerwood noted in his decision that he heard oral evidence
         from both the appellant and her partner.  The Judge noted  that  Mr
         Collins'  submitted  before  him  that  it  was   the   appellant's
         'uncontradicted' evidence that she had not had  lost  contact  with
         her family.

     10. I find no merit in  Mr  Collins'  argument  before  me  that  Judge
         Youngerwood's approach to the appellant's evidence was flawed:  the
         Judge quite properly directed himself, including that  he  did  not
         have to accept the appellant's evidence on the grounds that it  was
         uncontradicted.  The Judge reminded himself that the appellant  had
         been found not to be a  witness  of  credibility  in  her  previous
         appeals and that he was required, in line with  the  principles  in
         Devaseelan  to  'take  note'  of  the  previous   'cogent   adverse
         credibility findings made against this appellant'.

     11. Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]  Imm
         AR 1 was approved by the Court of Appeal in Djebbar v Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department  [2004]  EWCA  804  and  concerned  a
         second appeal made on human rights grounds by  an  appellant  whose
         asylum appeal had previously been dismissed.  Paragraphs 39  to  42
         of the decision found as follows:

             "(1)      The first Adjudicator's determination should  always
             be the starting-point. It is the authoritative  assessment  of
             the Appellant's status at the time it was made.  In  principle
             issues such as whether the Appellant was properly represented,
             or whether he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.

             (2)   Facts   happening   since   the   first    Adjudicator's
             determination can always be taken into account by  the  second
             Adjudicator.

             (3)   Facts   happening   before   the   first   Adjudicator's
             determination but having no relevance to the issues before him
             can always be taken into account by the second Adjudicator.

             (4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were not  brought  to
             the attention of the first  Adjudicator,  although  they  were
             relevant to the issues before him, should be  treated  by  the
             second  Adjudicator  with  the  greatest  circumspection.   An
             Appellant who seeks, in a later appeal, to add  the  available
             facts in an effort to obtain  a  more  favourable  outcome  is
             properly regarded with suspicion from the  point  of  view  of
             credibility.. for this reason, the  adduction  of  such  facts
             should  not  usually  lead  to  any  reconsideration  of   the
             conclusions reached by the first Adjudicator.

             (5) Evidence of other facts - for example country  guidance  -
             may not suffer from the same concerns as to  credibility,  but
             should be treated with caution.

             (6) If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant  relies  on
             facts that are not materially different from those put to  the
             first Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim  by  what
             is in essence the same  evidence  as  that  available  to  the
             Appellant at that time, the second Adjudicator  should  regard
             the issues as settled by the first Adjudicator's determination
             and make his findings in line with that  determination  rather
             than allowing the matter to be relitigated ...

             (7) The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines  (4)  and
             (6) is greatly reduced if there is some very good  reason  why
             the Appellant's failure to adduce relevant evidence before the
             first Adjudicator should not be, as it were, held against him.
             We think such reasons will be rare."

     12. The appellant in her witness statement  before  Judge  Youngerwood,
         despite those previous findings that she had not  proved  that  she
         was not in contact with family in Somalia, maintained that she  had
         had no contact with her family since she left Somalia in 2006.   On
         the basis of the Devaseelan principles  Judge  Youngerwood  had  to
         treat the previous Tribunals' findings on that  evidence,  that  it
         was not credible,  as  a  starting  point.   The  Judge  noted,  at
         paragraph [16], that Mr Collins'  asked  the  appellant  about  the
         position  since  2011.   In  rejecting  the  appellant's   restated
         evidence that she  had  no  contact  with  her  family,  the  Judge
         considered all the evidence, including that the appellant  as  well
         as previously giving an  untruthful  account  had  also  previously
         produced two witnesses who were also found not credible.

     13. The Judge had correctly directed himself, at [6] as to the standard
         of proof in these appeals.  The Judge stated at  [16]  that  'these
         cogent adverse credibility findings, on the core of the appellant's
         claim, means, in terms, that she is  simply  not  a  person  to  be
         believed,  unless  she  is  able  to  produce  some  credible   and
         relatively  compelling  evidence  to  establish  that  either   the
         previous findings should not  be  followed,  or  that  since  those
         findings her circumstances have changed'.

     14. When his findings are read in their entirety the Judge has  neither
         elevated the standard of proof nor  required  corroboration.   What
         the Judge was saying, and did quite properly find (as stated in the
         next sentence), was that, given the application of  the  Devaseelan
         principles, he did  not  now  accept  the  'mere  assertion'  of  a
         previously discredited witness that she was not in contact with her
         family (and he considered that mere  assertion  in  the  round,  in
         light also of her partner's evidence).  That was clearly a  finding
         properly open to him (and it is difficult to see how he could  have
         come to a different finding on the evidence before him).

     15. In  relation  to  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the  appellant's
         partner's evidence, the Judge was quite clear in his findings  that
         none of the evidence before him was challenged  but  that  did  not
         mean he had to accept that evidence.  That  is  different  from  Mr
         Collins'  submission  that  the  Judge  was  incorrectly   applying
         Devaseelan principles  to  the  partner's  evidence.   The  Judge's
         treatment of the evidence makes it clear that he considered all the
         evidence including the fresh evidence from the  appellant  and  her
         partner, as he was bound to do, in the round. This included  noting
         that the appellant had previously been found to have  produced  two
         witnesses who were also  found  not  to  be  credible.   Whilst  Mr
         Collins  noted  there  were   no   adverse   credibility   findings
         specifically in relation to her partner, the Judge clearly did  not
         accept  that  his  evidence  in  relation  to  the  issue  of   the
         appellant's family was sufficient, finding that he:

             "... gave no detailed evidence as to why he was in a  position
             to confirm what the appellant was saying, apart from what  she
             might have told him ..."

     16. It was open to the Judge  when  considering  the  totality  of  the
         evidence, including  her  partner's  supporting  evidence,  not  to
         accept that the appellant had demonstrated  that  she  was  not  in
         contact with her family in Somalia, for the reasons he gave.  There
         was no material error in that approach.

     17. In addition and in the alternative there was  no  challenge  before
         the First-tier Tribunal to the previous findings that the appellant
         is not from a minority clan.  Therefore even if I am wrong  in  the
         above in relation to the Judge's approach to the appellant and  her
         partner's evidence about her family  connections  in  Somalia,  any
         error cannot be material given the Judge's findings  at  [18]  that
         she would in the  alternative  (to  support  from  relatives)  have
         support/protection as the member of a majority clan.  There  is  no
         merit in the first or second grounds.

    Ground 3

     18. The appellant's third ground discloses no arguable error of law and
         is no more than a disagreement with the Judge's findings.   It  was
         argued that Judge Youngerwood erred in respect of risk  in  Somalia
         to women generally and specifically the appellant and Mr Collins in
         his grounds of appeal to both Tribunals and before me relied on the
         most recent background material  as  he  submitted  that  the  most
         recent country guidance case of MOJ &  Ors  (Return  to  Mogadishu)
         Somalia [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) did not specifically  address  risk
         to women.

     19. The Judge gave detailed and careful consideration to the  issue  of
         risk on return. The Judge's findings are set out from [11] to  [18]
         He accepted that the appellant's partner and  child  would  not  go
         with her and that she would be returning to Somalia on her own.  He
         summarised Mr Collins' arguments including that there is a  general
         risk to women and in particular  to  lone  women  in  Somalia.   Mr
         Collins' arguments before me were made before Judge Youngerwood and
         addressed in  some  detail  by  him.   That  included  Mr  Collins'
         reliance on the 2015 CIG report and the Judge gave reasons at  [12]
         for finding that  this  was  'in  no  way  inconsistent'  with  the
         information derived from 2011.

     20. The appellant's home town is Afgoye and the Judge  found  that  the
         evidence did not demonstrate that the situation in relation to  the
         accessibility of travel to Afgoye from Mogadishu had  deteriorated.
         The Judge also found at [12] that this may have been  something  of
         an academic argument given Mr Collins' submissions in  relation  to
         the general risk to women and in particular lone women.

     21. However the Judge considered at [16] that the appellant had  failed
         to demonstrate that she was 'without the necessary  family,  friend
         or clan connections on return to  Somalia'.   Although  Mr  Collins
         asserted that it was not a question of the appellant having  family
         in Mogadishu as she is from Afgoye, the  Judge  had  this  in  mind
         including considered at  [17]  that  Mogadishu  is  very  close  to
         Afgoye. The Judge had  also  set  out  Mr  Collins'  arguments  and
         reliance on the background country information in relation  to  the
         situation for women, particularly lone women.

     22. Judge Youngerwood concluded, at [18] that  he  was  'not  satisfied
         that she would not be able to have the assistance of some  form  of
         'social support network as the member of a majority clan, or having
         the protection from a majority clan, or having access to funds from
         relatives  living  in  Somali'.   Given  all  that  the  Judge  had
         considered in reaching that conclusion it is clear he had  in  mind
         the evidence as to the difficulties for lone women in Somalia.  His
         findings were properly open  to  him  and  properly  reasoned.   It
         cannot be said that they had no rational basis.

    Decision:

     23. The appeal is dismissed.  The making of the decision of the  First-
         tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on a point  of
         law and shall stand.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:     Dated: 8 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

