
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03474/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Sent         |
|On 15 October 2013                         |                           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                                   MS A M
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr J Dhanji of counsel
           instructed by Haris Ali & Co
          For the Respondent: Mr J Saunders a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 9 February 1986 who has
      been given permission to appeal the determination of Immigration Judge
      M R Oliver who dismissed her appeal against the respondent's  decision
      of 11 March 2011 to give directions for her removal  from  the  United
      Kingdom following the refusal of asylum.


   2. Whilst I have not been asked to do so I consider  it  appropriate  and
      necessary to anonymise this determination  in  order  to  protect  the
      interests of the appellant and her young daughter.


   3. The appellant came to the UK on 13 July 2010 with leave as a  student.
      The leave was for a period expiring on 9 September 2011. At that  time
      she was pregnant and  her  daughter  was  subsequently  born  in  this
      country in October 2010. The appellant and her family  are  Sunni  and
      the father of her daughter and his family  are  Shia.  Their  families
      strongly disapproved of the relationship and they never  married.  The
      father having encouraged the appellant to come to this  country  where
      he said he would join her and they would  marry  subsequently  married
      somebody else and now  has  no  contact  with  the  appellant  or  his
      daughter. The appellant claimed that  when  they  discovered  she  was
      pregnant her parents threatened to kill her and her child  and  would,
      through their contacts and influence be able to find her  and  prevent
      her from obtaining protection from the authorities should  she  return
      to Pakistan. She claimed to fear persecution from them  and  generally
      as an unmarried mother if she was to return to any part of Pakistan.


   4. The respondent did not believe the appellant's account  of  events  or
      that she would be  at  risk  on  return  to  Pakistan.  The  appellant
      appealed and Immigration Judge Oliver heard her  appeal  on  18  April
      2011. Both parties were represented and the appellant  gave  evidence.
      Whilst the judge hesitated  about  some  aspects  of  the  appellant's
      evidence he found that there had been genuine threats from her father,
      she came from a wealthy family with connections with  the  police  and
      would get no protection from them, would find it virtually  impossible
      to live on her own with her daughter without means  and  support  and,
      although she would be eligible to be admitted to a woman's refuge, she
      would get minimal help and would not be able to  look  forward  to  an
      early or viable exit. If she returned to Pakistan she and her daughter
      would be at real risk  of  being  subjected  to  honour  killings.  He
      allowed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds. It appears that
      the human rights grounds were Articles 2 and 3; not Article 8.


   5. The respondent applied for permission to appeal arguing that the judge
      erred in law by failing to make clear findings  both  in  relation  to
      internal relocation and whether her family would be able to  find  her
      if she  returned  to  a  part  of  Pakistan  outside  her  home  area.
      Permission to appeal was granted and directions given. The appeal came
      before Designated Immigration Judge David Taylor on 30 August 2011. He
      concluded that Immigration Judge Oliver erred in law,  set  aside  his
      decision and proceeded to rehear the appeal. Having done so  he  found
      that the appellant was not a credible witness, declined to accept  the
      genuineness of two newspaper cuttings submitted by the appellant which
      she claimed had been advertisements placed by her  father  offering  a
      reward for discovering and reporting  her  whereabouts  and  concluded
      that she had no genuine fear of harm from her family and would not  be
      at risk on return. In the alternative he concluded that if she was  at
      risk she could relocate to a part of Pakistan other  than  her  former
      home area. Having set aside the decision of Immigration  Judge  Oliver
      he substituted his own  decision  and  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
      grounds.


   6. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.
      Permission was refused by an Upper Tribunal Judge. Although I  do  not
      have the grounds of appeal when the application  was  renewed  to  the
      Court of Appeal I do have the order of Black LJ dated 20 November 2012
      ordering by consent that the appeal be withdrawn and making  an  order
      as to costs. There was confusion as to the effect of the  order  which
      was amended by consent on 3 July 2013 to make it clear that the appeal
      was being remitted to the Upper Tribunal. The appeal  came  before  me
      for  a  directions  hearing  on  6   August   2013   with   the   same
      representatives as now appear before me. Mr Saunders told me  that  he
      had the advantage of studying the notes  prepared  by  the  Presenting
      Officer who appeared before Designated Immigration Judge David Taylor.
      Neither representative was aware of the existence of any Statement  of
      Reasons which I would have expected to  have  been  produced  for  the
      Court of Appeal. Mr Saunders submitted and  Mr  Dhanji  conceded  that
      Immigration Judge Oliver erred in law on one of the points  raised  in
      the grounds of appeal that is by failing to give adequate reasons  for
      the conclusion that internal relocation was not open to the  appellant
      and her daughter. Both representatives agreed that I should set  aside
      Immigration Judge Oliver's decision but  that  his  findings  of  fact
      should be preserved and the only outstanding issue  to  be  determined
      was that of internal relocation.


   7. I gave directions dated 6 August  2013  recording  these  matters  and
      setting out further steps to be taken by the parties. I agree with the
      course of action proposed by the representatives and the  reasons  for
      this. I set aside the decision of Immigration  Judge  Oliver  which  I
      must now remake on the  issue  of  internal  relocation  adopting  his
      findings of fact.


   8. I have two bundles submitted by the appellant's  representatives  with
      their letter of  16  September  2013.  The  first  bundle  includes  a
      skeleton argument and  a  supplementary  witness  statement  from  the
      appellant dated 16 September 2013 although  Mr  Dhanji  accepted  that
      this added little to  the  previous  witness  statements.  The  second
      bundle contains the country guidance case of KA and  others  (domestic
      violence - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC), extracts
      from the COI report of  9  August  2013,  extracts  from  the  OGN  on
      Pakistan dated January 2013, a report from the Immigration and Refugee
      Board of Canada dated 17 November 2010 and  a  report  from  Dr  Roger
      Ballard dated 4 January 2012. Mr Saunders submitted  an  extract  from
      the OGN dated January 2013.


   9. Mr Dhanji tendered the appellant for cross-examination but Mr Saunders
      indicated that he did not wish to cross examine her.


  10. In his submissions Mr Saunders relied on the OGN at paragraph  3.10.6,
      3.12.1 and 3.12.8.  He  also  referred  to  the  COIS  report  in  the
      appellant's bundle. Dr  Roger  Ballard's  report  disagreed  with  the
      findings in KA and KA should be preferred. He directed my attention to
      paragraph 265 of KA. Immigration Judge Oliver had done  no  more  than
      find that there was no evidence to undermine the appellant's assertion
      that her family would be able to find her.


  11. Mr Saunders argued that the appellant was an educated woman and  as  a
      result would be able to relocate and sustain herself. It would not  be
      unduly harsh to expect her to relocate to a part of  Pakistan  outside
      her home area. He asked me to dismiss the appeal.


  12. Mr Dhanji relied on his skeleton argument. The appellant was a  single
      woman now aged 27 with a three-year-old daughter. She was educated but
      did not have any professional qualifications. She had never worked and
      needed to look after her three-year-old daughter. She  would  have  no
      financial or emotional support in Pakistan either to  support  herself
      and her daughter or to provide trustworthy  childcare.  Her  long-term
      prospects were bad. Paragraph 10.6 of the  OGN  should  be  looked  at
      together with the COIR report at pages 55 to 62. There were  very  few
      women's shelters for the size of the population and those that existed
      were under resourced. It was difficult to obtain  admission.  Even  if
      the appellant and her daughter were able to obtain admission it  would
      only be a temporary solution. She had no male relatives  to  help  and
      protect her, indeed no relatives who would help her at all. She  would
      be vulnerable and at risk as an unmarried woman with  an  illegitimate
      child. He submitted that she fell squarely within  paragraph  239  and
      240 of KA.


  13. Mr Dhanji  argued  that  there  was  nowhere  in  Pakistan  where  the
      appellant and her daughter would be safe from  her  family  or  severe
      societal discrimination and the ill effects of this. I  was  asked  to
      allow the appeal.


  14. Mr Saunders indicated that he did not wish to reply.


  15. I raised with the representatives the question of the extent to  which
      the appellant had raised Article 8 human  rights  grounds.  Mr  Dhanji
      said he was not aware that she had. Very properly Mr Saunders drew  my
      attention to the skeleton argument before  Immigration  Judge  Oliver.
      All this does, in paragraph 26, is to state;  "it  is  also  submitted
      that  Articles  2,  3  and  8  of  the  ECHR  are  engaged".   Neither
      representative was able to draw my attention to any other way in which
      the appellant had sought to pursue Article 8 human rights  grounds.  I
      am also conscious that the appellant has said almost nothing about her
      private life in this country or, of even greater importance,  anything
      about  her  daughter,  her  health,  possible  pre-school   education,
      domestic  circumstances  or  status.  There  is  some  indication   of
      potentially severe difficulties in relation to her  daughter's  status
      because the appellant has been to  the  Pakistan  High  Commission  in
      London who have issued a letter which indicates that because no father
      is named on the daughter's UK birth certificate the  authorities  will
      probably not issue her with either a Pakistan passport or an  identity
      document. There are suggestions that  without  these  the  appellant's
      daughter may not be able to gain admission to Pakistan or, once there,
      have access to any of the benefits which may be provided by the state.
      There  is  also  the  suggestion  that  her  lack  of  a  passport  or
      registration document may  make  it  more  likely  that  she  will  be
      identified as a child born out of wedlock.


  16. I consider that in the circumstances of this case the need to  address
      Article 8 issues is obvious and should not be ignored.  However  I  am
      also conscious that neither side has addressed this  or  provided  the
      sort of information which would be needed if I was to  reach  informed
      conclusions. In the circumstances I accede to the request made by both
      representatives that I should  determine  the  appeal  on  asylum  and
      Article 3 human rights grounds only. Both agree that  the  asylum  and
      Article 3 human rights grounds stand or fall together.


  17. I reserved my determination.


  18. In assessing the evidence of the appellant  Immigration  Judge  Oliver
      set  out  and  weighed  a  number  of  factors  for  and  against  her
      credibility. Having done so and perhaps with some  hesitation  he  did
      accept that the appellant was a broadly credible  witness.  I  do  not
      consider that the sentence in paragraph 27; "There is no  evidence  to
      undermine the appellant's assertion that  she  comes  from  a  wealthy
      family with some connections with the police" when read with the  rest
      of the determination indicates that he did not believe  this  part  of
      her account.


  19. There are a number of facts which are not  disputed.  Combining  these
      with Immigration  Judge  Oliver's  findings  of  fact  and  his  broad
      acceptance  of  the  appellant's  credibility  I  make  the  following
      findings. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan now aged 27 who  came
      to this country legitimately as a student on 13  July  2010.  She  was
      pregnant. She has a daughter born here in October 2010  who  continues
      to live with her in this country. She  had  a  relationship  with  the
      father of her daughter, also a Pakistani citizen.  The  appellant  and
      her family are Sunni and the father of her daughter and his family are
      Shia. Both families strongly disapproved of the relationship and tried
      hard to bring it to an end. The father of  her  child  encouraged  the
      appellant to come to this country saying that he would  join  her  and
      they would get married. The appellant's father agreed that she  should
      come here to study; she thinks because he believed that it would  take
      her away from the man he disapproved of whilst he did  not  disapprove
      of education for his daughters. He planned  to  arrange  her  marriage
      when she had completed her studies.


  20. After the appellant arrived in this country the father  of  her  child
      would not take her calls, has since married somebody else and now  has
      no contact with the appellant or his daughter. On discovering that the
      appellant had given birth to a child her father made what she believed
      to be very real  threats  to  kill  her  and  her  daughter.  He  also
      indicated that he would make strenuous  efforts  to  track  them  down
      should they return to Pakistan. The appellant's family  is  relatively
      affluent and she believes that her father would  have  influence  with
      the police and the authorities which would help him track her down and
      prevent her from obtaining help and protection from the authorities.
  21. I follow and  adopt  Immigration  Judge  Oliver's  findings  that  the
      threats made by the appellant's father are genuine and  that  she  and
      her daughter would face a  real  risk  of  being  killed  in  "honour"
      killings were they to go to her family's home area. I also  adopt  the
      finding that the authorities would not provide the appellant  and  her
      daughter with a sufficiency of protection in that area.


  22. I find  that  whilst  the  appellant  is  an  educated  woman  from  a
      moderately wealthy family and an urban area she has never  worked  and
      does not have any professional or other qualifications. She would have
      no financial or other support from her family or anyone else and every
      incentive to avoid any contact with them. There is no indication  that
      she has any  money  to  help  support  herself  and  her  daughter  in
      Pakistan. Her ability to obtain work would  be  circumscribed  by  the
      need to make arrangements for the care of her daughter.


  23. KA states at paragraphs 236 to 240;


         "236.    We wish to emphasise, however,  that  what  emerges  very
         strongly from the Safe  to  Return?  report  is  that  it  is  not
         sufficient simply to consider the issue of internal  relocation  by
         reference   to   whether   there   are   available   and   adequate
         centres/refuges. Focus has to be not only on the provision but  the
         general position women who make  use  of  such  centres  will  find
         themselves in the longer term.


         237.     One of the main conclusions of the report is that there is
         a lack of after-care and rehabilitation and the absence of any  re-
         housing for women made homeless  following  violence.  Its  authors
         emphasise that this  fact  plays  a  major  role  in  limiting  the
         decisions and choices such women then go on to make (see para  11).
         But  the  report  also  informs  us  that   although   in   several
         centres/refuges, women are expected to  leave  after  a  relatively
         short time, those who run them do sometimes  allow  women  to  stay
         longer and sometimes even allow  them  back.  So  whilst  we  think
         the Safe to Return? report draws helpful attention to the need  to
         look at the longer-term situation such women face, we do  not  find
         that the evidence contained in this report  or  the  other  sources
         helps us very much in forming a clear picture of how women  victims
         of domestic violence who have  made  use  of  women's  centres  and
         refuges then resolve their difficulties in terms of finding  places
         to live and work. The Safe  to  Return?  report  argues  that  the
         position is that in general such  women  end  up  being  forced  to
         return  to  their  abuser   husbands/families   or   face   serious
         exploitation. But there is very little empirical evidence cited  in
         support of these broad generalisations and, given  the  numbers  of
         women said to use these services, we would have  expected,  if  the
         general position was that these centres/shelters  routinely  failed
         to end the cycle of oppression the women who  turn  to  them  face,
         that would have been evident in the form of more reported cases  in
         the press or in the Pakistan Human Rights Commission report  or  in
         available cases studies. Nevertheless, the uncertain state  of  the
         evidence makes it imperative in our view that  decision-makers  pay
         particular   regard   to   how   they    think    the    individual
         applicant/appellant will be able to manage getting  on  with  their
         lives after they have left the centres/refuges.


         238.    We need to consider further to what extent  other  factors
         such as class, age, culture, tribe, religion etc can further modify
         the position of women victims of domestic violence.


         239.    It is fairly clear that women who have their own financial
         means or access to financial help from family members or friends or
         who are well-educated or professional women are likely to  be  able
         to secure residential accommodation. We accept the observation made
         by the Safe to Return? authors that  possessing  a  class  status
         higher up the social ladder does not mean that such  women  do  not
         still face discrimination and a degree of stigmatisation.  However,
         even the authors themselves accept that  if  women  have  financial
         means they can in general survive (see 6.15) and  the  evidence  is
         lacking to indicate that such women are in general unable  to  cope
         with  such difficulties; although clearly some do not cope and some
         may even find they have lost more than poorer women (7.5.1) .


         240.    On the other hand, concerning age, it  would  appear  that
         most centres/refuges do not adequately cater for the needs of young
         girls on their own (Safe to Return?, 6.10) and  young  adult  women
         are likely to find it more difficult to live alone than others  (we
         note that is also the view taken by the Canadian  IRB  in  December
         2007)."


  24.  In the light of paragraph 265 and 266 of KA I find that there is only
      a remote possibility that if the appellant  returns  to  Pakistan  and
      relocates to an area outside that of her former family home her family
      would be able to track her down. Whilst her father is relatively  well
      off there is no sufficiently clear indication that he would be able to
      gain the help of the authorities  in  a  countrywide  search  for  the
      appellant.


  25. The OGN report of January 2013 shows and I find that there are centres
      in Pakistan catering for abused women and that although some  of  them
      are full beyond capacity and that their  total  number  is  not  great
      compared to the size of the population there is a reasonable  prospect
      that the appellant would be able to access a place for herself and her
      daughter. However, there are few which offer  longer-term  refuge  and
      she is not likely to be able  to  remain  in  a  centre  indefinitely.
      Whilst staying in such a centre her movements would be restricted  and
      there could be pressure to return to her family. In paragraph  3.10.11
      the respondent sets out three criteria which need to be  satisfied  if
      an individual is to qualify for asylum in this country. I  have  found
      that the appellant meets the first two of these and I  now  find  that
      she meets the  third  as  well.  While  she  may  be  able  to  access
      relatively short to medium-term accommodation in a centre she would be
      unlikely  to  obtain  state  support  and  would  have  a  justifiable
      reluctance to seek it. There is a real risk that the authorities would
      consider that she had committed adultery or fornication.  If  she  was
      prosecuted there would be a greater risk, amounting to  a  real  risk,
      that news of her presence in the country would get back to her family.
      Furthermore, in relation to the  third  criteria,  she  cannot  access
      financial or other support from her family or friends.


  26. In the light of what is said in paragraph 3.12.1 in relation to  women
      who fear becoming the victims of an  honour  crime  I  find  that  the
      appellant's position as a woman who fears her family is  very  similar
      to that of a woman who fears violence at the  hands  of  her  husband.
      Paragraph 3.13 also indicates the risk she faces, independently of any
      risk from her family, as a  woman  who  either  self-evidently  or  on
      little more than cursory investigation of her circumstances has either
      committed adultery or been guilty of the offence  of  fornication.  It
      would take little more  than  the  intervention  of  an  officious  or
      malicious individual to provoke  investigation  and  a  real  risk  of
      prosecution.


  27. I have studied the COI report in particular between pages 55  and  62.
      This reinforces my conclusions reached in the light of  the  OGN.  The
      Refworld report at pages 69 and 70 of the appellant's bundle  supports
      similar conclusions whilst emphasising the societal discrimination and
      difficulties which a woman, particularly of the  appellant's  age,  is
      likely to experience living alone in Pakistan without a male protector
      or family. She will be vulnerable, the more so as she will  be  living
      with a young child.


  28. Unlike the appellant in KA this appellant will have no family  support
      of any kind. On the contrary her well founded fears of her family  are
      likely to mean that she will always be looking over her  shoulder  and
      judging the safety of her actions against the risk of doing  something
      which might by one means or another cause her family to  discover  her
      whereabouts.


  29. Looking at all the appellant's circumstances in the round in the light
      of KA and the country information before me I find that the  appellant
      has established both a real risk of persecution and that her Article 3
      human rights are likely to be infringed. I find that that she does not
      have a viable internal relocation option.


  30. Having set aside the decision of Immigration Judge Oliver I remake the
      decision and allow the appellant's appeal  on  asylum  and  Article  3
      human rights grounds.


  31. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.  This  direction
      applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.











      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 16
      October 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
