
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03171/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th March 2016                           |On 12th April 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                    S H S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Chaudhry, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Gambia,  born  in  1983.  She  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey dismissing  her
    appeal against removal on asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds in a decision promulgated on 26th November 2015.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on the ground that the judge failed  to
    give adequate reasons for a finding  on  material  matters.  The  judge
    concluded that the Appellant will not be at risk on return as a  result
    of claiming asylum in the UK on the basis that she was lesbian  because
    there was an anonymity order in place. It is submitted that  the  judge
    materially erred in law in  concluding  that  this  was  sufficient  to
    protect the Appellant. This conclusion was further  undermined  by  the
    threat by the Gambian President. There was evidence  before  the  judge
    which showed that the   threat  was  enforced  against  asylum  seekers
    because the Gambian authorities treated asylum claims as tarnishing the
    image of the country.

3.   The judge erred in law in failing to determine the safety of the  route
    of return in accordance with HH (Somalia) and Others  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    426 and in failing to apply the appropriate test  in  relation  to  the
    risk to a failed asylum seeker set out  in  AA  (Risk  for  involuntary
    returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00061, namely, at paragraph 31:


         "The issue is whether the evidence establishes  a  real  risk.  The
         appellant does not need to show a certainty or a  probability  that
         all failed asylum seekers returned involuntarily will face  serious
         ill-treatment upon return. He needs to show only that  there  is  a
         consistent pattern of such mistreatment such that anyone  returning
         in those circumstances faces a real risk of  coming  to  harm  even
         though not everyone does. So is there is [sic] evidence pointing to
         a substantial number of cases in the context  of  general  evidence
         showing that involuntarily returned failed asylum seekers,  are  at
         real risk of being subjected  to  serious  ill-treatment,  on  that
         account alone? That requires a careful analysis of the evidence  as
         to what has happened to returnees and, of course,  of  the  country
         information which provides the background."


4.   It was submitted that in the case of Gambia it  had  been  passed  into
    law that failed asylum seekers or those who tarnish the  image  of  the
    country commit a treasonable offence. This was further declared by  the
    President on national television.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  M
    Holmes on 18th  December 2015 on the following grounds


         "The judge appears to have concluded  briefly  that  the  Appellant
         could return to the Gambia on her own passport and  that  anonymity
         to the decision meant that no one in the Gambia would know why  she
         had claimed asylum. It is  not  at  all  clear  whether  the  judge
         accepted, or rejected, the claim that there was real risk  of  harm
         to all those who were perceived to be failed  asylum  seekers,  or,
         only those who were perceived to have falsely claimed asylum on the
         basis of homosexuality or only to those who were  perceived  to  be
         homosexuals. That itself arguably amounted to an error of law.




         The judge's approach also begged a number of  unanswered  questions
         such as whether the Appellant's passport was still valid  and  thus
         whether there was a risk she would be returned on emergency  travel
         documents giving rise to the risk of perception as a failed  asylum
         seeker, whether the lack of any valid visa for the  UK  would  give
         rise to questioning at the airport, whether travellers returning to
         the UK were generally questioned about what immigration status they
         had and enjoyed there and whether the Appellant could  be  expected
         to lie in response."

Submissions

6.   Mr Chaudhry submitted that the issue was whether  the  Appellant  could
    return to Gambia safely as a failed asylum seeker. The Appellant  would
    be at risk travelling on a document she  had  obtained  from  the  High
    Commission.

7.   At paragraph 91 of the Appellant's bundle there was  an  internet  news
    report posted on 8th May 2014 which stated:


         "Gambian leader Yahya Jameh has warned asylum seekers  not  to  use
         this government's position on gays  and  lesbians  to  tarnish  his
         image as they attempt to resettle in the West as refugees.  APA can
         report Thursday. Speaking in Basse  in  the  upper  region  of  the
         country. President Jameh said those among his  compatriots  leaving
         the country to tarnish his image abroad are doing  so  at  his  own
         detriment.


         'Some people go to the west and claim they are gay and  that  their
         lives are at risk in the Gambia in order for them to be  granted  a
         stay in Europe. If I catch them I  will  kill  them,'  the  Gambian
         leader warned.


         According  to  him  the  British  authorities  have  realised   the
         untruthfulness of those claims which people use as  a  strategy  to
         stay in Britain.
         He said the British have decided to conduct a test  on  traveller's
         claiming to come from the Gambia and information to  confirm  their
         sexual orientation. Describing them as vermin, President Jameh  has
         been  on  record  as  threatening  gays  and  lesbians  with  stiff
         punishments if they were caught committing acts of homosexuality."

8.   Mr Chaudhry submitted that, although the judge took into  account  what
    the President had said, he did not take into account  the  entirety  of
    the  report.  The  President  was  threatening  all   asylum   seekers,
    particularly those claiming to be homosexual. The Appellant would be at
    risk because of the documents on which she travelled.  He relied on the
    skeleton argument which was before the judge in relation to this  point
    and submitted that the judge had failed to make any findings on it. The
    judge's finding that the Appellant could return on her own passport was
    perverse because she did not have a passport.


9.   Further, the Respondent had not  considered  the  Appellant's  mode  of
    return in the refusal letter and it was incumbent on the  judge  to  do
    so. There was insufficient reasoning in paragraphs 79 to 82 to  support
    the finding that the Appellant would not be  at  risk  on  return.  The
    Appellant would be detected because she had no leave to remain  in  the
    UK and this would lead to further interrogation of her  claim.  It  was
    not for the Appellant to mislead the authorities or to  lie  about  her
    whereabouts on return. The  judge's  conclusion  at  paragraph  82  was
    against the weight of the evidence.

10.  For the Respondent, Mr Duffy  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  appeal
    depended on a sound bite from a speech of the President and it was  not
    clear in what context the quote had been made. It was also made  almost
    two years ago in May 2014. There was  no  actual  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that failed asylum seekers were at risk on  return.
    Even if the judge had failed properly to set out his reasons on risk on
    return the error was not material because there was no evidence  before
    the judge to show that failed asylum seekers  who  had  claimed  to  be
    homosexual were at risk on return.

11.  The judge found that the Appellant was  not  homosexual  and  therefore
    she would not be at risk on return to Gambia.  The  Appellant  was  not
    lesbian and there was no evidence that failed asylum  seekers  were  at
    risk.

12.  Mr Chaudhry submitted that there was evidence that homosexuals were  at
    risk and those returned were likely to face questioning. The judge  had
    failed to make a finding on the mode of return  and  the  judge  should
    have been well  aware  that  the  Appellant  did  not  posses  her  own
    passport.

13.  Mr Duffy submitted  that  it  did  not  matter  whether  the  Appellant
    returned on her own passport or an emergency  travel  document  because
    there was no evidence before the  judge  to  show  that  she  would  be
    questioned on return or that she would be put at risk  because  of  the
    documents she produced.

Discussion and Conclusion

14.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    homosexual and gave cogent reasons for coming to that conclusion. There
    was no challenge to the judge's finding  in  that  respect.  The  judge
    rejected her claim that she was lesbian and rejected her claim that her
    actions in Gambia in the past may have given rise to a perception  that
    she was lesbian.

15.  The judge found that the Appellant had fabricated her asylum claim  and
    could return to Gambia of her own volition. He did not fail to  make  a
    finding on the safety of the method of return. The  Appellant  came  to
    the UK in 2014 on a visit visa using her own passport. A  copy  of  her
    passport appeared in the bundle valid from November  2012  to  November
    2017.
16.  In the skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal  there  was  no
    reference to the Appellant being at risk on return because she would be
    returned on an emergency travel document or on her  own  passport  that
    she had obtained from the High Commission  in  the  UK.  There  was  no
    background evidence to support the submission that returnees to  Gambia
    with such documents were questioned,  interrogated  or  indeed  of  any
    interest to the authorities.

17.  Accordingly, there was no error of law in the judge's failure  to  deal
    with this distinct issue, given that it was not argued before him,  was
    not apparent on the face of the papers  and  there  was  no  background
    material to support such a submission and therefore give  rise  to  the
    need to make a finding on it.

18.  The issue in this appeal was whether the Appellant would be at risk  on
    return as a failed asylum seeker or as a failed asylum seeker  who  had
    made a claim for asylum on the basis that she  was  homosexual,  albeit
    that that claim had indeed been rejected.

19.  Mr Chaudhry could direct me to no evidence in the  Appellant's  bundle,
    which was before the First-tier Tribunal, which showed that the Gambian
    authorities  questioned  people  on  return  who  were  travelling   on
    emergency travel documents. Indeed he  could  point  to  no  background
    evidence in the  Appellant's  bundle  which  demonstrated  that  failed
    asylum seekers in general were of interest to the authorities or indeed
    failed asylum seekers who had made a false claim  to  be  a  homosexual
    were of interest to the authorities.

20.  The only evidence which was before the First-tier  Judge  was  evidence
    of a statement from the President made in a speech in  2014  that  some
    people go to the west and claim they are gay and  their  lives  are  at
    risk in the Gambia in order for them to be granted a stay in Europe "If
    I catch them I  will  kill  them."  There  was  no  evidence  that  the
    authorities had indeed carried out the threat issued by  the  President
    or that asylum seekers whose claim to be homosexual had  been  rejected
    were at risk of harm on return to the Gambia.

21.  Accordingly, I find that the evidence which was before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was insufficient to show that the Appellant would be  at  risk
    on return either as a failed asylum seeker or as a failed asylum seeker
    who had claimed asylum on the basis  of  being  homosexual.  There  was
    insufficient evidence to show that travelling on  an  emergency  travel
    document or a document obtained from the  High  Commission  in  the  UK
    would put the Appellant at risk.

22.  In any event, any error in relation to the failure to make an  explicit
    finding on risk on return for failed asylum seekers  was  not  material
    because there was insufficient evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
    to support the conclusion that failed asylum  seekers  were  indeed  at
    risk.



23.  I conclude that applying the test of failed asylum seekers set  out  in
    AA the Appellant had failed to show that there was a consistent pattern
    of mistreatment such that anyone returning to the Gambia having claimed
    asylum on the basis of homosexuality faced a real  risk  of  coming  to
    harm. There  was  insufficient  evidence  pointing  to  any  case  that
    involuntary returned failed  asylum  seekers  were  at  risk  of  being
    subjected to ill-treatment.

24.  Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision of 26th  November 2015 and I dismiss the
    Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


           J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 30th March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 30th March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
