
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03764/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26th February 2016                  |On 18th March 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     a K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Johnstone (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Chandrasingh (Solicitor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department.  I  shall,  hereinafter,  refer  to  her  as  "the
    Secretary  of  State".   I  shall  refer  to  the  Respondent  as  "the
    Claimant".  The Secretary of State has appealed to the Upper  Tribunal,
    with permission, against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Hubball hereinafter "the Judge") allowing the Claimant's appeal against
    a decision of 19th February 2015  refusing  to  grant  him  asylum  and
    deciding to remove him from the UK by way of directions.

 2. The Claimant is a national of Turkey.  He claimed to have been born  on
    16th June 1994 but the Secretary of State did not believe him  and,  as
    it turns out, nor did the Judge.  The Judge concluded that, in fact, he
    had been born on 16th June 1994.  Be that as it may, he claimed  asylum
    on 16th November 2012 having come to the UK in possession  of  a  valid
    visa.  He said that, as a Kurd (and it is accepted that he is Kurdish),
    he had faced ill-treatment at the hands of the Turkish authorities.  He
    said that if he were to be returned to Turkey he would be forced to  do
    military service and that  he  had  conscientious  objections  to  that
    because he did not want to be put in a position where he would have  to
    kill people.   He  also  expressed  a  fear  of  a  Kurdish  separatist
    organisation known as the PKK, who  he  said  would  seek  to  forcibly
    recruit him.

 3. The Secretary of State, it is fair to say, comprehensively  disbelieved
    the Claimant's account of events in Turkey and the  various  claims  he
    had made.  So,  the  Respondent  refused  to  grant  him  international
    protection and the Appellant exercised his right  of  appeal.   He  was
    successful.   The  Judge  found  him  to  be  credible,  accepted   his
    explanation for various perceived inconsistencies in the account he had
    offered and concluded that he would be at risk on return at  the  hands
    of the Turkish authorities (in connection  with  the  military  service
    point) and the PKK.  He reached these  conclusions  having  heard  oral
    evidence and having received what appear to have been  quite  extensive
    and  detailed  oral  submissions.   The  relevant   determination   was
    promulgated on 1st June 2015.

 4. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds, which to some extent  have  the  flavour  of  a
    detailed re-argument about them, criticised the Judge  for  failing  to
    provide reasons or adequate reasons for certain of  his  findings.   In
    particular, it is asserted that he did not properly deal with  Facebook
    evidence which appeared to  suggest  that  the  Claimant's  father  and
    brother were at large at a time when the Claimant had  said  they  were
    detained by the Turkish authorities.  Further, the Judge, it was  said,
    had irrationally accepted that the Claimant's brother had been released
    from detention as a suspected PKK supporter so that  he  could  perform
    his own military service.  Further the Judge had failed  to  deal  with
    discrepancies in the Claimant's account regarding the claimed arrest of
    his father and brother.  Further, the Judge had failed to  explain  why
    he  was  accepting  much  of  what  the  Claimant  had  to  say  whilst
    simultaneously finding that he had lied about his  age.   Further,  the
    Judge had failed to explain his acceptance of the Claimant's claim that
    the PKK had extorted money  from  his  father  and  that  the  Claimant
    himself would be at risk of forcible recruitment to the PKK.  There was
    then a final ground to the effect that the Judge had failed to properly
    consider whether the Appellant was a genuine conscientious objector.

 5. Those grounds did not initially find favour, a Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal refusing to grant permission to appeal,  but  the  application
    was renewed and, on 24th August 2015 permission was granted by a  Judge
    of the Upper Tribunal who said this;

         "2.  I find that the contention that no account was taken of  those
             aspects of the Appellant's account that the Respondent did not
             accept, is taking matters too far.

         3.   However, having read the determination, I  am  persuaded  that
             this application demonstrates  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge may have made  an  error  of  law  in  failing  to  give
             adequate reasons for his findings on material matters.

         4.   A losing party is entitled to know why they lost and the Judge
             has arguably  failed  to  discharge  his  obligation  in  that
             regard, in this determination."

 6. There was then a hearing before me to consider whether the  Judge  had,
    indeed, erred in  law  and,  if  so,  what  should  follow  from  that.
    Representation at that hearing was as indicated above and I am grateful
    to each representative.

 7. Miss Johnstone, essentially, sought to rely upon the points  which  had
    been made in the grounds.  She indicated that her main challenge was in
    relation to the Judge's acceptance of the  Claimant's  credibility  and
    the explanation, or perhaps lack of it, for that acceptance.

 8. Ms Chandrasingh contended, in essence that the Judge  had  given  clear
    reasons for all of his findings, that irrationality  was  an  extremely
    high threshold which had not been reached and  that  the  conscientious
    objector issue had been adequately considered.

 9. The Judge's determination is a lengthy one.  It is apparent that he has
    approached  his  task  with  diligence.   He  has  set  out,  in   some
    considerable detail, the oral evidence he received and the lengthy  and
    detailed submissions which were made to him.   It  is  certainly  clear
    from a reading of the determination that he did, in large measure, find
    the Claimant to be a credible witness  (the  exception  being  the  age
    issue), that he did regard claimed inconsistencies in  the  account  as
    having been satisfactorily explained,  that  he  did  accept  what  the
    Claimant had had to say about his family's  previous  involvement  with
    the PKK, that he did believe the Claimant's claim that he would  be  at
    risk of forced recruitment by the PKK, that he accepted his  objections
    to military service were genuine and that, as such, he  could  properly
    be regarded as a conscientious objector (or at least a potential one in
    the event of refusal) who would be at risk in consequence.  Indeed, the
    Judge appeared to find that that risk was two-fold in the sense that if
    he did perform military service against his conscience the rationale in
    HJ (Iran)  and  HT  (Cameroon)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department 2010 UKSC 31 would apply and that, if he did not do  it,  he
    would  receive   disproportionate   punishment.    So,   although   the
    determination is not always wholly easy to follow, it is apparent, on a
    careful reading, that the Judge did make  findings  about  the  various
    matters he was required to.

10. As to the Facebook issue,  the  Judge  had  regard  to  the  Claimant's
    explanations, noting them at paragraph 43  of  the  determination.   He
    noted the submissions which had been made to him  about  the  issue  at
    paragraph 92 of the determination.   He  resolved  the  points  in  the
    Claimant's favour at paragraph 131 and 132, making  it  clear  that  he
    accepted the Claimant's evidence.  I did have a concern that, from  one
    perspective, it might  be  said  that  the  determination  contained  a
    summary of the evidence on the point and then the  findings  without  a
    sufficiently clear explanation as to how those findings had been  made.
    In other  words,  I  was  concerned  that  the  Judge  might  not  have
    adequately  explained  why  he   chose   to   accept   the   Claimant's
    explanations.  However, credibility was a matter  for  him.   He  heard
    extensive oral evidence from the Claimant and had that available to him
    alongside the written evidence.  Although he could have  said  more  it
    can be inferred that he found the explanations offered to be  plausible
    and believed them to the  lower  standard  applicable  (the  real  risk
    test).

11. There is then the contention that the Judge's acceptance of  the  claim
    that the Appellant's  brother  had  been  released  from  detention  to
    perform military service was irrational.  On the face of it,  it  would
    be most surprising if  the  Turkish  authorities,  having  arrested  an
    individual for suspected PKK involvement, the PKK  being  a  separatist
    anti-government organisation, would release such a  person  to  perform
    military service.  However, as Ms Chandrasingh points out and  as  Miss
    Johnstone recognised, albeit that  she  maintained  the  argument,  the
    threshold for irrationality is very high.  In my judgment,  whilst  the
    finding might  fairly  be  described  as  surprising,  that  particular
    threshold is not reached.

12. There are then the points regarding the  claimed  lack  of  explanation
    concerning discrepancies relating to the account of the arrest  of  the
    father and the brother and the lack of explanation as to why the claims
    with respect to the PKK were accepted.   It  is  apparent,  though,  as
    indicated, that the Judge did  find  the  Claimant  to  be  a  credible
    witness.  Credibility was, essentially, a matter for him and it was, of
    course,  open  to  him  to  accept  contentions  and  explanations  for
    discrepancies offered by the Claimant if he found that Claimant  to  be
    credible.  All of this comes down, again, therefore, to the question of
    whether there was sufficient explanation for the  positive  credibility
    assessment.  Here, I fully accept that the Judge could have  said  more
    than he did.  Nevertheless, it is clear he found  explanations  offered
    to him by the Claimant to be plausible.  To some extent that has to  be
    inferred but that can be done without  difficulty  or  without  falling
    into speculation when the determination is read  as  a  whole.   It  is
    clear, for example, that the Judge's view of the plausibility  of  what
    he had been told  led  him  to  make  the  findings  at  paragraph  127
    regarding the previous involvement of the family with the PKK  and  the
    findings he made at paragraph 128 that his father and brother had  been
    arrested, albeit, not at the same time.

13. I did wonder  whether,  with  respect  to  the  favourable  credibility
    assessment, the Judge ought to have said something further as to why he
    felt able to make such an  assessment  despite  his  finding  that  the
    Claimant had lied about his age.   The  determination  would,  perhaps,
    have been more complete had there been some explicit reference to that.
     However, the Judge clearly knew he had reached a negative  view  (from
    the Claimant's perspective) as to that and it  follows  that  he  would
    have taken that into account in making his other findings.  It was open
    to him to believe the bulk of an account offered to  him  even  if  one
    aspect of it was not to be believed.  What he did and did  not  believe
    was, essentially, a matter for him.

14. There is then the conscientious objector issue.  It  is  fair  to  say,
    though, that Miss Johnstone did not seek to pursue this  with  a  great
    deal of vigour before me, making it clear, as indicated above, that her
    primary attack was upon  the  Judge's  credibility  findings.   I  have
    already concluded that, despite some misgivings, what the Judge had  to
    say  about  all  of  that  was  sufficiently  sound.    I   accept   Ms
    Chandrasingh's submission that the  Judge  did  properly  consider  the
    conscientious objector issue with the  relevant  authorities  in  mind,
    even if not expressly referred to, and that he also properly considered
    and attached  weight  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  own  Operational
    Guidance when addressing  the  issue.   It  was  open  to  him,  in  my
    judgment, to conclude  that  the  Claimant  had  genuine  conscientious
    objections to service and that that was  properly  underpinned  by  his
    objection to killing.  It was then open to the Judge to conclude  that,
    on both of the above bases which he did (see above),  he  would  be  at
    risk as a consequence of his genuine objections.

15. I can understand why permission to appeal was  granted  in  this  case.
    The determination is sometimes a little difficult to follow but a  fair
    reading does reveal, in my judgment, that the  Judge  reached  findings
    and conclusions open to him on the evidence and which  were  adequately
    (and that  is  the  standard,  nothing  higher  than  that)  explained.
    Accordingly, I conclude that the Judge's decision did  not  involve  an
    error of law  and  shall  stand.   This  means,  of  course,  that  the
    Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the  making
of an error of law.  The decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is paid or payable and there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

