
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03006/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 July 2013                               |On 5 August 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                   mr s p

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Hena of Counsel instructed by Amirthan & Suresh
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 9 December  1989.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 February 2011 on  a  student  visa.
    Subsequently,  he  applied  for  asylum  on  28  February  2013   which
    application was refused by the respondent on 20 March 2013.

2.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Jhirad on  30  April  2013.   She
    dismissed his appeal in all respects.

3.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that  decision  and  leave  to
    appeal was granted on 31 May 2013.  In a letter of  14  June  2013  the
    respondent indicated that it was her  contention  that  the  judge  had
    directed herself appropriately.

4.   Thus, the matter comes before me in pursuance of the grant of leave.

5.   The determination was very short.  That  by  itself  is  no  reason  to
    offer criticism.  It is of concern to me that a number of matters  were
    omitted from consideration.

6.   The primary burden of the submissions made by Ms Hena on behalf of  the
    appellant is directed to the approach taken by the judge to the medical
    report which had been presented before her.

7.   Essentially, the appellant had a number of scars to his body  which  he
    said arose from  ill-treatment  which  he  had  received.   The  report
    supported the possibility of  those  scars  being  caused  in  the  way
    alleged although indicated that an accidental causation  could  not  be
    excluded.

8.   However, in relation to scars 2 and 3 which  were  to  the  ankle,  the
    doctor  agreed  that  they  were  typical   of   injuries   caused   by
    intentionally being beaten with a blunt object implement.   The  number
    of the scars and the clustering of scars around the  ankle  is  however
    suggestive of a non-accidental cause.  The  doctor  considered,  having
    regard to the direction and pattern of the scars that the  most  likely
    explanation was intentional injuries caused by beating.

9.   Clearly, that report was an important part of the  evidence  in  favour
    of the appellant.  It is dealt  with  very  briefly  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 9 of the determination. The judge attaches little  weight  to
    the medical report because the symptoms are classified as  non-specific
    and could  have  other  causes  other  than  that  as  alleged  by  the
    appellant.  Complaint is made in the grounds of appeal that  the  judge
    has not engaged with what the expert had to say on the matter.   It  is
    contended that the judge was unduly dismissive of the report.

10.  It seems to me that that is  a  meritorious  consideration,  indeed  Mr
    Saunders, who represents the respondent, most fairly indicated that  he
    was not arguing strongly in the favour of the finding.

11.  The claim of the  appellant  taken  at  its  highest  is  that  he  was
    arrested on 9 August for ten to thirteen days, where he  sustained  his
    injuries.  Thereafter, he was required to sign on at the army camp once
    a week for a lengthy period.  Eventually he  broke  his  conditions  of
    bail and came to the United Kingdom.

12.  He was arrested on 26 September 2008  along  with  his  father  because
    weapons stored by the LTTE were  found  at  the  temple.   Subsequently
    although he fell to be charged with his father, bribery resulted in his
    name not appearing on the charge sheet and his release  being  secured.
    Nevertheless, it  was  his  case  as  advanced,  that  the  authorities
    retained an interest in him and had visited his home  on  a  number  of
    occasions following his departure from Sri Lanka.  Seemingly  there  is
    an arrest warrant that is in the possession of his family for him.

13.  Although  the  judge  found  the  account  of  the  appellant  to  lack
    credibility for a number of reasons, there has been no assessment as to
    risk on return in the light of the then country guidance case of LP.

14.  Mr Saunders submits that even were there to be an error of law  in  the
    assessment of credibility and in  the  evaluation  of  the  appellant's
    case, it would make little difference in the light of GJ & Others (post
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  He submits
    that the category of persons who would be at risk did not  include  the
    appellant in his situation and circumstances.  Even taking his case  at
    its highest, for the purpose of these proceedings, he would not  be  at
    risk on return.  It seems  to  me  however  that  that  is  perhaps  to
    oversimplify the situation.  It would depend upon whether an  appellant
    is on the "watch list".  It seems to be accepted in the course  of  the
    decision that those  returning  as  failed  asylum  seekers  are  often
    interviewed at the airport.  If they are of no particular  interest  to
    the authorities they will be allowed to proceed.  However, it may  well
    be the case that they would be visited also at their home  address  and
    questioned.

15.   My  attention  was  drawn,  particularly  to  paragraph  170  of  that
    decision, that those leaving  Sri  Lanka  without  difficulty  was  not
    probative of a lack of adverse interest in an individual.  In turn  the
    computers at the airport held two lists, a "stop list" comprising names
    and bio data details of individuals against  whom  there  is  either  a
    court order or an outstanding arrest warrant  and  a  "watch  list"  of
    those whose activities the authorities wish to  monitor.   Those  on  a
    stop list will be stopped at the airport and  passed  to  the  relevant
    security service in accordance with the order or warrant.

16.  It seems to me therefore that the  issue  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant is credible or whether or not he is the  subject  of  adverse
    interests of the authorities such as to call into being a  warrant  for
    his arrest is a material  matter  that  is  capable  of  effecting  the
    outcome of return.

17.  In all the circumstances I find  that  there  has  been  an  inadequate
    consideration of the appellant's case such that there should be  a  re-
    hearing, de novo, before the First-tier Tribunal.   I  have  considered
    paragraph 7 of the Senior President's Practice Direction.

Directions

(1)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Jhirad shall be set aside.

(2)  There shall be a re-hearing de novo before the First-tier Tribunal.

(3)  An interpreter in the Tamil language is required.

(4)  Any further documentation - evidence should be served no later  than  5
    days before the hearing.  It is clearly  a  matter  for  the  appellant
    whether he seeks to obtain the arrest warrant held by his family, it is
    a reasonable expectation that he should.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
