
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
AA/03722/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 27 June 2016                           |On 04 July 2016             |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                                     I S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms G Patel instructed by Broudie Jackson and Cantor
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction. An anonymity direction was made previously and shall
   continue.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge McAteer promulgated on 9 July  2015  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to  remove  the
   Appellant from the UK following the decision to  refuse  the  Appellant's
   claim for asylum
Background
4. The Appellant was born on 29 October 1986 and is a  national  of  Gambia.
   The Appellants case was that she was in  2004  the  victim  of  a  forced
   marriage in that her family were poor  and  a  Mr  S  had  paid  for  her
   education up to the age of 18 and she was then forced to marry  him.  She
   claims to have been the victim of domestic abuse, assault and  rape.  She
   claims to have had two children by her husband,  a  son  in  2006  and  a
   daughter in 2008. She claims that she came to visit her sister who  lived
   in the UK in 2012 and that she came with her mother leaving her  children
   in Gambia.
5. On 19 August 2014 the Appellant  applied for asylum.
6. On 18 February 2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application.
The Judge's Decision
7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge  Mc  Ateer  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the   appeal   against   the
   Respondent's decision. The Judge found :
   a) The Appellant was a citizen of Gambia.
   b) She accepted that the background material showed that forced  marriage
      was common in Gambia and there was insufficient state  protection  and
      internal relocation was not an option.
   c) She found that the Appellant was not a  credible  witness  as  to  the
      circumstances in which she left Gambia and came to claim asylum in the
      UK and set out the reasons why she had come to that conclusion.
   d) She accepted that the Appellant was married but reached no  conclusion
      as to whether she accepted that the Appellant had children because  of
      the discrepancies in the documentary evidence.
8. Grounds of appeal were lodged on June 21 2015  arguing  that  the  Judges
   credibility findings were unsafe but permission was refused by First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Froom on 3 August 2015. The application was  renewed  with
   grounds dated 17 August 2015 and on  16  September  2015  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Gill gave permission to appeal.

9. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Ms  Patel  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that (a) She relied on both sets of grounds.

   (b) She argued that the Appellants inability  to  be  precise  about  her
   husbands age should not have been held against  her  as  she  was  always
   consistent that he was older than her.

   (c) The apparent contradiction about the reason she gave  for  coming  to
   the UK was not a contradiction at all  as  the  online  application  made
   clear that she intended to come to the UK on 20 July 2012 after the  baby
   was born.

   (d) Her application for a visit visa and failure to set out the  problems
   she was having was her way of escaping ill treatment.

   (e)Her failure to claim on arrival had to be looked at in the round.

   (f) She suggested that the Judge had made no clear finding as to  whether
   the Appellant had children and this was important  evidence  relevant  to
   the issue of how desperate she felt to leave them behind.

   (g) She Judge focused too much on events in the UK.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison submitted that:

   a) He relied on the Rule 24 response.

   b) The Appellants application for a visit visa was  fraudulent  from  the
      beginning as she had no intention of returning to the Gambia  but  she
      made no attempt to claim asylum on arrival in the UK.

   c) The Judge set out reasons why she did not find  the  Appellant  to  be
      credible and the weight she gave to those findings was  a  matter  for
      her.

11. In reply Ms Patel on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

   a) People who were desperate were sometimes  forced  to  make  fraudulent
      applications to escape persecution.

   b) The delay in her  claim  was  because  she  was  unfamiliar  with  the
      authorities. While this  undermined  her  credibility  it  had  to  be
      balanced with the other evidence.

The Law

12.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Nor is it necessary to consider  every  possible
   alternative inference consistent with truthfulness because an Immigration
   judge concludes that the story told is untrue. In Mibanga v  SSHD  [2005]
   EWCA Civ 367  Buxton  LJ  said  this  in  relation  to  challenging  such
   findings:
      "Where, as in this case, complaint is made  of  the  reasoning  of  an
      adjudicator in  respect  of  a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
      credibility),  particular  care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that   the
      criticism is as to the fundamental approach of  the  adjudicator,  and
      does not merely reflect  a  feeling  on  the  part  of  the  appellate
      tribunal that it might itself have  taken  a  different  view  of  the
      matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

15. The issue in this case was whether the Appellant had  given  a  credible
   account of her circumstances in Gambia, that she  was  the  victim  of  a
   forced marriage when she was 18 years old because  her  poor  family  had
   felt obliged to the man who had funded her education.

16. In an extremely detailed and careful analysis  of  the  documentary  and
   oral evidence before her the Judge set out a number of  reasons  why  she
   did not find the Appellant to be a credible witness and  the  weight  she
   gave each of those findings were a matter for her.

17. I do not accept that the Judge focused on her  actions  in  the  UK  but
   rather she focused on what she identified as  inconsistencies  throughout
   her evidence both in relation to her  circumstances  in  Gambia  and  her
   behaviour in the UK.  Thus I am satisfied that it was open to  the  Judge
   at paragraphs 75-76 to  find  that  those  facts  which  underpinned  her
   account of a forced marriage, that her family  were  poor  and  therefore
   agreed to the marriage to  the  man  who  paid  for  her  education,  was
   inconsistent with her mother's claim in her visa application to own  land
   and to find that the documentary evidence she produced  did  not  support
   her  claim  that  the  land  had  little   value.    There   were   other
   inconsistencies noted in the refusal letter which the  Judge  could  also
   have taken into account as  to  how  the  visa  application  appeared  to
   suggest that since birth she had lived at her family home rather than  in
   what she now claimed were her husband's properties in Backau or Yundum.

18.  The  Judge's  finding  that  her  credibility  was  undermined  by  her
   inability to be clear as to her husband's age is challenged in the  first
   of the grounds. I note of course  that  this  was  one  of  many  adverse
   credibility findings the Judge made and I am  satisfied  that  given  the
   Judges findings that she was reasonably well educated and they  had  been
   married for 8 years and that the Appellant had given a date of birth  for
   her husband in the visa application it was open to her to find  that  her
   subsequent inability to give clear evidence about this issue was  one  of
   the factors that rendered her evidence vague and lacking  in  detail  and
   undermined  her  credibility.  I  do  not  accept  that  there   is   any
   inconsistency between the Judge accepting that the Appellant was  married
   (paragraph 101) and her finding that her inability to be clear about  her
   husband's age: she explained that her concern was the Appellants evidence
   lacked detail given that they had been married for 8 years. She was  also
   entitled to note that although the  Appellant  claimed  to  still  be  in
   contact with her mother who could have provided  supportive  evidence  in
   relation to all of the issues before the Judge  there  was  no  statement
   from her or explanation as to why she had not provided one.

19. It is argued that the Judge was not entitled to conclude that there  was
   a discrepancy in the reasons given for why the Appellant wanted  to  come
   to the UK. The Judge had before her a copy at C2 of the ECO's notes which
   suggested that the Appellant wished to be present at  the  birth  of  her
   sister's child whereas in her witness statement and  oral  evidence  that
   she wished to attend the naming ceremony. It is suggested that the online
   application (C 8) showed that her intended date of  travel  was  20  July
   2012 she clearly never  intended  to  be  present  at  the  birth.  I  am
   satisfied that this point is arguable and does not appear  to  have  been
   specifically raised in the hearing  (I  have  looked  at  the  record  of
   proceedings) but I also find that  as  it  is  one  of  many  credibility
   findings made by the Judge that any failure to raise it  in  the  hearing
   made no material difference to the outcome of the hearing.

20. The Judge had the opportunity to hear the Appellant give  oral  evidence
   and address the discrepancies that the Respondent argued were inherent in
   her evidence. I am satisfied that the Judge set out a careful examination
   of the discrepancies in the light of the documentary  and  oral  evidence
   but makes findings that were open to her as to why she concluded that the
   Appellants credibility was undermined by her failure to claim  asylum  on
   arrival in the UK against the background of her assertion that she  never
   intended to return to Gambia and was a reasonably well  educated  person:
   those findings appear at paragraph 58 onwards. It was open to her to find
   that the Appellants failure to approach the  authorities  was  incredible
   given her apparent willingness to trust a complete stranger,  the  Somali
   lady who she claims she went to live with for 18 months or indeed Michael
   the male who she says assisted her in making her  claim  (paragraphs  64-
   69).

21. I do not accept that the Judge made no clear findings as  to  her  claim
   to have children. Indeed she makes clear at paragraph 102 that  that  she
   was unable  to  make  a  finding  given  her  concerns  about  the  birth
   certificates produced for which she gives detailed reasons  at  paragraph
   99-100.

22. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set
   aside) Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote  (1):  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."  I was therefore satisfied that  the
   Judge's determination when read as a whole set  out  findings  that  were
   sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.

25. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008  9as
   amended)  the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout   these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.

Signed                                                              Date
3.7.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

