
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03192/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2015                          |On 4 March 2015               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                    M. M.
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal comes back before me today pursuant to  the  decision  made
    in respect of 'error of law' at a hearing on  12  December  2014.   The
    'Error of Law' decision is  appended  to  this  decision  for  ease  of
    reference.  In that decision I found that whilst aspects of the  First-
    tier Tribunal's fact-finding in respect of events leading  up  to,  and
    reasons for, departing Iran were  unimpugnable  there  was  a  material
    error of law in respect to the Appellant's post-exit activities and  in
    particular his work as a musician:  see  'Error  of  Law'  decision  at
    paragraphs 12-15.

2.   Directions were given at that hearing  in  respect  of  the  filing  of
    further evidence, and further evidence has now been filed on behalf  of
    the Appellant by way of a supplementary  bundle  of  documents  in  two
    sections, sections S and T, and a further  couple  of  documents  under
    cover of a letter dated 26 February being supporting  evidence  from  a
    poet and songwriter to whom I shall refer as A (his full details are  a
    matter of record on file).


Preliminary Issue

3.   Before me today Ms Brocklesby-Weller  raised  a  preliminary  point  in
    respect of a forthcoming 'country guidance' case in the linked  appeals
    AA/04493/2011, AA/13363/2011 and AA/04380/2011.  Those cases have  been
    heard by the Upper Tribunal, and I was shown a letter dated 3  February
    2015 from the Principal Resident Judge at Field House  indicating  that
    it is hoped that decisions will be available soon.  It is said that the
    facts of those particular cases relate in particular to the  'blogging'
    activities of the individual appellants.  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  sought
    an adjournment to await the outcome  of  those  linked  appeals  before
    proceeding to a conclusion in the current case.  Mr Gayle opposed  that
    application, submitting that the instant case stood on  its  own  facts
    which were significantly different from the activities of a blogger.

4.   I accept Mr Gayle's submission in this regard. In the  absence  of  any
    more detailed information concerning the facts of the  awaited  country
    guidance cases, and bearing in mind the issues  and  evidence  in  this
    particular case, I am satisfied that it is appropriate to  proceed  and
    that an adjournment is not warranted to ensure  fair  disposal  of  the
    appeal.


Consideration

5.    In  remaking  the  decision  I  have  had  regard  to   the   relevant
    jurisprudence in respect of claims for  protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and the ECHR, and for humanitarian protection.

6.   In particular I have reminded myself that it is for  the  Appellant  to
    show that he or she is a refugee.

7.   By Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention a refugee is  a  person  who
    is out of the country of his or her nationality and  who,  owing  to  a
    well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  reasons  of  race,  religion,
    nationality or membership of a particular  social  group  or  political
    opinion, is unable  or  unwilling  to  avail  him  or  herself  of  the
    protection of the country of origin.

8.   The  degree  of  likelihood  of  persecution  needed  to  establish  an
    entitlement to asylum is decided  on  a  basis  lower  than  the  civil
    standard of the balance of probabilities.   This  is  expressed  as  'a
    reasonable chance', 'a serious possibility' or 'substantial grounds for
    thinking' in the various authorities. That  basis  of  probability  not
    only applies to the history of the matter and the situation at the date
    of decision but also to the question of persecution in  the  future  if
    the Appellant were to be returned.  In accordance with the judgment  in
    Karanakaran [2000] EWCA Civ 11 it is an evaluative process of a  single
    composite question: see in particular paragraphs 50, 56 and  98-104  of
    the judgment of Lord Justice  Brooke,  and  paragraphs  14-19  of  Lord
    Justice Sedley's judgement.

9.    It  is  the  Appellant's  case  that  his  activities  as  a  musician
    constitute anti-regime activity, or alternatively activity inconsistent
    with the values that the regime seeks to impose upon its  subjects,  to
    an extent that he would be of adverse interest amounting to persecutory
    harm if he were to be returned to Iran at the present time.  In support
    of his case he relies upon the materials now filed, in addition to  the
    materials before the First-tier Tribunal to demonstrate his  activities
    as a musician.

10.  In the premises,  the  Respondent  accepts  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    musician. See the 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') of 2  May  2014
    at paragraph 27, where the Respondent refers to accessing  one  of  the
    Appellant's videos on YouTube and also conducting a Google search using
    the Appellant's name.

11.  The materials now filed in the supplementary bundle are accompanied  by
    a DVD and by a witness statement signed on  13  February  2015  by  the
    Appellant explaining  the  contents  of  the  DVD  and  the  additional
    supporting materials.

12.  After viewing the DVD Ms Brocklesby-Weller indicated that she  did  not
    wish to question the Appellant in respect of his witness statement, and
    accordingly subject to  playing  the  DVD  in  open  court  the  appeal
    proceeded by way of submissions.

13.  I have made a note of the submissions in  the  Record  of  Proceedings,
    which is on file, and I have had regard to everything that was said  at
    the hearing in reaching my decision.

14.  The Appellant relies in particular on the following matters:

    (1)  A song called 'Ehsas'  (that  translates  as  'Feeling'),  and  an
         accompanying video uploaded in 2012.   This  song  and  video  were
         produced prior to the Appellant's exit from  Iran.   The  Appellant
         describes the song in his witness statement as "an  innocuous  love
         song"  but  draws  attention  to  the  romantic  imagery   in   the
         accompanying video, in particular a  woman  appearing  without  any
         head covering.


    (2)  A song, 'Tomorrow', and accompanying video.   The  video  to  this
         song was uploaded to the internet in May 2014.  The lyrics  to  the
         song are set out in translation  at  page  S4  of  the  Appellant's
         supplementary  bundle.   They  make  reference  to  'fighting   for
         tomorrow' and 'battling' together.  The imagery  accompanying  this
         song constitutes a number of still pictures  and  pieces  of  video
         footages depicting of anti-regime demonstrations  and  the  putting
         down of such demonstrations by force.


    (3)  A song 'The Beauty in Chains', and accompanying video.  This piece
         was only uploaded two days prior to the hearing.  The  accompanying
         video is a still graphic made up of the border outline of Iran with
         a line drawing rendition of the Appellant's face  appearing  within
         the outline.  The Appellant's name also  appears  on  the  graphic.
         The lyrics to the song - which are  reproduced  in  translation  at
         pages S6-S7 of the Respondent's bundle - are in my judgment overtly
         political.  They characterise the Appellant's homeland as the 'home
         of destruction', also referring to it as a 'lifeless' homeland,  "a
         land heartsick with lifelessness" and a "chained beauty".


    (4)  Footage of the video to 'Tomorrow' being shown on  two  television
         programmes: one broadcast on 14  August  2014  on  Manoto  TV;  and
         another broadcast on 21 August 2014 on a channel called  Barandazan
         (which translates as 'the overthrowers'.


    (5)  Footage of the Appellant being interviewed on a programme "A  Talk
         with Sirvash Amani"  on  the  Iran  REA  channel.   The  translated
         transcript of this  interview  is  reproduced  in  the  Appellant's
         supplementary bundle at pages S10-S12.  I  note  from  the  lengthy
         spoken piece  by  the  Appellant  during  the  discussion  on  that
         television programme that he expressed words to the effect that  he
         considered it an honour to be able to perform this particular  song
         which gave voice to the people of  Iran,  and  he  also  encouraged
         people to unite and think for only freeing Iran.


15.  I have no hesitation  in  concluding  that  the  songs  and  images  of
    'Tomorrow'  and  the  song  of  'The  Beauty  in  Chains'  are  overtly
    political, that they have been uploaded to the internet and  they  have
    attracted attention in the Diaspora and media, and that the  video  for
    'Tomorrow' has been broadcast through television channels  as  well  as
    being available to view on the internet.  It is also the case that  the
    Appellant has been  interviewed  in  respect  of  this  video  and  has
    expressed opinions concerning the unity of the people and advocating  a
    movement towards freedom.

16.  In those  circumstances  the  issues  become  the  likelihood  of  such
    activities being known to the authorities in Iran, and whether they are
    such as to give rise to an adverse interest in the Appellant.

17.  In this context I  do  not  accept  the  premise  of  the  Respondent's
    primary submission today, that in the absence  of  actual  evidence  of
    actions taken against the Appellant's family in  Iran  or  other  overt
    evidence  of  adverse  interest  in  the  Appellant  that   he   cannot
    demonstrate an entitlement to  protection.   What  is  germane  is  the
    question of risk, and that may be evaluated  by  reference  to  country
    information in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  relating  directly  or
    specifically to the Appellant.  In this context, for the  avoidance  of
    any doubt, I do not accept that the fact that  the  Appellant's  family
    may not have been targeted in his absence is reliably indicative of  an
    absence of risk to the Appellant.

18.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller did  not  seek  to  direct  my  attention  to  any
    particular item of country information or background evidence, but  did
    acknowledge that the case of BA (Demonstrators in  Britain  -  risk  on
    return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) constituted the  most  recent  and
    relevant  country  guidance.   That  case  is  primarily  directed   at
    participants in rallies and demonstrations,  but  it  does  nonetheless
    contain relevant guidance both generally and specifically  with  regard
    to persons who might be perceived as opponents of the regime.  From the
    headnote I note in particular the contents at paragraph 4 in respect of
    'sur place'  activity,  identification  risk,  and  factors  triggering
    inquiry or action on return, and in particular the issue of  profile  -
    "is the person  known  as  a  committed  opponent  or  someone  with  a
    significant political profile; does he fall within a category which the
    regime regards as especially objectionable?"

19.  By way of background  information  it  is  also  germane  to  note  the
    contents of paragraphs 60 and 61 of the Respondent's RFRL, which are in
    the following terms:

         "60. With regard to your risk on return  because  of  your  claimed
             political activity in the UK, it is noted that  the  US  State
             Department 2010 Report of Human Rights in Iran states that:

                  'The   government   monitored   Internet   communications,
                  especially  via  social  networking  Web  sites  such   as
                  Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube, and collected individuals'
                  personally identifiable  information  in  connection  with
                  peaceful expression of views.  The government  threatened,
                  harassed, and arrested  individuals  who  posted  comments
                  critical of the government on the Internet; in some  cases
                  it reportedly  confiscated  their  passports  or  arrested
                  their family members....  Freedom House  and  other  human
                  rights organisations reported that  authorities  sometimes
                  stopped citizens at Tehran International Airport  as  they
                  arrived in the country,  asked  them  to  log  into  their
                  YouTube and Facebook accounts, and  in  some  cases  found
                  them to delete information.'


         61.  Similarly, on 4 December 2009 the Wall Street Journal reported
             that:


                  'In recent months Iran has been conducting a  campaign  of
                  harassing and intimidating members of its diaspora  world-
                  wide - not just prominent dissidents - who  criticise  the
                  regime, according to former Iranian lawmakers  and  former
                  members of Iran's elite security force, the  Revolutionary
                  Guard, with knowledge of the program.  Part of the  effort
                  involves  tracking  the  Facebook,  Twitter  and   YouTube
                  activity of Iranians around  the  world,  and  identifying
                  them at opposition protests abroad, these people say.'"

20.  Necessarily the Appellant's  activities  go  beyond  mere  comment,  or
    reposting,  or  reTweeting  information  on  his  own  personal  social
    networking pages.   It  is  his  works  -  for  some  of  which  he  is
    responsible for the lyrical content, and in some of which he appears as
    the vocal artist - that carry a message that it is hoped will be viewed
    and shared by others.

21.  In respect of profile, in my judgment in addition to the  broadcast  of
    the Appellant's works and his invitation to participate in a  broadcast
    discussion, it is also relevant to note the evidence  provided  by  the
    Iranian poet A by way of a supporting letter dated 24 February 2015  in
    which he refers to the Appellant as a  'voice  of  the  modern  Iranian
    people' and as 'an  atheist  artist',  who  has  offered  his  artistic
    contribution  to  support  the  secular  movement  of  his  birthplace.
    Attached to the supporting letter is a biography of A  which  indicates
    his own particular anti-regime profile. I accept  the  submission  that
    the Appellant's association with such an individual is relevant  to  an
    evaluation of the Appellant's own profile.

22.  I also  note  that  in  the  supplementary  bundle  the  Appellant  has
    provided a petition organised by the Federation of Iraqi Refugees.   As
    part of that petition it is stated that the Appellant "is a  well-known
    Iranian atheist, famous singer and  songwriter",  and  that  he  became
    involved in politics following the 2009  Green  Revolution.   It  is  a
    petition urging that the Appellant be allowed to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom.  In isolation that  document  might  be  criticised  as  being
    essentially self-serving.  However, in context it is broadly consistent
    with the other materials on file in respect of the Appellant's  profile
    and in those circumstances I accord it weight as  further  evidence  of
    the Appellant's profile.

23.  In respect of country information Mr Gayle directed me to a  number  of
    extracts in the materials that have been submitted in  support  of  the
    Appellant's case, and in particular I note the  following  two  reports
    that appear at pages B17 and B25 of the  bundle  that  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

24.   At  B17  is  a  report  dated  11  December  2013  produced   by   the
    International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran entitled "International
    Campaign  for  Human  Rights  in  Iran,  IRGC   Forces   Arrest   Music
    Distributors, Pressure Them to Confess on Television".  From that  item
    I note in particular the following:

         "Since the establishment of the Islamic Republic  of  Iran  Iranian
         musicians have needed government authorisation  in  order  to  play
         their music, hold concerts and produce  music  albums  and  videos.
         Government scrutiny of such musical activities and productions  has
         been stringent and only certain genres of music receive  production
         and activity licences.  Under  such  circumstances  musicians  have
         been pushed underground where they perform illegally at great  risk
         to themselves and to their audiences.  Even when musical groups are
         issued concert licences there is no guarantee that they can  safely
         hold their scheduled appearances.  At an August concert of Dawn  of
         Rage, an Iranian metal band, all the musicians and the  200  guests
         attending the concert were arrested at  a  public  amphitheatre  in
         Tehran."

    That  report  clearly  indicates  the  very  restrictive  approach  the
    authorities take to those wishing to  express  themselves  through  the
    medium of music.

25.  At B25 there is a report headed "Musicians in Iran: An Uphill  Struggle
    All the Way" dated 21 June 2013.  The source for  this  report  is  the
    internet  portal  Quantara.de  and  it  is  stated  that   the   portal
    "represents the concerted effort of the Federal  Centre  for  Political
    Education and the Institute for Foreign Cultural Relations  to  promote
    dialogue with the Islamic world and is a project funded by  the  German
    Foreign Office".  Within that article the following appears:

         "Singer Arya Aramnejad from Babol in northern Iran was among  them.
         His song 'Ali Barkhiz', which  he  put  out  during  the  religious
         Ashura Festival in 2009, proved his undoing.  In  the  music  video
         for the track he sang 'what sin have the  people  committed?  /  We
         just want freedom', while showing scenes of bloody clashes  between
         militia and demonstrators.'


         Aramnejad went on to call upon the Imam  Ali,  considered  by  many
         Muslims to be the very first imam, to rise up and do something.  As
         a result of his song the musician was  repeatedly  sent  to  prison
         where he suffered many reprisals.  He was only  released  again  in
         early 2013."


    It seems to me that  there  are  parallels  to  be  drawn  between  the
    circumstances thus described  and  both  the  lyrical  content  of  the
    Appellant's songs with his expression of wishes for freedom and  unity,
    and the images in the video for 'Tomorrow' of  bloody  clashes  between
    militia and demonstrators.


26.  Taking all of those matters  together  and  considering  them  'in  the
    round' I find that in all the circumstances I  am  satisfied  that  the
    overtly political content of the Appellant's more recent  output  post-
    exit from Iran is reasonably likely known to the authorities  with  the
    consequence that the Appellant is at  risk  of  adverse  interest  with
    concomitant risk of serious harm.  The Appellant's fear of  persecution
    on political grounds is in my judgment well-founded and he is  entitled
    to the protection of the Refugee Convention.

27.  In the circumstances it is not necessary for me  to  reach  a  specific
    conclusion in respect of the Appellant's earlier  video  for  the  love
    song 'Feelings'.  As acknowledged by Mr  Gayle  during  the  course  of
    submissions western videos - with similar or more  explicit  content  -
    are widely available and watched in Iran.  It may be that there is some
    additional element to the Appellant's particular video because  it  was
    produced in Iran, and a parallel is drawn with the production of videos
    within Iran of young people miming to  the  song  'Happy'  by  Pharrell
    Williams dressed in a manner that is inconsistent with the strict dress
    code favoured by the regime. On the other hand, as pointed out  by  the
    Ms Brocklesby-Weller today, it must be borne in mind that  this  is  an
    older video and there were findings by the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
    remain unimpugned that the  video  did  not  cause  the  Appellant  any
    difficulties prior to his exit from Iran. However, as  I  say,  in  the
    circumstances it seems to me unnecessary to come to any  conclusion  in
    this regard bearing in mind what I consider to be the overtly political
    nature of the more recent post-exit output.


Notice of Decision

28.  The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

29.  I make an anonymity order (see below).


    The above represents a corrected transcript of an  ex-tempore  decision
    given at the hearing on 27 February 2015.


Signed        Date: 3 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Date: 3 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed        Date: 3 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

                                  APPENDIX

   Text of the 'Error of Law' decision made pursuant to the hearing on 12
                                December 2014


                     DECISION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Petherbridge promulgated on 4 July 2014 allowing the Appellant's appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 2 May 2014 to  remove  him
    from the UK subsequent to a refusal of asylum.

Background

 2. The Appellant is  a  national  of  Iran  born  on  24  June  1981.  His
    immigration  history  is  summarised  in  the  cover   sheet   to   the
    Respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal (extracted from  the
    Respondent's 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 2 May 2014. It
    is also summarised at  paragraphs  11-14  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's determination. These are matters of record  and  known  to  the
    parties and accordingly it is unnecessary for me to set them out in any
    detail here. I refer to aspects of the history as is incidental for the
    purpose of this document.

 3. The Appellant claimed asylum in April 2011. The Respondent refused  the
    application for reasons set out in the  RFRL  of  2  May  2014,  and  a
    decision  to  remove  the  Appellant  was  taken  in  consequence.  The
    Appellant appealed to the IAC.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons set out in his determination.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on 24 July 2014,  but  subsequently
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 30 October 2014.

 6. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24  response  dated  24  November  2014
    resisting the challenge to the decision of Judge Petherbridge.


Consideration: Error of Law

 7. The Appellant essentially raises two bases  of  challenge  against  the
    decision of Judge Petherbridge: the Judge failed to provide sustainable
    reasons for adverse credibility findings; further or alternatively  the
    Judge erred in failing to take into  account  the  supporting  evidence
    that it was said indicated that songs of the Appellant's with an  anti-
    regime content had been posted on the Internet.

 8. In my  judgement  the  first  basis  of  challenge  was  essentially  a
    disagreement with the findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in
    respect of the events leading to the Appellant's departure  from  Iran,
    and the manner of his departure, and did not disclose any error of  law
    on the part of the Judge. In this context I note the following:

    (i)  The Judge concluded that he did "not accept [the Appellant]  as  a
         credible witness in respect of the manner in which he came to leave
         Iran in April 2011" (paragraph 62). This was because the Judge  did
         "not  accept  that  the  Schengen  visa  issued  by   the   Italian
         authorities granted on the 23 January 2011 to the 02 May  2011  was
         not a visa that was not issued to the Appellant in respect  of  his
         own passport" (paragraph 63) The Judge explained his  reasoning  at
         paragraphs  64-78,  concluding  also  that  he  rejected  that  the
         Appellant's music studio had been raided in April 2011, or that his
         house was raided and that his brother was subsequently arrested but
         released.


    (ii) The Respondent had raised an issue in respect of the documentation
         used by the Appellant during his journey to the UK in the RFRL: see
         paragraphs 40-47. In short, records showed that a Schengen visa had
         been issued by the Italian Internal Ministry to  a  person  bearing
         the Appellant's name with identical passport details to those  that
         the Appellant was recorded as using in Brussels on 25  April  2011.
         It was considered that this undermined  the  Appellant's  claim  in
         respect of the events that led to his departure from Iran  and  the
         circumstances of his departure. On  appeal  the  Appellant  claimed
         that the passport with  the  Schengen  visa  was  not  his  genuine
         Iranian passport, and produced a photocopy of what he  claimed  was
         his genuine passport now sent to him by his brother from Iran.


    (iii)     The  Judge  for  cogent  and  entirely  sustainable   reasons
         explained at paragraphs  66-77  why  he  rejected  the  Appellant's
         explanation. It necessarily followed  that  if  the  Appellant  had
         applied for a Schengen visa in January 2011 using his own passport,
         his account of having decided to  quit  Iran  following  events  in
         April 2011 was seriously undermined.


    (iv) The challenge in this regard came down to a  submission  that  the
         Judge had been in error in failing to "deal with the absence of any
         fingerprint evidence linking the Schengen visa  to  the  Appellant"
         (see grounds at paragraph 5).


    (v)  I note that it is clear that the Judge was aware that there was no
         relevant fingerprint evidence because a submission had been made to
         this effect, and recorded in the determination: see paragraph 60.


    (vi) Before me Mr Kirk acknowledged that what the Judge had done was to
         determine the issue on the available evidence. He also acknowledged
         that insofar  as  the  judge  had  determined  the  matter  on  the
         available evidence, there was no deficiency in his  reasoning  that
         could constitute an error of law.


    (vii)    In all the circumstances I do not accept that the  Judge  made
         his decision in ignorance of the fact that there was no fingerprint
         evidence, or - more particularly - that  he  should  have  accorded
         such weight to the absence of fingerprint evidence  such  that  his
         reasoning in respect of the available evidence was rendered unsafe.
         There is no merit in this ground of challenge.


 9. In the circumstances the Judge was entitled to  conclude  that  at  the
    time of his departure from Iran the  Appellant  was  not  a  person  in
    respect of whom the authorities had an  adverse  interest,  and  indeed
    that he had not fled for such reasons. Necessarily this meant that  the
    Appellant could only succeed in his appeal on the basis of his claim to
    be  a  well-known  musician   responsible   for   what   he   and   his
    representatives have broadly termed 'anti-regime' songs and videos that
    might  reasonably  likely  attract  the  adverse   attention   of   the
    authorities in Iran.

10. During the course of discussion before me, it appeared that this aspect
    of the claim had been relatively poorly formulated  and  particularised
    before the First-tier Tribunal, and moreover, there was little  by  way
    of supporting evidence identifying  a  direct  connection  between  the
    Appellant and the broadcast / posting of expressly anti-regime  lyrics.
    There was, for example, no supporting evidence that expressly connected
    the Appellant with Radio Farda; it was accepted that the screenshots of
    Internet postings of the Appellant songs did not identify them as being
    political songs; insofar as my attention was directed to actual  lyrics
    for which translations were available, these were not overtly political
    (albeit that a political message might be contained therein by  way  of
    metaphor or allegory). I note that as part  of  the  argument  Mr  Kirk
    submitted that there might reasonably likely be an element of  risk  by
    reason of the content of music videos posted on YouTube of  a  romantic
    nature with depictions of women that  would  be  deemed  unsuitable  in
    Iran. It was also suggested - although not seemingly previously clearly
    formulated in this manner - that the authorities in Iran would be  able
    to connect the Appellant to political songs by reason of  his  computer
    having been seized by the Revolutionary Guard. My  attention  was  also
    directed to various aspects of the background  or  country  information
    that was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  suggested  a  general
    crackdown on music production and censorship of music.

11. I remind myself that at this stage I am  not  determining  the  overall
    merits of the claim (and indeed necessarily have not embarked on a fact-
    finding exercise or otherwise reached any conclusions): however, it  is
    relevant to have regard to the substance of the Appellant's case in  so
    far as it may impact upon the materiality of any claimed error  on  the
    part of the First-tier Tribunal. Notwithstanding  the  observations  in
    the preceding paragraph, it does seem to me that there  were  materials
    before the First-tier Tribunal arguably capable of establishing a  risk
    on return arising from the Appellants activities  as  a  musician.  The
    issue therefore becomes whether the First-tier  Tribunal  properly  had
    regard to such matters.

12. I am persuaded that there is substance to the second basis of challenge
    and have concluded that the Judge did err in his approach.

13. The Judge accepted that the Appellant was a musician  who  had  written
    songs (paragraph 79), and also accepted that  "the  objective  evidence
    would suggest that the Iranian authorities  are  very  mindful  of  any
    dissent of the regime, whether it comes  from  inside  the  country  or
    outside" in the  context  of  evidence  relating  to  the  authorities'
    reaction to six young Iranians involvement in miming to a video of  the
    hit song 'Happy' (paragraph 80). The Judge also  seem  to  accept  that
    Radio Farda was "a radio station  that  has  political  undertones  and
    which would be monitored by the authorities in Iran [and] that  if  his
    records contain any disparaging remarks of the regime or  its  ideology
    would have brought him to the attention of the authorities"  (paragraph
    83). However, the Judge concluded against the Appellant's claim in this
    regard on the basis that the Appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate  a
    connection with, or that his songs had  been  played  on,  Radio  Farda
    (paragraph 81), and because "there is no evidence that his song written
    to date has become of any interest to the authorities" (paragraph 83).

14. I accept that the Judge's reasoning in this regard is flawed because of
    the omission of any reference to the posting of the  Appellant's  works
    on YouTube. There is no analysis of the  nature  of  those  songs,  the
    contents of the videos, or any finding as to  whether  the  authorities
    are reasonably likely to monitor such output.

15. In all such circumstances I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    materially erred, and that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must
    be set aside in so far as it relates to the Appellant's activities as a
    musician in the context of events since his departure from Iran.  Those
    aspects of the decision that relate to  the  Appellants  activities  in
    Iran, and the circumstances leading up to his departure from  Iran  are
    not impugnable.


Future Conduct of the Appeal

16. Because the appeal only requires re-making  in  one  limited  -  albeit
    potentially determinatively significant aspect - it  is  not  necessary
    for it to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. I consider  that  the
    matter may appropriately be dealt with in the Upper Tribunal -  subject
    to some necessary Directions required in order that the  basis  of  the
    Appellant's case be clarified in respect  of  the  claimed  anti-regime
    nature of his published musical  works:  see  further  my  observations
    above at paragraph 10. I gave an indication as to  the  nature  of  the
    required clarification in line with the Directions set out below at the
    conclusion of the error of law hearing.


Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
    error of law and is set aside.

18. The decision in the appeal is to be remade before the  Upper  Tribunal,
    reserved to me, on 27 February 2015. The  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in respect of events up  to  the  Appellant's  departure  from
    Iran, and his journey to the UK, are  to  be  preserved:  evidence  and
    submissions will be entertained in respect of the  Appellant's  claimed
    risk by reason of his activities as a musician, and in  particular  his
    claimed broadcast/publication/posting of anti-regime, music and videos.

   Consequent Directions


   (i) The Appellant is to provide all such materials as he seeks  to  rely
         upon in a consolidated bundle, and/or in an  accessible  electronic
         format as appropriate, to demonstrate  that  the  contents  of  his
         music, either lyrically, or stylistically, or in the way  presented
         through  videos,  is  likely  to  be  seen  as  offensive  by   the
         authorities in Iran. Such evidence is to include  details  of  when
         and where any of his works were broadcast/published/posted, and any
         relevant background or country information on risk.


   (ii)   The   Appellant   is    to    provide    a    written    argument
         identifying/clarifying the nature of any 'anti-regime'  content  in
         any of his lyrics/videos.


   (iii) All such materials and written submissions are  to  be  filed  and
         served at least seven days prior to the resumed hearing.


