
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  AA/03859/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 15 August 2013                             |On 23 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN



                                   Between

                              MASTER DEAR GAZI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Blum, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, HOPO

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He is of  Kurdish  ethnicity.   He
    claimed asylum on 23 June 2012 when he was apprehended by  Kent  Police
    in the rear of a lorry  and  subsequently  served  with  notice  as  an
    illegal entrant.  He claimed his date of birth was 5 May 1997.   As  he
    did not provide any  evidence  to  support  his  claimed  age,  he  was
    referred to Kent Social Services.  They assessed his date of birth as 5
    May 1995.  His application for asylum was refused  on  24  August  2012
    without a right of appeal.  However, due to his  age,  he  was  granted
    Discretionary leave to remain until 5 November 2012.

2.   The appellant submitted an in time application  for  further  leave  to
    remain on 18 October 2012 which was refused on 5  December  2012.   The
    appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  decision  came  before  a
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 8 February 2013.  The  judge  found
    that the respondent's decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law
    because the respondent had failed to give effect to the  positive  duty
    under section 55.  She remitted the case back to the respondent.

3.   On 11 April 2013 the respondent made a decision to refuse to grant  the
    appellant further leave, and to refuse to vary leave to remain  in  the
    UK and to remove him by way of directions under s.47 of the Immigration
    and Nationality Act 2006.  The reasons for  the  respondent's  decision
    were set out in a letter dated 11 April 2013.  It is his appeal against
    this decision that was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Meah  on
    asylum grounds.

4.   FTT Judge Meah allowed the appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  The respondent has not challenged this decision.

5    The appellant was granted permission to appeal the judge's decision  on
    the basis that the judge failed to make clear and reasoned findings  on
    the core of the appellant's asylum claim, namely that  his  father  was
    involved in Kurdish politics and was detained and, alternatively,  that
    he would be at risk on return due to his profile of absence from  Iran.
    After hearing Mr Blum's submissions, Mr Avery conceded that  the  judge
    made an arguable error of law by his failure to make clear and reasoned
    findings on the core of the appellant's asylum claim.

6.   Mr Blum said that as  the  appellant  did  not  give  evidence  at  the
    hearing before the judge and  the  appeal  proceeded  by  way  of  oral
    submissions only, there was no need to remit the matter to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for re-hearing.  I therefore heard submissions from  both
    parties in order to determine the appellant's appeal.

7.   The basis of the appellant's claim is that he is Kurdish.  He was  born
    and lived in Sena City.  He was the only child of his parents.  He told
    the respondent that he had never attended school and was unable to read
    or write, although he told the Social Services that he was able to read
    a few words in Kurdish Sorani and has a basic understanding  of  maths.
    From the age of 10 or 11 he started  working  for  his  father  in  his
    wholesale shop which was in a shopping centre in Ban Bashka.  It was  a
    big shop that sold cigarettes.

8.   His father was a supporter of the Kurdish  Party  because  he  used  to
    attend meetings and he also gave them money.  He had been  involved  in
    politics for a long time.  The appellant did not know which  party  his
    father was involved in.  His father did  not  attend  any  protests  or
    marches.  His father would attend meetings two or three times  a  month
    at the same place and he would attend with his father, but  would  wait
    outside.  Alternatively, he would attend one or two  meetings  a  month
    with his father.  Alternatively, he was present at  some  meetings  and
    heard them talking about the Democratic  Party  from  sitting  outside.
    Sometimes his father asked him to take  letters  to  other  people  and
    sometimes he also gave him money to take  once  a  month  to  a  person
    called Jamali.  His father told him these things were for the party and
    to be careful.

9.   Two to three days before he left Iran his father was  arrested  at  the
    family home early one evening.  There was a knock at the door  and  his
    father answered.  The appellant was in the kitchen at the time and  did
    not see how many people arrived to take his father  but  he  could  see
    through a crack in the door that there were several men in uniforms and
    he believed they were police.  He did not hear them say anything to his
    father.   He  saw  his  father  being  restrained   and   taken   away.
    Alternatively, he did  not  remember  when  his  father  was  arrested.
    Alternatively, he heard them saying they were arresting his father.

10.  At this point his mother came into the kitchen and took him to  a  room
    in the yard.  She told him not to say anything  and  covered  him  with
    some old blankets.  He hid there for one or two hours  until  she  told
    him that he could come out.  His mother told him that  the  police  had
    searched the house and taken his father away.  They both had  to  leave
    the house.  She took him to his paternal grandfather's house in  Salwat
    village.  He stayed there for two  days.  Alternatively,  he  stayed  a
    week.  After two days his mother told him that their neighbour  Ursalan
    had told her that the police were looking for him. His mother told  him
    that the reason why his father was arrested was because he was donating
    money to Kurdish parties. His mother took him to Salmas and from  there
    he was passed to an agent to leave Iran.

11.  Mr Blum adopted the grounds  lodged  by  Mr  Chirico  as  well  as  his
    skeleton argument dated 22 May 2013 and the skeleton argument  prepared
    for the hearing on 8 February 2013.

12.  Mr Avery adopted the submissions made by Ms A Bridger who was the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer at the  hearing  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Meah on 22 May 2013.  Mr Avery relied on the lengthy Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter which he said set out the credibility issues  which  the
    Secretary of State said applied.

13.  Ms Bridger had argued that the appellant's claim was vague at best  and
    some major discrepancies had arisen in his evidence  which  meant  that
    his  claim  could  be  deemed  as  being  not  credible.   One  of  the
    discrepancies was the regularity of  his  father's  attendance  at  the
    meetings; whether one or two a month or two or three times a month.   I
    agree with Mr Blum that this was a minor error which did not  undermine
    the appellant's account.

14.  The other error relied  on  by  respondent  was  when  the  appellant's
    father was arrested.  In his witness statement the appellant  said  two
    or three days before he left Iran.  The respondent challenged  this  at
    paragraph 45 of the RFRL stating  that  he  had  not  provided  further
    evidence of when his father was detained or where he was detained.   In
    answer to question 91 asking him when his father's arrest happened, the
    appellant said "I don't know  before  I  left."   Counsel  argued  that
    "when" is a vague question and that no clarification was sought of this
    answer at interview.  I accept that  the  question  was  vague  and  it
    produced a vague response from  the  appellant.   However,  considering
    that in his typed witness statement dated 23 July 2012,  the  appellant
    had been specific as to when his father  was  arrested,  I  would  have
    expected  him  to  give  an  equally  specific  response  when  he  was
    interviewed two weeks later on 9 August 2012 about this  issue.   After
    all this was the reason he claimed to have left Iran.  Furthermore,  he
    had just turned 17 and therefore not that young and had arrived in  the
    UK shortly after the claimed event.  On consideration of the evidence I
    find that the appellant was not being truthful about the event that led
    him to leave Iran.

15.  The appellant claims that his father was involved in Kurdish  political
    activities.  It was because  of  his  activities,  which  consisted  of
    attending meetings and funding the Kurdish party, that his  father  was
    arrested.  He could not give the name of the political party his father
    belonged to.  He claimed he had asked his father but  his  father  told
    him he was too young to know about such matter.  I  accept  Mr  Avery's
    submission that although the appellant was  a  minor  at  the  time  of
    events, he was not very young  at  17  and  would  have  had  a  bigger
    appreciation of what was happening around him than he appears  to  have
    let on at the interview.

16.  I can accept, if the appellant's evidence is credible,  that  he  would
    have accompanied his father to the meetings and sometimes would be  let
    in to the meetings or sometimes he would wait outside probably  because
    they did not want him to hear or become involved in the discussions.  I
    do not however accept the submission that  the  appellant  had  limited
    knowledge of and understanding of the matters which led  to  his  being
    sent from Iran. In light of his evidence that he was sometimes  let  in
    to the meetings even though he was young, I  find  that  the  appellant
    would have had  some  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  political
    activity his father was involved in.  I do not find that the  appellant
    was as ignorant of his father's political activities as he claimed.

17.  Mr Blum relied on paragraph  14  of  Mr  Chirico's  submissions,  which
    stated that it is common ground that those who are known, or suspected,
    by the government to be members or  supporters  or  Kurdish  separatist
    parties are likely to be at risk.  He relied on the case of AB and  the
    respondent's OGN which confirms at 3.12.15 that while the  "pure"  fact
    of Kurdish ethnic origins would not, without more, create a  risk,  the
    Iranian  government  "disproportionally   targeted   minority   groups,
    including  Kurds,  for  arbitrary  arrests,  prolonged  detention   and
    physical abuse."  The appellant claimed that his mother had  been  told
    by the authorities two days after he was arrested that the  reason  for
    his arrest was that he had been donating money to Kurdish  causes.   In
    light of the appellant's vague evidence about  his  father's  political
    activities, I am unable to find that his father was either a member  or
    supporter of a Kurdish separatist party.  The appellant's evidence  was
    that he was sent to give money to a  particular  person.   He  gave  no
    evidence as to who this person was, whether this person was a member or
    supporter of a Kurdish separatist party.   I  am  unable  without  more
    evidence to find that his father was indeed  arrested  by  the  Iranian
    government for the reason given by him.

18.  The appellant left Iran because he claims  his  mother  told  him  that
    their neighbour had said that the police were looking  for  him.   This
    news appears to have led to a speedy departure from Iran.  We are  well
    aware that agents take a lot of money from families  of  appellants  in
    order to take them abroad.  The appellant told Social Services that  he
    continued to work for his  father  until  his  arrest  by  the  Iranian
    authorities  and  the  forced  closure  of  his   business.    In   the
    circumstances I find that it is unlikely that the money used to pay the
    agent would have come from his father's shop.  The speed with which the
    appellant was taken out of the country suggests that it must have  been
    a planned departure.  This finding undermines his claim that his father
    was arrested by the authorities as a result of  which  they  were  also
    looking for him as a person suspected of such involvement as claimed in
    the skeleton argument.

19.  It was also argued on behalf of the appellant  that  the  fact  of  his
    illegal departure from Iran, about which there  is  no  dispute,  is  a
    factor augmenting the risk to the appellant as is the fact of a  return
    from the UK.  Further, that there has been a diplomatic rupture between
    Iran and the UK and there is no basis at all by which the appellant can
    either return voluntarily from the UK or be involuntarily removed  from
    the UK.

20.  In light of my finding that the appellant's departure  was  planned,  I
    do not accept that he left Iran illegally.  Whilst  I  accept  that  he
    entered the UK illegally, I do accept that he left Iran illegally.    I
    do not accept that the submission a diplomatic rupture between Iran and
    the UK is a basis for finding that the appellant will  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return to Iran for a Convention reason.

21.  He has not presented a credible  asylum  claim  and  I  find  that  the
    appellant is not likely to be persecuted on his return to  Iran.    His
    asylum               appeal                is                dismissed.








Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

