
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03328/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 3 November 2015                   |On 9 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               NOMATHEMBA MOYO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E MacKay, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By determination issued on 20 August 2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Farrelly  dismissed  the  appellant's   appeal   against   refusal   of
    recognition of her claim to asylum as a  lesbian  from  Zimbabwe.   She
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:
    1.     The judge erred in law because he was not entitled to hold  that
         the appellant  was  not  gay.   He  has  not  believed  either  the
         appellant or Miss Tshuma but gives  no  reasons  why  he  does  not
         accept evidence from other  sources  that  the  appellant  is  gay.
         First,  as  regards  the  letter  from  the  Unity   Centre,   they
         subsequently wrote and corrected the error noted by  the  judge  in
         paragraph 24.  A faxed letter was sent on the day  of  hearing  and
         lodged  in  process  from  Unity  Centre  confirming  there  was  a
         typographical error in the original letter and  the  2  women  [the
         appellant and  Miss  Tshuma]  had  been  attending  meetings  since
         January 2014 and not 2013.  The  judge  had  taken  account  of  an
         irrelevant matter which had been addressed during the course of the
         hearing ... No reasons are given why the judge did not  accept  the
         evidence of  either  Andile  Moyo  or  Edwin  Mathe  ...  that  the
         appellant is gay.  Nor is there any acknowledgement of a  statement
         ... from Noma Sibanda who had attended the Tribunal [on a  previous
         date when the case had  been  adjourned]  and  on  account  of  her
         pregnancy was unable to attend the reconvened hearing ... The judge
         was informed of the position and yet no acknowledgement is made  of
         the statement of the witness ... that this  person  also  knew  ...
         that the appellant was gay ...
         The judge further erred in failing to give  appropriate  weight  to
         the evidence of the 4 witnesses whose statements  were  before  the
         judge, 3 of whom gave evidence  at  the  hearing.   The  judge  was
         obliged to give proper consideration to the weight of evidence  ...
         in favour of a finding that the appellant is gay.  The judge should
         have considered that evidence from Edwin  Mathe  and  Noma  Sibanda
         were from completely independent sources in that there  was  family
         ... nor sexual relationship ... no reasons  provided  [the  grounds
         continue repetitively].
      2. The judge erred in law because he has  not  considered  the  second
         part of the first question in paragraph 82 of HJ and HT.  This part
         of the question requires the fact finding  judge  to  be  satisfied
         that an appellant "... would be  treated  as  gay  ..."  (in  their
         country of origin).  There was evidence  ...  that  people  may  be
         perceived in Zimbabwe as gay and accordingly ... that the appellant
         would be treated as gay ... No findings have been made in  relation
         to whether even if the judge did  not  believe  the  appellant  she
         would be perceived as gay or treated as gay in Zimbabwe.
      3. The judge erred in law in applying country guidance.   LZ  Zimbabwe
         CG [2011] UKUT 487 states ... that relocation  to  Bulawayo  is  an
         option.  But on the evidence the appellant came from that city  ...
         so ... the judge ... is saying that even if the  appellant  is  gay
         she can relocate in Bulawayo, the very  city  she  claims  to  have
         suffered persecution in.

Submissions for appellant.

 2. At paragraph 24 the judge dealt  with  the  letter  from  Unity  Centre
    without noting the correction to a chronological  error.   He  had  not
    acknowledged in any respect that there was evidence from Noma  Sibanda,
    and that there had been good reason for her non-attendance.  She was an
    independent witness whose evidence had to be considered.  Nor was there
    any mention of the evidence of Edwin Mathe, who had attended and  given
    evidence.  There had also  been  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    sister Andile Moyo.  The judge rejected the  appellant's  evidence  and
    that of Miss Tshuma, but did not  say  what  he  made  of  those  other
    witnesses.  Taken along with the  failure  to  mention  the  corrective
    letter, these were material omissions.  (I note that Mr Mackay did  not
    pursue ground 1 to the extent that the judge was "not entitled" to find
    that the appellant is not gay.)

 3. Mr MacKay made no submission further to ground 2.

 4. On ground 3, if there had been a finding that the appellant was lesbian
    and part of a couple, there would  have  to  be  consideration  of  how
    openly they might live together.

 5. The errors of the judge required a remit to the First-tier Tribunal for
    fresh  findings,  which  would  include  the  application  of   country
    guidance.

Submissions for respondent.

 6. The outcome was not based only  on  what  the  judge  said  (under  the
    heading "Conclusions")  at  paragraph  34,  where  he  finds  that  the
    appellant and Miss Tshuma have created a false claim.  The grounds  and
    submissions had focused on that paragraph,  but  ignored  paragraph  24
    (under the heading "Findings").  The judge there says that he looks  at
    all the evidence and does so in the round.  He goes on to note that not
    only do the appellant and Miss Tshuma say she is lesbian,  so  also  do
    her sister and friend.  "These are not independent witnesses  but  this
    does not mean that they cannot be believed.  Their evidence is part  of
    the whole on which I draw my conclusions."

 7. The judge did overlook the corrective letter from the Unity Centre, but
    that was a minor element.

 8. The judge considered the evidence of the two principal  witnesses,  the
    appellant and her alleged lesbian partner, in detail.  He did not  find
    the appellant reliable, for several good reasons (paragraphs 26 to  32)
    and did not believe Miss Tshuma, also for good reasons, mainly based on
    the timing of her alleged realisation that she  was  bisexual  and  the
    alleged beginning of her relationship with the appellant, shortly after
    failure of her previous claim, made on other grounds.

 9. The key evidence having been dealt with, the judge  needed  to  say  no
    more about the further supporting evidence.

10. At paragraph 35 the judge  approached  the  case  in  the  alternative,
    concluding that even if the appellant were lesbian and her account  was
    true, there were parts of Zimbabwe where  she  and  Miss  Tshuma  could
    safely and reasonably live together.  That was a complete answer to the
    case.

Response for appellant.

11. Although the judge referred at paragraph  24  to  other  evidence,  the
    passage implied there had been only 2 other witnesses, when  there  had
    been 3.  The question was not whether he made  any  reference  to  that
    evidence and to considering all the evidence in the round, but  whether
    he actually adopted that approach.  There had been 3 witnesses on whose
    evidence no express finding was made.  It was not sufficient  for  such
    findings to be implicit.  Paragraph 33 did not amount to a good  reason
    for finding Miss Tshuma not to be credible.

12. The judge had not in reality considered the case "at highest",  because
    the previous relationship in  Zimbabwe  to  which  he  referred  was  a
    secretive one, not 2 lesbians living openly together.  The errors would
    therefore require a further hearing, and could not be  avoided  by  the
    alternative conclusion.

Discussion and conclusions.

13. Ground 1 incorrectly categorises any legal error which it  might  show.
    The judge was entitled to hold that the appellant was  not  gay.   That
    was an issue, although not by itself decisive.  Any real point goes  to
    the adequacy of the reasoning to support the finding.

14. The principal evidence was plainly from the appellant and Miss  Tshuma.
    If there were good reasons for rejecting  the  evidence  from  both  of
    them, evidence from other witnesses that they believed both to  be  gay
    was not likely to achieve another conclusion.

15. It might have been better if the judge had been more explicit, but  the
    appellant's grounds and submissions inaccurately focused  on  paragraph
    34 to the exclusion of the rest of the determination, and in particular
    of paragraph 24.

16. There was an oversight regarding the corrective letter from  the  Unity
    Centre but I agree that was a minor matter.

17. Ground 1 shows no inadequacy of reasoning or other significant error in
    the conclusion that the appellant is not gay.

18. Ground 2 makes little sense.  It does  not  show  that  the  judge  was
    required to consider any principle derived from HJ and HT further  than
    he did.  The appellant put forward no case that although not  gay,  she
    might be perceived as such, and ill-treated as a result.

19. Ground 3  shows  no  error  of  law.   The  country  guidance  is  that
    relocation  is  generally  available,  and  not   only   in   Bulawayo.
    Appellants from Bulawayo may relocate elsewhere.

20. The Presenting Officer was correct in pointing out that the finding  on
    internal relocation is a complete answer to the  case.   There  was  no
    case developed for the  appellant  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
    required the judge to go any further than he did.

21. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           6 November 2015
