
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03320/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th November 2014                       |                                |
|                                           |On 11th November 2014           |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                      deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ms kehinde Akewusola
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Tettey, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  against  the  decision  of
   Judge Ince who, following a hearing on the 6th August 2014,  allowed  the
   respondent's appeal against the decision to refuse  her  application  for
   asylum and to remove her from the United Kingdom.

2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Warren  L  Grant  on  the  18th
   September 2014. The grant accurately summarise the Secretary  of  State's
   grounds of appeal. However, as we shall see, it by  no  means  accurately
   represents the actual contents of Judge Ince's determination.

3. Paragraph 2 of the grant reads as follows -

    The grounds assert correctly (sic) that having referred himself in some
    detail to the guidance set  out  by  the  Tribunal  Devaseelan  (Second
    Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial  Effect)  Sri  Lanka*  [2002]  UKAIT
    00702 the First-tier Tribunal Judge then failed either to regard  as  a
    starting point the adverse credibility findings made by the Tribunal in
    a determination dismissing the appellant's asylum  appeal  on  13  July
    2012 or to give reasons for  departing  from  that  determination.  [My
    emphasis]

4. In fact, nothing could be further from the truth. Judge Ince had in  fact
   both treated the determination of Judge Birkby as his staring  point  and
   thereafter given detailed and  cogent  reasons  for  departing  from  its
   findings. The falsity of the claim to the contrary, both in  the  grounds
   and the grant of permission to appeal, may be illustrated only by quoting
   extensively from Judge Ince's determination.

5. At paragraph 39,  Judge  Ince  summarised  both  the  reasoning  and  the
   outcome of Judge  Birkby's  determination  of  the  respondent's  earlier
   appeal -

  39. The Appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by Judge Birkby  on  8
      June 2012.  I note that she was unrepresented  but  accompanied  by  a
      McKenzie friend, a Ms Pennington.  In a  determination  signed  on  20
      June, Judge Birkby dismissed the Appellant's appeal.   He  noted  that
      the  Appellant  had  not  been  truthful  with  the   UK   Immigration
      authorities; that  her  account  of  being  mistreated  by  Umaru  was
      inconsistent with the details given when the VAF was lodged (that  she
      was a student living in Lagos)  and  her  explanation  (that  she  had
      nothing  to  do  with  the  arrangements)  evasive;  that  there  were
      inconsistencies about whom she was visiting in the UK (her brother  or
      uncle); that she did not know things that she  would  be  expected  to
      know (such as where her twin brother Taiwo went to  school,  how  many
      wives Umaru had, and what her parents did for a living); and  that  it
      was implausible that Umaru, who had  severely  abused  the  Appellant,
      would allow her to go to the UK to do some wedding shopping when  this
      would have allowed her to escape.  Judge Birkby  also  commented  that
      although the Appellant claimed to have suffered injuries, there was no
      medical report to corroborate such.

6. Judge Ince's self-direction and reasons  for  departing  from  the  above
   findings can be found at paragraphs 52 to 65 of his determination -

  52. I begin by reminding myself that the decision of Judge Birkby  is  the
      starting point and that although it is not binding upon me, I  am  not
      hearing an appeal against it.  Although no new  incidents  have  taken
      place, I do have medical evidence that was not  before  Judge  Birkby,
      such evidence persuading the Respondent to treat the matter as a fresh
      claim.  It is not suggested by the Respondent that the scarring on the
      Appellant's body was inflicted in the four month  period  between  the
      hearing before Judge Birkby in June 2012 and  her  examination  by  Dr
      Lord in October 2012 (and there is no suggestion in Dr  Lord's  report
      that the scarring was so recent)  and  therefore,  although  this  was
      evidence that could have been before Judge Birkby, I do not  treat  it
      with the "greatest circumspection".  Moreover, I take account  of  the
      fact that the Appellant was  unrepresented  before  Judge  Birkby  and
      therefore may not have placed appropriate emphasis on certain  aspects
      of her claim or thought about the importance of  volunteering  certain
      explanations.

  53. I see no reason not to accept Dr Lord's findings.  The Respondent  has
      argued that the Istanbul Protocol has not been followed  but  this  is
      challenged by Dr Lord.  I am aware that  Dr  Lord  is  an  experienced
      forensic physician who has submitted many reports in this jurisdiction
      and I have not been made aware of any Tribunal criticism of her  work.
      It is correct that there may be alternative explanations for  some  of
      the scarring found by her, which therefore may not have arisen in  the
      way described by the Appellant, but some of the  evidence  is  clearly
      persuasive.  For instance, the  evidence  of  FGM  is  clear  and  the
      absence of stitching found by Dr Lord  is  highly  supportive  of  the
      Appellant's description of how it was carried out, with  scissors  and
      with no treatment afterwards.  I also note that some of  the  scarring
      was in places which are usually protected from  random  or  accidental
      contact, which supports  the  Appellant's  description  of  deliberate
      infliction, and the evidence of the burn mark on her  leg  also  being
      corroborative of how the Appellant says it came about.  Of course,  it
      is always possible that many of the scars could have had  an  innocent
      explanation but I have to assess the likelihood of them  occurring  in
      the way suggested.  Dr Lord's  report  does  therefore,  (and  here  I
      disagree  with  Ms  Brewer's  submission  on  the   point)   take   us
      significantly further and is corroborative of the Appellant's account.



  54. I note the reasons given by  the  Respondent  for  not  believing  the
      Appellant.  She argues that there are discrepancies between  what  the
      Appellant says her situation was in Nigeria and what the VAF revealed.
       We do not know exactly what her VAF stated because it  has  not  been
      produced in these proceedings, nor do we know why the application  was
      refused.  There is the computerised summary of  the  visa  application
      but the information therein is minimal.  However, it does confirm that
      the passports of the Appellant and  of  her  brother  were  issued  at
      different times, which supports the Appellant's account that they were
      brought up separately, or at least treated  differently  -  they  were
      twins and if they were living together one  would  expect  a  passport
      application for both to be made at the same time.  Moreover,  if  what
      the Appellant says was true, and the trip was organised by her  mother
      without the Appellant's knowledge, then the details of who the  family
      were supposed to be visiting in the UK would be unknown to  her.   Her
      evidence about the trip to Lagos when it  appears  that  the  VAF  was
      lodged simply states that she had  her  photograph  taken  and  signed
      something - there is no evidence  that  she  was  asked  to  read  the
      document she signed.  Accordingly, it  is  conceivable  that  she  was
      unaware of the precise details in the VAF.

  55. The Respondent also argues that the suggestion that Umaru would  allow
      the Appellant to go abroad,  thereby  giving  her  an  opportunity  to
      escape from him and his abuse, is implausible.  I agree that at  first
      blush it is implausible.  However, there is evidence  before  me  that
      tempers this first impression.  The Appellant has explained  that  she
      had "calmed down" and at least gave the appearance of having  accepted
      her situation.  She did not quarrel with  Umaru,  she  "had  made  her
      peace with him", and she willingly had sex with him,  obeyed  him  and
      gave him everything he demanded.  Moreover, I note that the last  time
      that she had tried to escape was 2 or 3 months after Khalid was  taken
      from her, and thus around  September  2006,  when  she  was  aged  18.
      Moreover, when she was allowed to leave the compound to go to Lagos in
      November 2007  with  her  mother,  she  made  no  attempt  to  escape.
      Although Umaru's men followed  them,  it  seems  that  they  were  not
      escorting them in the true sense of being at their side all  the  way.
      This in turn could well  have  demonstrated  to  Umaru  that  she  was
      accepting of her situation.  Accordingly, by the  time  the  Appellant
      came to leave Nigeria in or around March 2009, some 2� years after her
      last escape attempt and when she  was  no  longer  a  teenager,  being
      almost 21, and when she had been consistently obedient,  it  may  well
      have been the case that Umaru believed that she had been "tamed"  (for
      want of a better word) and that she would not attempt to  escape.   In
      any event, she was not going to the UK alone but with her mother,  who
      was complicit in her captivity, as escort.   Accordingly,  I  conclude
      that this scenario is not as implausible as it might seem.

  56. As for the apparent implausibility of Umaru wanting to marry her  when
      he already had control over her, I note that the Appellant suggests  a
      motive (that he wanted to carry on making money  from  her)  but  also
      says that this was a question better asked of him since he was the one
      who wanted to marry her.  The reality is that the Appellant  does  not
      know why Umaru wanted to marry her and  is  speculating.   Ms  Wilkins
      suggests  other  possible  motives,  namely  that,  according  to  the
      objective evidence, Nigerian husbands have permission  to  beat  their
      wives and there is also evidence that when confronted with a  domestic
      violence complaint, the police often tell victims to go home and be  a
      "good wife".  However, there may be more basic motives, such  as  that
      Umaru liked her, or felt guilty about mistreating her in the  past  or
      wanted her to remain in his life since she had demonstrated  that  she
      was obedient and had been brought  under  control,  or  "tamed".   The
      contradictory  emotions  expressed,  or  actions  taken,  by  domestic
      violence abusers, being kind one moment and violent the next, is  well
      known.   I  therefore  place  little   weight   upon   this   apparent
      implausibility.

  57. There were some inconsistencies in her account before me - she did mix
      up the details of  how  she  initially  managed  to  escape  from  the
      compound between the two events.  However,  I  note  her  explanation,
      that these attempted escapes took place a  long  time  ago,  in  2006,
      around eight years ago, and take such into account.  Moreover, it must
      not be forgotten that both attempts resulted in  significant  violence
      to her, being beaten on the first occasion and branded on the  second,
      and therefore I also take account of  the  fact  that  recalling  such
      events  was  likely  to  be  uncomfortable  at  the  very  least   and
      potentially traumatic.  I note the evidence of her GP on  this  point.
      I therefore give less weight to these discrepancies.

  58. I also note that the Appellant did not mention earlier aspects of  her
      fear of returning to Nigeria, such as her fear that her daughter would
      suffer FGM as she did herself.  She explained that she  had  forgotten
      to mention it.  However, I note that in her  first  asylum  claim  and
      appeal she was unrepresented and when she was  represented,  reference
      was made in the further submissions in March 2013 to the potential for
      "harm" to Mercy if she went to Nigeria, which, given that the  medical
      report from Dr Lord confirmed that the Appellant  had  undergone  FGM,
      would have indicated to anyone who read the submissions in conjunction
      with the report, that there was a  potential  for  the  process  being
      repeated on Mercy.  No new statement from the Appellant was  submitted
      with the further submissions (at least, there is none before  me,  and
      no documents from the subsequent Judicial Review application have been
      produced) and the only evidence direct from her since her evidence  to
      Judge Birkby is her appeal statement, where she does raise  it  as  an
      issue  of  concern.   I  therefore  do  not  give  this  omission  any
      significant weight.  In any event, I have no doubt that,  as  she  had
      herself been subjected to FGM, it would only be natural for her to  at
      least be fearful of the same fate being inflicted upon  her  daughter,
      even if she did not express that fear.

  59. I have considered the issue of Section 8.  With regard to not claiming
      asylum at the airport, I take account of the fact that  she  was  with
      her mother when she arrived in the UK and that her  main  concern  was
      escaping from her, not claiming asylum.  There is no  evidence  before
      me that prior to her arrival in the UK the Appellant had any knowledge
      of the concept of asylum, or how to claim it.  I therefore  give  this
      little weight.

  60. As for misleading the Immigration Officer when she  was  arrested  for
      the bus pass incident by giving a false name, I take  account  of  the
      fact that she had been told by Sunday always to  use  that  name  and,
      although he was no longer a factor in her life, this was the  name  by
      which she was known at the  GP's  surgery,  she  was  still  living  a
      relatively isolated existence and had  not  at  that  stage  taken  or
      received any legal advice.  I consider that this is an  understandable
      explanation and again, give it little  weight.   I  note  Ms  Wilkins'
      submission that the Appellant appears to have gone  from  one  abusive
      relationship to another and therefore can  understand  how  she  might
      have accepted Sunday's advice on the point, notwithstanding his  abuse
      of her.

  61. Finally, the Respondent argues that the Appellant only claimed  asylum
      after being served with the IS151A form.  Again, at that stage she was
      unrepresented but she very soon thereafter  sought  legal  advice  and
      made an asylum claim.  This is commensurate with her being unaware  of
      the procedures surrounding this process.  I do not attach much  weight
      to this aspect either.

  62. What does strike me as impressive is  that,  throughout  this  process
      from initial claim in 2012 to the hearing before me, the Appellant has
      given a consistent account in relation to  the  core  aspects  of  her
      claim, namely being separated from her close family from a very  early
      age; being treated differently  from  her  male  twin  brother;  being
      "given" to Umaru; being consistently  raped,  beaten  and  mistreated;
      attempting to escape on two occasions; becoming  pregnant  and  giving
      birth to Khalid, who was taken from her;  of  coming  to  the  UK  for
      wedding shopping; of escaping from her family in the UK and  of  being
      initially assisted by and then abused by Sunday.  Although  additional
      details have been given of various aspects of this account  from  time
      to time, it has remained consistently the same.

  63. I was also impressed by the significant detail given by the  Appellant
      when asked to expand on certain incidents,  details  which  I  do  not
      consider would be present in a fabricated account.  I note  also  that
      she ascribed some of the scarring to assaults by Sunday which  on  the
      face of it would have not been in her interests since they occurred in
      the UK.  This suggests to me that the Appellant had  no  intention  to
      exaggerate the abuse given to her by Umaru.

  64. Moreover, we now have corroboration of her account, from her GP's  and
      from Dr Lord's report, as outlined above.

  65. Consequently, looking at all the evidence in the  round,  noting  that
      the standard of proof is low and reminding myself that there  will  be
      very few asylum claims where there will not  be  areas  of  doubt  and
      uncertainty, I conclude that the Appellant has discharged  the  burden
      of proof upon her and has told the truth about what happened to her in
      Nigeria and since leaving her home country.  In short, although  there
      have been some inconsistencies and potential  implausibilities,  there
      is no good reason not to believe her account.

7. In view of this comprehensive and detailed explanation for  Judge  Ince's
   decision to depart from the findings of Judge Birkby, one cannot help but
   wonder whether the judge who granted permission to  appeal  had  actually
   read it; had he done so, it is difficult to see how he could have granted
   permission in the terms that he did, or indeed at all.

8. The Secretary of State's  grounds  additionally  challenge  Judge  Ince's
   reasoning insofar as it was based upon  the  medical  evidence  contained
   within the report of Dr Lord.  This  challenge  assumes  that  Dr  Lord's
   opinion concerning  the  cause  of  the  respondent's  injuries  depended
   entirely upon her acceptance of  the  truthfulness  of  the  respondent's
   explanation for them [see paragraph f of the grounds].  Based  upon  this
   assumption, the Secretary of State argues that Judge Ince failed to  take
   account of the fact that Judge Birkby had  found  that  the  respondent's
   account was untrue. The respondent asserts that support for this argument
   can be found in the following  passage  in  the  determination  of  Judge
   Birkby -

    The appellant claims she has scars on her person, although there is  no
    medical report. Whether or not those scars exist, I  am  not  satisfied
    those scars would have been caused at the  hands  of  either  Umara  or
    Sunday, or any other man. [Emphasis as added  at  paragraph  d  of  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal]

9. However, this argument singularly fails to distinguish  between  (i)  the
   mechanism of injury, and (ii) the identity of the  perpetrator.  Dr  Lord
   could not and did not express any opinion in relation to the identity  of
   the perpetrator. Only the respondent knows  who  inflicted  the  injuries
   upon her. However, Dr Lord is eminently qualified  to  comment  upon  the
   manner of their infliction, and it was in relation to this issue that she
   had expressed her opinion. Moreover, she had found that evidence  of  the
   following injuries was "diagnostic" (that is to say, conclusive)  of  the
   mechanism of  injury  described  by  the  appellant:  genital  mutilation
   without  subsequent  stitching,  scars  on  her  back  and   flank   (the
   consequence of laceration), and scars to  the  angles  of  her  jaw  (the
   consequence of full thickness injury). Moreover, the  burn  scar  on  her
   left ankle was "typical" and "highly consistent"  with  the  respondent's
   account of being burnt with a metal rod which had been  heated  up  in  a
   fire. These medical conclusions, and others,  were  summarised  by  Judge
   Ince at paragraph 41 of his determination. Thus,  whilst  Judge  Birkby's
   findings appeared to leave open the possibility that  the  injuries  were
   self-inflicted, it was entirely open to Judge Ince to conclude that  this
   possibility was unrealistic in  light  of  medical  evidence  before  him
   concerning the manner of their infliction. Indeed,  it  would  have  been
   arguably perverse for Judge Ince to have found otherwise.

10. I would finally observe that  carelessness  in  granting  permission  to
   appeal not only leads to  the  resources  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  being
   wasted, but it also fails to recognise and  respect  the  generally  high
   standard of work that is produced by the First-tier Tribunal of which the
   present determination is a conspicuous example.



Notice of Decision

11. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity not directed.



Signed                                  Date 10th November 2014

David Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


