
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03083/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Upper Tribunal         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26th July 2016                        |On 8th August 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    a m t
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Tetty, Counsel

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Turnock) which in a decision promulgated on 14th  April
    2016 allowed the Respondent's appeal against deportation, under Article
    3 ECHR.

 2. For the sake of clarity, I shall refer throughout this decision, to the
    Secretary of State as "the Respondent" and to AMT  as  "the  Appellant"
    reflecting their respective positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. This is an appeal which has generated much litigation. There have  been
    two hearings before the First-tier Tribunal (decisions  promulgated  30
    July 2015 and 14th April 2016), an  Upper  Tribunal  hearing  (decision
    promulgated 10th February 2016) and several applications for permission
    to appeal.

Background

 4. The Claimant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 27th  January  1970.   She
    arrived in the UK on 18th October 2000 as a visitor.  She  subsequently
    made application to remain as the spouse of a British citizen which was
    ultimately refused and she became appeal rights exhausted in 2005.

 5. On 11th March 2005 she was convicted of conspiracy to  supply  class  A
    controlled drugs (heroin and  crack  cocaine)  and  sentenced  to  four
    years' imprisonment.  She applied for asylum  on  the  basis  that  she
    would be at risk on return to Jamaica from co-accused against whom  she
    had given evidence and who would either  themselves  or  through  their
    network system, seek reprisals against her and her family  members.  In
    respect of  her  asylum  claim  the  appellant  was  interviewed  on  3
    occasions, the last one being on 21st November 2014.

 6. On 11th December  2012  before  her  last  asylum  interview,  she  was
    convicted on two counts of conspiracy  to  supply  class  A  controlled
    drugs and sentenced to three years and  six  months'  imprisonment.   A
    notice of liability to automatic deportation was served and  a  further
    asylum  interview  conducted  (the  21st   November   interview).   The
    Respondent then made a deportation order dated 4th February 2015.

 7. The Appellant appealed against the making of the deportation  order  on
    the basis that she was entitled to be granted refugee  status  and  her
    rights under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR  would  be  breached  by  her
    removal. The appeal came before the FtT (the 30th July 2015 decision)

First FtT Hearing

 8. The FtT took evidence from the Appellant and gave consideration to  the
    certificate issued by the Secretary of State under  the  provisions  of
    Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  It
    concluded that the Appellant was not excluded from consideration as  to
    whether she was entitled to protection of the  Refugee  Convention  and
    discharged the certificate. The  judge  however  dismissed  the  asylum
    claim  because  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the  evidence  presented
    established  that  informers  against  gangs  in  Jamaica,   could   be
    considered to fall within the category of  a  particular  social  group
    such as to bring them within the Refugee Convention.

 9. He went on to consider therefore whether the Appellant had  shown  that
    she would be at Article 3 risk from non-state agents,  from  which  the
    state  would  not  be  able  to  provide  reasonable   protection   and
    accordingly whether the appeal should be allowed under Article 3 of the
    ECHR. He found that there was such a risk and  allowed  the  appeal  on
    Article 3 grounds.

10. The judge also considered whether the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights
    would be breached. For the  purposes  of  this  decision  although  the
    appellant has 7 children, it is correct to say that  only  3  of  these
    children weigh heavily in this decision. The first is J1 now  13  years
    of age and who is a UK national and in local authority care, J2  now  5
    years old and who is a Jamaican national and J3 now 3 years old who  is
    also a UK national. The Appellant is the sole carer for J2 and  J3  and
    it has always been her case that if deported she would take J2  and  J3
    with her.  In the light of  his  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  at
    Article 3 risk, the judge concluded that it would be  unduly  harsh  on
    all 3 children to remove her,  but  particularly  with  regard  to  her
    younger children. He found that the risk amounted  to  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above the factors set out in  paragraph  398/and
    S.117C of the Rules. Therefore he also allowed the  Appellant's  appeal
    under article 8 ECHR.

Permission to Appeal Decision of 10th July 2015

11. The Respondent sought permission to appeal on three grounds  summarised
    below.

       . The FtT had reversed the burden of proof  in  concluding  that  the
         Claimant's appeal should be allowed under Article 3.  The judge had
         required the Secretary of State to produce information  as  to  the
         current whereabouts of the co-accused, to say whether they had been
         deported to Jamaica, and to  show  whether  they  were  related  to
         various Jamaican gangs.

       . The judge's approach was inconsistent  with  the  country  guidance
         case of AB (Protection -  criminal  gangs  -  internal  relocation)
         Jamaica CG [2007] UKAIT 00018.  It was said that the judge had  not
         properly turned his mind  to  whether  there  was  viable  internal
         relocation  option  available  and  without  the  Appellant   being
         admitted into a witness protection programme.

       . The judge had erred in finding  that  there  were  very  compelling
         circumstances in respect of Article 8.  The findings were  premised
         on the flawed Article 3 decision that the Claimant  would  have  to
         live under the witness  protection  programme  when  there  was  no
         evidence of persecution in her home area.

12. Permission was granted and an error of law was found. In  reaching  its
    decision the Upper Tribunal said the following:

         "22.  In  very  many  ways  this  is  an   absolutely   outstanding
         determination.  The judge has done an exceptional amount of work on
         this case.  He clearly took a great deal of care in  analysing  the
         evidence, and was clearly frustrated that key facts  could  not  be
         established.

         23. I have carefully considered Miss  Khan's  submission  that  the
         judge allowed the appeal both on the basis that the Claimant's  co-
         accused were linked to the Shower Posse and in Jamaica, and on  the
         basis that that had not been established.  However, that is  simply
         not clear from the text of paragraph 125.

         24. Moreover in saying that the  Secretary  of  State  should  have
         responded appropriately, by which I presume he meant  by  providing
         evidence in relation to the  deportation  of  the  co-accused,  the
         judge clearly reversed the burden which  always  remains  with  the
         Claimant to prove her case, i.e. that she would  be  at  risk  from
         them in Jamaica.

         25. Furthermore the judge has not based his assessment of real risk
         upon findings of fact but upon a number of surmises.  It would have
         been open to him to reasonably  conclude  that  [P]  and  [D]  were
         deported to Jamaica since they were recommended for deportation and
         had served ten year sentences.  Equally it would be open to him  to
         conclude that [Mc], having been sentenced to six years, was in  all
         likelihood deported.  However, that  is  not  how  he  phrased  his
         decision.

         26. So far as Ground 3 is concerned, if  the  judge  erred  in  his
         assessment of risk, his view of whether there were very  compelling
         reasons why the Claimant's  removal  would  breach  her  Article  8
         rights and those of her children is flawed.

         27. There is less merit  in  Ground  2.   The  judge  assessed  the
         evidence in relation to the witness protection  programme  and  was
         entitled to conclude at paragraph 139 that  on  the  basis  of  the
         country information provided there were considerable doubts  as  to
         whether she would be admitted and if she  were,  whether  it  would
         provide adequate protection for her.  He was entitled  to  conclude
         that in the absence of admittance to the programme relocation would
         not provide adequate protection.

         28. Mrs Petterson was not in a position to assist with the remaking
         of this decision without her file.  I canvassed  with  the  parties
         whether the appropriate course, unusually, would be to  remit  this
         matter back to the same judge and neither had any objection.

         29. In view of the amount of work that the judge  has  already  put
         into this case, and his familiarity with it,  the  most  economical
         course would be for this case to be remitted back to him to make an
         assessment of risk on return on the basis of the facts that he  has
         already made.  He needs to clarify whether it is his view that  the
         co-accused have been deported to  Jamaica.   If  the  Secretary  of
         State chooses not to provide any evidence about deportation at  the
         next hearing that could be a reasonable inference.  He  also  needs
         to say whether it makes any difference to his  decision  that  they
         have any connection to  the  Shower  Posse.   If  it  does  make  a
         difference, then it is for the Claimant to prove that connection.

         30. This matter is remitted back to Judge  Turnock.   There  is  no
         challenge to his conclusions  on  the  asylum  claim,  nor  to  his
         findings of fact which are preserved, namely that the Claimant  was
         at risk of reprisals in 2006 but there is no evidence of threats to
         members of her family in Jamaica since then and none to her."

The Second FtT Decision 14 April 2016

13. The matter came before Judge Turnock once more on 31st March 2016 for a
    further hearing.  The judge properly directed himself in the terms  set
    out by the Upper Tribunal.  After further consideration he  found  that
    the Appellant would be at risk on return  to  Jamaica,  on  account  of
    Article 3 ECHR rights being violated.

14. The Respondent once again sought permission  to  appeal  the  decision.
    This was initially refused in the FtT in a decision issued on 10th  May
    2016.  In  refusing  permission  Designated  Judge  Manuell  said   the
    following:

         "1.  The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of  her  protection
         claim raised after a deportation order had been  made  against  her
         was again allowed on Article 3 ECHR  and  Article  8  ECHR  grounds
         (following remittal to him for clarification of certain  issues  by
         the Upper Tribunal) by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Turnock  in  a
         decision and reasons promulgated on 14 April 2016.   The  Appellant
         asserts that she is at risk of serious harm from criminal gangs  in
         Jamaica if returned there, in part from having been an informer.

         2.  The Respondent's lengthy onwards grounds dated  27  April  2016
         were in time.  In summary the grounds  contend  that  the  tribunal
         reversed the burden of proof and engaged in speculation, failed  to
         apply country guidance, erred in its approach  to  Article  8  ECHR
         (family life) and gave inadequate reasons.

         3.  The current proceedings have become somewhat tangled and it  is
         easy to see why the Secretary of State is displeased by the judge's
         decision to allow the appeal.  That decision may  well  be  thought
         generous  given  the  Appellant's   deplorable   criminal   record.
         Nevertheless, there was no appeal against the remittal to the  same
         judge by the Upper Tribunal (my emphasis) and it  would  have  been
         odd for the judge not to have followed his previous  assessment  of
         the risks he considered  the  Appellant  faced  if  returned.   But
         ultimately  the  complaints  against  the  decision  amount  to   a
         sustained expression of disagreement.  The judge's Article  3  ECHR
         findings were open to him and were  based  on  objective  evidence.
         Any excessive generosity or indeed legal error in relation  to  the
         Article 8 ECHR family life claim could not affect  the  sustainable
         decision to allow the appeal under Article 3  ECHR  and  hence  the
         Appellant's ultimate success.  No arguable material  error  of  law
         has been identified."

15. The Respondent renewed her application to the Upper  Tribunal.  It  was
    granted in the following terms:

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal against the decision
             of FtTJ Turnock to allow the Appellant's appeal under  Article
             3.

         2.   The application is granted because it  is  arguable  that  the
             judge  did  not  adequately  reason  the  internal  relocation
             decision (see AB  (Protection  -  criminal  gangs  -  internal
             relocation) Jamaica CG [2007] UKAIT 00018).  (See [58] of  the
             decision of the FtT).

         3.   It is arguable that the  judge  did  not  identify  compelling
             circumstances in the context of 398 (c).  It is arguable  that
             the judge's assessment of unduly harsh was made without regard
             to the Appellant's criminal history (See MM  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
             450).

         4.   The ground relating to risk on return to home area is  not  as
             strong; however, I grant permission on all grounds."

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision of Judge
    Turnock discloses an error of law requiring  the  decision  to  be  set
    aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing Before Me

16. Before me Mr Diwnycz appeared on behalf of the Respondent and Mr  Tetty
    on behalf of the Appellant.  I clarified with the parties at the outset
    of the proceedings that what was before me was a narrow issue which  in
    summary amounts to the following:

    . Did Judge Turnock make adequate finding in  his  second  decision,  to
      justify his conclusion that the Appellant would be at risk  on  return
      to Jamaica and that risk would amount to an Article 3 risk?

    . If the answer to the above question is "yes", is it then the case that
      the Article 3 risk identified would amount to compelling circumstances
      in the context of Section 398(c)?

17. Both representatives were in agreement that those  two  questions  pose
    the specific issues  before  me.  I  am  grateful  to  Mr  Diwnycz  for
    confirming that if I were  to  resolve  the  Article  3  issue  in  the
    Appellant's favour, then it would be accepted that  the  other  grounds
    effectively fall away. Mr Diwnycz did not seek to dissuade me that  the
    terms of the grounds seeking permission against  the  14th  April  2016
    decision appear to be  an attempt to reargue  that  which  had  already
    been dealt with by Judge Taylor in her decision of 10th February  2016.
    It was  agreed  therefore  that  the  permission  given  against  Judge
    Turnock's second decision was limited, in  the  way   I  have  set  out
    above.

18. I heard submissions from both representatives. Mr Diwnycz confined  his
    submissions to those set out above. Mr Tetty  relied  upon  a  Rule  24
    response and highlighted the following points.  He submitted that Judge
    Turnock in reaching his conclusions  on  the  Article  3  risk  to  the
    Appellant, took into account the current country guidance case  of  AB.
    That outlined the power and influence and violence of gangs in Jamaica.
     He said that the judge had spent a great deal of  time  in  his  first
    decision considering the risk to the Appellant should she  be  deported
    to Jamaica.  He had made clear findings that the  Appellant  had  given
    evidence against her co-accused including  violent gang  members  known
    as "P" and "D".  It was the view of the police, certainly at that time,
    that the Appellant was at risk of reprisals from her co-defendants.

19. The judge reported at [54] of his second decision that it has now  been
    established that the Appellant's co-defendants P and D were deported to
    Jamaica following the completion of their lengthy  sentences  following
    conviction for drug offences. The prosecution relied on the Appellant's
    evidence to gain those convictions.

20. Judge Turnock, made a further finding saying that it was as a result of
    the Appellant's evidence against them which ensured both P and D served
    lengthy prison sentences.  He relied upon police information that their
    intelligence indicated that both P and D have access  to  firearms  and
    are no strangers to violence.

21. The judge also found that the country guidance information led  him  to
    conclude that gang culture is much more prevalent in  Jamaica  than  in
    the UK.  Therefore he was satisfied that P and D have shown  themselves
    to be violent gang members who would revert to that culture in Jamaica.
    The judge was satisfied that P and D will have access to a gang network
    in Jamaica and would be able to trace the Appellant  without  any  real
    difficulty once they learned she was in the country. He relied upon the
    Appellant's evidence that another of her co-accused "Mc" has a relative
    who is a big noise in the Jamaican gang culture.

22. The judge further considered and found that he could not  be  satisfied
    that the Appellant would be admitted to a witness protection  programme
    in Jamaica and therefore given the necessary protection she needed.  In
    these circumstances, Mr Tetty submitted, it was clearly open  to  Judge
    Turnock to find that the Appellant would be at Article 3 risk  and  the
    judge's decision should stand.

Consideration and Findings

23. I find I am satisfied that the decision of Judge  Turnock  contains  no
    error of law requiring it to be set aside.  I now give my  reasons  for
    this.

24. The Appellant appeals against the making of a deportation order by  the
    Respondent under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 -  "automatic
    deportation", on the grounds that she has been convicted of  a  serious
    offence resulting in a term of imprisonment of three years six months.

25. The Appellant's appeal is on the basis that she falls within  Exception
    1 to Section 33(2) of the 2007 Act because to deport  her  to  Jamaica,
    would amount to a breach of her rights under Article 3 ECHR.

26. I find that Judge Turnock in assessing  this  claim,  firstly  properly
    directed himself to the relevant  statutory  framework.   There  is  no
    misdirection there.

27. Secondly the judge carefully proceeded to set out (in  both  decisions)
    the evidence which was before him.  There was a great deal of evidence,
    but the judge spent considerable time setting out that  evidence  which
    in both  decisions  spreads  over  several  detailed  paragraphs.   The
    evidence included the oral evidence  of  the  Appellant  together  with
    documentary evidence.

28. Following an error of law being found in his first decision  the  judge
    proceeded in his second decision to set out fully the UT's findings and
    reasons and then directed himself on the task which was now before him.



29. A proper reading of the decision shows that the judge turned  his  mind
    to establishing that which he had been directed to do.  He  established
    that the Appellant's co-accused P and D were deported to  Jamaica  [54]
    and this led him to conclude that they are still there.  I see  nothing
    wrong with that finding based as it was on the evidence before him.

30. The judge then took into account,  the  evidence  of  P  and  D's  past
    history, and this led him to the conclusion that both P and D  are  men
    of violence who are capable of  causing  life-threatening  injuries  to
    others. They have connections with gang members in  Jamaica.  This  led
    him to conclude that there is a strong likelihood that P and D had  not
    changed their ways.  Again that was a finding that was reasonably  open
    to the judge.

31. The judge then took into account that " Mc", another co-accused of  the
    Appellant and of P and D, remains in the UK, but nevertheless has  real
    connections with the violent gangs in Jamaica through a relative.  This
    network  would  inevitably  place  the  Appellant  at  great  risk   of
    reprisals. Accordingly piecing this  information  together,  the  judge
    concluded that there is a real risk  that  the  Appellant's  return  to
    Jamaica and her whereabouts would soon be known once she arrived there.
     This would then place her at Article 3 risk [58].  I  see  nothing  to
    show that the judge's sequential findings were in any way  perverse  or
    irrational (indeed it has not been suggested by Mr  Diwnycz  that  they
    are) and therefore they were findings fully open to him.

32. The judge then went on to outline and assess  whether  there  would  be
    meaningful protection for the Appellant by way of a witness  protection
    scheme.  He examined the country guidance case, looked at  the  Country
    Information Report, but preferred to place reliance on a report  by  an
    expert - Dr Scott Long.  The judge noted that Dr Long in his words,  is
    "closely familiar with the human rights situation in Jamaica" [135].

33. Following Dr Long's report, the judge concluded as he was  entitled  to
    do, that the Appellant would not find meaningful  protection  from  the
    authorities in Jamaica - the  widespread  reported  corruption  of  the
    Jamaican police force,  together  with  the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    participated in a foreign crime, would mean that witness protection was
    not a viable option for her. I find it was fully open to the  judge  to
    make those findings and there is nothing to show they are irrational or
    perverse.

34. In short I find that  Judge  Turnock  has  given  a  full  and  careful
    decision with reasons based on the evidence which was led  before  him.
    This is a sustainable decision and nothing that I  have  heard,  merits
    overturning the decision for legal error.

35. As I  set  out  earlier  in  this  decision,  it  was  agreed  by  both
    representatives that if I were to find  that  Judge  Turnock  has  made
    sustainable findings on the Appellant's Article 3 risk, then  it  would
    follow that I would be bound to find in favour of the Appellant in  her
    appeal against the deportation order and that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal must stand. For the foregoing reasons I do so find.

Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision of the  First-tier
Tribunal dated 31st March 2016 (promulgated 14th  April2016)  is  dismissed.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore stands.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     05 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts

