
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04636/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 30 September 2013                          |On 8 October 2013            |
|Prepared 30 September 2013                    |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                           heben abubakry alipoor
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Miss H Horsley, Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Forrester,  promulgated  on  24  June  2013,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 30
    April 2013 to refuse him leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  and  to
    refuse him asylum.

 2. The appellant is an ethnic Kurd from Iran whose case is that  he  faces
    persecution on return on account of his suspected involvement with  the
    KDPI and/or the risk of being treated as a draft evader.  He fears also
    that he will be ill-treated on return as a failed asylum seeker.

 3. The respondent accepts that the appellant is an ethnic Kurd  from  Iran
    but did not accept his account of being suspected of membership of  the
    KDPI and that he would not be at risk on  return  to  Iran,  having  no
    adverse profile other than his illegal exit.

 4. Judge Forrester found that  the  appellant  was  not  credible  on  the
    grounds:-

    (i)  that although the basic facts were consistent, his  account  lacks
         credibility in detail; [11.1] that it  was  "completely  incredible
         that a village so small could support a shop as  contended  for  by
         the appellant given the limited descriptions of the shop  given  by
         the appellant and  the  inconsistencies  in  what  the  shop  sold"
         [11.1],

    (ii) that none of the items the appellant claims he sold would  "in  my
         judgment be items that the tiny community in  which  the  shop  was
         located would have needed" [11.2]; and, that  as  the  shop  was  a
         fabrication, he could not accept that KDPI literature was found  in
         the shop and found it inconceivable  when  arrangements  were  made
         that the appellant was not given the means  and  method  of  making
         contact with his uncle [11.4],

    (iii)    that on his return to Iran the  appellant  would  not  have  a
         history which aroused the appellant's suspicions [13].

 5. The grounds of appeal challenged the decision on  the  basis  that  the
    judge materially erred in law

     i) in his approach to the findings regarding  the  family  shop  given
        that its existence had not been challenged by the  Home  Office  in
        the refusal letter [5, 6] and at no point during  the  hearing  did
        the  Presenting  Officer  or  the  judge   question   whether   the
        appellant's family owned a shop in Iran, thereby depriving  him  of
        the opportunity to address this matter, there being no challenge in
        the respondent's submissions that the shop existed [8].

    ii) in finding that the appellant's family's ownership of the shop  was
        implausible, which amounted to unlawful speculation  not  based  on
        any objective evidence,

    (iii)    in determining the entire case on a single issue;

    iv) in failing to have proper regard to the expert report  which,  even
        were the appellant not credible, indicated that  he  was  at  risk;
        and,

     v) in failing to have regard to the Respondent's failure to trace  the
        appellant's family in Iran [14 to 15].

 6. On 18 July 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge Blandy granted permission  to
    appeal on all grounds.  The respondent replied to that letter  pursuant
    to Rule 24 in a letter dated 31 July 2013  submitting  that  the  judge
    gave cogent reasons for disbelieving that there was a shop,  a  finding
    open to him to make.

 7. I heard submissions from both representatives.  Mr Draycott  submitted,
    relying on the grounds, that the judge's decision  was  irrational  and
    not grounded in evidence.

 8. Ms Horsley submitted that the judge reached conclusions open to him and
    he had been entitled to make findings about what  he  thought  a  small
    store would sell.  She also submitted that, contrary to  what  was  put
    forward in the grounds of appeal, that the respondent had accepted  the
    shop existed and it was  not  clear  that  there  had  been  no  cross-
    examination on the point or that the judge had not asked questions [7].
     At that point it became clear that there was no Record of  Proceedings
    on the court file.

 9. The determination does not identify any proper basis on which the judge
    could properly have come to the  conclusion  that  it  was  "completely
    incredible that a village of so small a size could conceivably  support
    a shop as contended for by the appellant". Whilst the judge is entitled
    to use commonsense in assessing the evidence, as Neuberger LJ noted  in
    HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 at 28 to 29, inherent improbability  can
    be a dangerous even a wholly inappropriate factor to rely on in  asylum
    cases. As Keene LJ noted in Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 at [27]  care
    must be taken in concluding an account is incredible without looking at
    the  issue  through  the  evidence  of  the  country  information.  The
    determination does not disclose any reliance on such evidence and  thus
    the findings on credibility  are  inadequately  reasoned.  Further,  at
    [11.2] the judge impermissibly relies on  his  own  speculations  as  a
    basis for rejecting the appellant's evidence.

10. In the circumstances, I am satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination did involve the making of an error of law  affecting  the
    outcome of the appeal and must be set aside.  The determination must be
    remade. The Senior President of the Tribunals'  Practice  Statement  of
    25th September 2012 provides as follows at paragraph 7:

              "7. "Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal

             Where under section 12(1) of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in
             accordance with relevant Practice Directions) to  re-make  the
             decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii).


              [7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each occasion to proceed
             to re-make the decision instead of remitting the case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:-


                  (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party
                      before the First-tier Tribunal  of a fair hearing  or
                      other opportunity for that party's case to be put  to
                      and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


                  (b)  the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding
                      which is necessary in order for the decision  in  the
                      appeal to be re-made is such that, having  regard  to
                      the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate
                      to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

11. The effect of the error here is such that none of the findings  can  be
    preserved, and as the record of proceedings appears to  be  absent,  an
    extensive judicial fact-finding exercise is required and, having regard
    to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to  remit  the
    case to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  determination  of  the
    appellant's appeal on all issues.

    Directions

    1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


    2. None of the findings made by Judge Forrester are preserved


    3. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.



    Signed                     Date:  1 October 2013
[pic]
     Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


