

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04767/2015
                                                               AA/04880/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|on 7 December 2015                     |                On 4 January 2016    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               REBECCA JUSTEN
                             JESSICA JUSTEN JOHN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the First Appellant:            Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by
Gray & Co., Solicitors
For the Second Appellant:   Mrs F Farrell of P G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:           Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are Christians and nationals of Pakistan.  They claim to
    have been at risk from the Taliban, as a result of which they  fled  to
    the UK.  They are mother and  daughter.   Another  daughter,  a  minor,
    accompanied them.  The first appellant's husband and  son  remained  in
    Pakistan, because they did not have visas for the UK.

 2. The respondent did not consider the appellants'  claims  credible,  and
    held that in any event "taken at highest" sufficiency of protection and
    internal relocation were both available.

 3. Judge  Handley  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeals  by  determination
    promulgated on 2  July  2015.   He  had  some  concerns  regarding  the
    evidence.  He accepted that the first appellant is a Christian, but not
    that she is either a high profile or an evangelical one (paragraph 35).
     He considered that  areas  of  relative  safety  were  available,  and
    referred to country guidance to the effect that relocation was normally
    a viable option unless an individual was accused of blasphemy which was
    being seriously pursued.  He did not accept that the appellants were in
    that situation (paragraph 36).

 4. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

        2. The FTTJ erred in law because:

              1. Paragraph 29: the issue discussed  was  not  a  significant
                 discrepancy, or if it was, it was no more than a minor one.
                  The letter received by her  family  in  January  2014  was
                 after she had left Pakistan.  She was  entitled  to  assume
                 that questions would be restricted  to  matters  that  pre-
                 dated her entry to the UK.  The FTTIJ was not  entitled  to
                 conclude that the appellant's credibility was damaged of  a
                 "serious discrepancy" arose.

              2. Paragraph 30:  the  incidents  between  December  2012  and
                 December 2013 should have been considered in the round, nor
                 individually  analysed.  The  appellant  alleges   that   4
                 incidents took place between  December  2012  and  December
                 2013 and all allegedly related to the appellant's religion.
                  The basis of any analysis should not have been whether the
                 police were told that 2 of these incidents (attack  on  the
                 son and attack on the appellant related  to  religion,  but
                 whether they were plausible, having regard to  time,  place
                 and circumstance.  If not,  and  appeared  to  be  isolated
                 incident, then the conclusions in this paragraph would have
                 been open  to  the  FTTIJ.   But  having  regard  to  other
                 guidance considered in the round, including the appellant's
                 evidence (unclear if this is accepted or rejected that  the
                 police  were  not  sympathetic  to  such  complaints,   the
                 conclusion in the last sentence of this  paragraph  as  not
                 open to the FTTIJ.

              3. Para 31: it is not clear whether the FTTIJ accepts that the
                 (2) letters referred to blasphemy  either  specifically  or
                 implicitly.  Persecution is in the mind of the  persecutor:
                 both the December 2012 and December 2013  letters  referred
                 (implicitly in the earlier  one  which  allegedly  mentions
                 "... consequences ...") to blasphemy (specifically  in  the
                 later one).  Only if  evidence  of  their  contents  and/or
                 whether they were even received is rejected can the  threat
                 of blasphemy be excluded.  They are not so the issue  is  a
                 crucial one.  No proper finding is made, and the  basis  of
                 the conclusion in  this  paragraph  -  that  the  appellant
                 herself accepts she was not evangelising - is unsafe.  What
                 may be evangelising to one person may not  be  to  another.
                 The test is whether in Pakistan teaching even  basic  facts
                 which include a reference  to  Jesus  might  be  considered
                 blasphemous by some.
              4. Paragraph 33: it is not clear what part of  Section  8  has
                 been engaged.  From the second sentence here, it is assumed
                 to be S8(4).  The  basis  of  the  claim  is  a  series  of
                 incidents allegedly occurring within one year, at  the  end
                 of which the appellant alleges she left  her  home  country
                 and attempted to claim asylum as quickly as  possible  (see
                 the later part paragraph 7 in her Statement).  S8(4)  talks
                 of not claiming asylum after  a  "reasonable  opportunity".
                 There is no basis for arguing the appellant  delayed  doing
                 so.   Section  8  raises  a   rebuttable   presumption   of
                 incredibility  in  certain  circumstances  such   as   that
                 envisaged by sub section 4.  Either that  presumption  does
                 not arise in the first place or if it does has clearly been
                 rebutted here.



              5. Paragraph 34: the risk identified in AK is of "... becoming
                 a  victim  on  blasphemy  ..."  (Headnote  5).   As   above
                 (paragraph 2.3)  it  is  not  clear  whether  it  has  been
                 accepted that the appellant has been accused of  blasphemy.
                 The second sentence in paragraph 36 in  the  decision  does
                 not help because no reference is made to  the  contents  of
                 either letter.  In any event, AK also says that  individual
                 factors should  be  assessed  on  a  case  by  case  basis.
                 Relevant factors here include the appellant's experience in
                 Christian teaching, the allegation  she  has  had  to  move
                 before on account of  alleged  possible  threats,  and  the
                 status of her husband (a Christian leader).  No account  is
                 taken of any of these factors.

              6. Paragraph 36: according to AK, internal relocation  is  not
                 viable if allegations  of  blasphemy  are  being  seriously
                 pursued (Headnote 8).  Reference is made to paragraphs  2.3
                 and 2.5  above.   Whether  the  blasphemy  allegations  are
                 credible is crucial.  In any event internal relocation must
                 take  account  of  personal  circumstances  (such  as   her
                 experience, her husband's status and her previous  attempts
                 to relocate and their effect). This has not been done.

              7. The FTTIJ has left out of  account  evidence  which  should
                 have been taken into account.  No reference is made to  the
                 evidence referred to at paragraph 13 in her statement.

 5. Mr  Forrest  firstly  identified  the  principal  item  of  documentary
    evidence on which he said the case relied. This is  a  photocopy  dated
    10/02/14 and headed "to whom it may concern", signed by Mr Justen John,
    Director ARP Mission Schools, Sahiwla, Pakistan.  It  states  that  the
    author recently received a "threat letter" addressed to his  wife,  the
    first  appellant,  from  unknown  senders  describing   themselves   as
    Mujahedeen-i-Islam; that the police declined to register  a  complaint,
    describing this as a religious matter; and that the police  advice  was
    to move away  "to  have  our  lives  secured".   The  document  has  an
    attesting stamp from an advocate of the High Court and Commissioner for
    Oaths.  Why such a document should be stamped in that way, and to  what
    effect, has not been explored.

 6. I note since the hearing that  among  the  rather  disorganised  papers
    placed on file for the appellants there is a  copy  translation  of  an
    undated letter  to  "Miss  Rebecca"  warning  her  to  keep  away  from
    preaching or else, "We will have  you,  your  daughter  and  the  whole
    family implicated in blasphemy laws in such a manner that there will be
    no way left ... we will kill you .... and will be able to find  you  in
    any  corner  of  Pakistan".   This  is  signed  Mujahedeen-i-Islam  and
    accompanied by what may be a copy of the original document in Urdu.

 7. Mr Forrest based his submissions only  on  2.3,  2.5  and  2.6  of  the
    grounds.  He said that three significant points were not in doubt:  the
    first appellant was a Christian; was a teacher of  history  in  several
    schools; and Christians form a relatively small minority  in  Pakistan,
    who suffer discrimination.   Each claim of persecution arising in  that
    context had to be decided case by case.  The judge failed to  make  any
    finding on the critical allegation that she was the victim of blasphemy
    allegations.  He expressed doubts about the  first  threatening  letter
    (no copy produced, as it was not retained) at paragraph 29 but  reached
    no clear conclusion.  At paragraph 32 he seemed to have no doubts about
    the second letter.   He  failed  to  put  matters  in  context  of  the
    background evidence about such threats.   He  identified  the  question
    whether accusations of blasphemy were being seriously pursued but  left
    it open.  A rehearing was required for such findings to be made.

 8. Mrs Farrell adopted the submission made by Mr Forrest,  and  said  that
    the two cases stood or fell together.

 9. Mr Matthews submitted that the case turned on the application of AK and
    SK (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 00569 (IAC), as the judge
    held at paragraph 36.   The appellants said  that  there  had  been  an
    attempt to register a FIR on their side, not  that  any  FIR  had  been
    filed against them.  The  judge  based  his  decision  on  the  salient
    features of the case, particularly as set out at paragraph 31  -  first
    appellant not preaching, but imparting historical information;  not  an
    evangelical Christian; not aware of  any  blasphemy  charges;  able  to
    remain in her home town before  leaving  Pakistan;  did  not  tell  her
    employers until after she resigned; husband  [and  son]  continuing  to
    live in the same area.  No risk at the level calling for protection was
    proved but even if matters rose to that level internal  relocation  was
    available.

10. I reserved my determination.

11. AK and SK is headnoted thus:


           1.  Christians in Pakistan  are  a  religious  minority  who,  in
          general, suffer discrimination  but  this  is  not  sufficient  to
          amount to a real risk of persecution.


          2.  Unlike the position of  Ahmadis,  Christians  in  general  are
          permitted to practise their faith, can attend church,  participate
          in religious activities and have their own schools and hospitals.


          3. Evangelism by its  very  nature  involves  some  obligation  to
          proselytise.  Someone  who  seeks  to  broadcast  their  faith  to
          strangers so as to encourage them to convert, may find  themselves
          facing a charge of blasphemy. In that way, evangelical  Christians
          face a greater risk than those Christians  who  are  not  publicly
          active. It will be for the judicial fact-finder  to  assess  on  a
          case by case  basis  whether,  notwithstanding  attendance  at  an
          evangelical church, it is important to the individual to behave in
          evangelical ways that may lead to a real risk of persecution.


          4. Along with Christians, Sunnis, Shi'as, Ahmadis and  Hindus  may
          all be potentially charged with blasphemy. Those citizens who  are
          more marginalised and occupy low standing social positions, may be
          less able to deal with the consequences of such proceedings.


          5.   The risk of becoming a victim of a blasphemy allegation  will
          depend upon a number of factors and must be assessed on a case  by
          case basis. Relevant factors will include the place of  residence,
          whether it is an urban or rural area, and the  individual's  level
          of education, financial and employment status and level of  public
          religious activity  such  as  preaching.  These  factors  are  not
          exhaustive.


          6. Non state agents who use blasphemy laws against Christians, are
          often motivated by spite, personal or business disputes, arguments
          over land and property. Certain political events may also  trigger
          such accusations. A blasphemy allegation, without more,  will  not
          generally be  enough  to  make  out  a  claim  under  the  Refugee
          Convention.  It  has  to  be  actively  followed  either  by   the
          authorities in the form of  charges  being  brought  or  by  those
          making the complaint. If it is, or will be, actively pursued, then
          an applicant may be able to establish a real risk of harm  in  the
          home area and an insufficiency of state protection.


          7. Like other women in Pakistan, Christian women, in general, face
          discrimination and may be at a  heightened  risk  but  this  falls
          short of a generalised real risk. The need for  a  fact  sensitive
          analysis is crucial in their case.  Factors  such  as  their  age,
          place of residence and  socio-economic  milieu  are  all  relevant
          factors when assessing the  risk  of  abduction,  conversions  and
          forced marriages.

          8. Relocation is normally a viable option unless an individual  is
          accused of blasphemy which is being  seriously  pursued;  in  that
          situation  there  is,   in   general,   no   internal   relocation
          alternative.

12. The judge clearly had reservations about some of the evidence from  the
    first appellant.  He thought she was to an  extent  exaggerating.    He
    did not need to resolve matters any further than he did because  taking
    her account at highest and applying country guidance, it  failed.   She
    is not an evangelical.  Any threat against her did not progress to  the
    registration of a  charge  of  blasphemy.   No  such  charge  has  been
    initiated with the authorities, still less pursued.  She  was  able  to
    remain at home for some considerable time, and her husband and son  are
    still there.  The facts did not demonstrate a local risk, and certainly
    not one  which  precluded  relocation  within  Pakistan.   The  judge's
    conclusions at paragraphs 36 and 37 were well justified.  No  error  of
    law has been shown.

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            17 December 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




