

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal number: AA/04172/2015
      AA/04820/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On March 9, 2016                  |On March 29, 2016              |
|                                  |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                             MISS SHARAREH SHAH
                               MISS SAREH SHAH
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
Appellant   Mr Muman, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
      Co Solicitors
Respondent  Mr Diwnycz (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The  Appellants  are  citizens  of  Iran.  On  March  16,  2013  the
       appellants arrived in the  United  Kingdom  and  claimed  asylum  on
       arrival. The appellants were subsequently interviewed on February 5,
       2015 and on  February  27,  2015  they  were  refused  asylum  under
       paragraph 336 HC 395 and a decision was taken to  remove  them  from
       the United Kingdom by way  of  directions  under  paragraph  10A  of
       Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

    2. The appellants appealed those decisions under section 82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on March 12, 2015.

    3. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Kershaw  on
       August 3, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on August 11,  2015  he
       refused the appellants' appeals on all grounds.

    4. The appellants lodged grounds of appeal on July 25, 2015  submitting
       the First-tier Judge had erred in his approach  to  the  appellant's
       claim and in particular in the way he dealt with  the  core  of  the
       appellants' claims.

    5. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dineen gave permission to appeal on
       one ground namely it was arguable the Judge failed to have regard to
       the evidence of the second named appellant when considering  whether
       their account was credible. In  all  other  respects  permission  to
       appeal was refused.

    6. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both representatives.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
       pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make no order.

SUBMISSIONS

    8. Mr Muman submitted a skeleton argument and submitted the  Judge  had
       failed to make material findings on matters central  to  the  asylum
       claim. He submitted that by requiring the  second  appellant  to  be
       absent from the proceedings when  the  first  named  appellant  gave
       evidence the Judge contributed to the error  in  law.  He  submitted
       that the Judge erred by using the word "openly" when describing  the
       appellant's discussion at the party. In finding the  appellants  had
       not given an explanation for discussing the  matter  the  Judge  had
       erred because he had failed to have regard to screening  interviews,
       witness statements or cross-examination. The Judge  also  failed  to
       have regard to the fact they  claimed  to  be  whistle-blowers.  His
       adverse  findings  in  paragraph  [69]  fed  into  his  findings  at
       paragraphs [74] and [76]. The Judge also erred by  failing  to  have
       regard to the incriminating evidence found on their computer and  in
       their desks as well as failing  to  have  regard  to  the  fact  the
       appellant's  father  had  been  arrested  or  that  they  left  Iran
       suddenly.

    9.  Mr  Diwnycz  submitted  that  the  arguments  raised  were  a  mere
       disagreement with the Judge's decision. The  Judge  did  not  accept
       their behaviour at the party to be credible and it was open  to  him
       to make that finding. He considered  whether  people  would  discuss
       such matters at a party where others would  be  present  and  drinks
       consumed. The Judge considered their claim and rejected  aspects  of
       it including  about  their  explanation  for  not  telling  [M].  At
       paragraph [80] the Judge  applied  the  test  correctly  as  he  had
       rejected their claim. Although permission had been  granted  on  one
       point there was no evidence to show how drunk they were or that they
       had abandoned all sensibility.

   10. I reserved my decision.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   11. Permission to appeal was given on one ground only namely the Judge's
       approach/assessment of the evidence of what occurred at the party.

   12. The incident that forms this appeal surrounds the events of March 1,
       2015. The appellant had attended at a party and  they  claimed  they
       discussed the conduct of three men who were using their influence to
       elicit fraudulent funds by signing up false  loans.  The  appellants
       claimed they were filmed and that a few days later  a  compact  disc
       was  placed  in  the  second-named  appellant's  desk  drawer  which
       contained political propaganda. [M], who worked for Heresat, and was
       a suitor for the first-named  appellant  informed  the  second-named
       appellant and she went into hiding. On March 4, 2015 the first-named
       appellant claimed she went to work and was told to go home  and  her
       evidence was that [M] called her father informing him that they were
       being framed. Their house was searched, a computer seized and  their
       father was detained. The computers were said  to  contain  political
       propaganda.

   13. The Judge set out the documents he  had  had  regard  to  and  these
       included bundles of documents provided by both  the  respondent  and
       the  appellants.  He  also  referred  to  an  extensive  record   of
       proceedings and at paragraph [31]  he  referred  to  the  fact  that
       "after some discussion with both representatives it was decided that
       I would hear evidence in respect of each appellant separately".

   14. I indicated to Mr Muman that paragraph [7] of his skeleton  argument
       had no merit and was outside the scope of the permission to  appeal.
       My reasons for this were two fold-firstly,  the  Judge  had  clearly
       discussed this at the First-tier Hearing and secondly the Judge  has
       a discretion on who should be present during evidence by  virtue  of
       Rule  27(4)  of  the  Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

   15. Turning to the core issue in this application  the  Judge  noted  at
       paragraphs [48]  to  [49]  of  his  decision  that  the  first-named
       appellant's representative relied on the skeleton arguments  and  he
       was invited to accept the claim as made.

   16. The second-named appellant was then  called  to  give  evidence  and
       after  cross-examination  the  Judge  took  submissions   from   the
       representatives in respect of the second named appellant.

   17. Mr Muman agreed that the Judge correctly identified the issues to be
       considered in paragraphs [67] and [68] of his decision.

   18. The challenge relates to his approach to their claim  in  paragraphs
       [69] and [76] and in particular paragraph [69]. I feel it  would  be
       helpful to set out this paragraph. The Judge wrote-

         "I find it incredible that the appellants would be present  at  the
         birthday-party with a number up to 30 people present and that  they
         would openly discuss this kind of information. It  is  accepted  by
         both parties that the information would be extremely  damaging  and
         place them at risk. I have been given no real explanation as to why
         they would discuss this  at  such  a  place.  It  is  the  kind  of
         information that one would  expect  to  keep  secret  and  only  be
         revealed in some kind of covert place." (Italics added by me)

   19. Mr Muman's argues that the  Judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
       appellant's explanations which were firstly they  were  speaking  to
       only one person and secondly they had been drinking. He submits that
       these explanations were not considered by the Judge.

   20. He referred me to their screening interviews, asylum interviews  and
       statements.

   21. The screening interviews contain nothing startling.  They  refer  to
       the appellants stating they had a drink. They do not claim they were
       drunk or that they were unused to alcohol.

   22. In the first-named appellant's asylum interview questions about  the
       party began at Q143 but at Q156  she  stated  the  conversation  was
       between the her, her sister and one friend called [S].

   23. In the second-named appellant's asylum interview questions about the
       party began at Q129.  Like  her  sister  she  confirmed  there  were
       between 20-30 people present she remembered [S] was present but  was
       unsure what happened to her. She was not aware she had  been  filmed
       at the party.

   24. Both appellants provided witness statements that  are  contained  at
       pages 49-52 of their respective bundles. At paragraph [10] they each
       claimed they were under the influence of alcohol  and  that  "people
       were sitting and talking to each other in their groups and the party
       was busy therefore we did not think that someone  would  be  hearing
       out conversation".

   25. Paragraph [4] of the permission refers to  the  complaint  that  the
       Judge did not take account of  this  evidence  and  that  the  Judge
       should have specifically addressed this.

   26. I am satisfied the Judge  was  aware  of  the  evidence  because  at
       paragraph [28] of his decision he referred to their statements.

   27. The Judge set out their claims in some detail but he did not  accept
       they would have discussed such incriminating  matters  at  a  party.
       Neither appellant appears to have blamed alcohol for "talking  about
       matters" but allege that during the party they discussed with  their
       friend what they knew. The Judge rejected their claim  and  did  not
       find it credible they would have discussed such matters at a party.

   28. Although permission was given to appeal I am satisfied the Judge had
       to assess the credibility of their claims. He rejected their  claims
       that they discussed the matter and whilst he  does  not  comment  on
       paragraphs  [10]  of  their  statements  that  does  not  mean   his
       assessment is defective. He had the benefit  of  hearing  them  give
       evidence and he did  not  find  their  claims  credible.  There  was
       nothing in their accounts, or more particularly their oral evidence,
       that suggested the appellants were under the influence of alcohol to
       such a degree that they would have discussed in public matters  they
       knew would cause them problems if heard by the wrong person. He  did
       not believe their claim and between paragraphs [69] and [71] he gave
       his reasons. Nothing in the grounds of appeal demonstrate there  was
       an error in law.

   29. Although permission was only given on this sole ground Mr Muman also
       addressed me on other matters but the Judge summed up the  issue  he
       had to consider in paragraph [72] of his  decision  when  he  wrote,
       "... the issue is not whether the fraud was taking place but whether
       it or not they were known to have openly discussed  it  and  I  find
       this is untrue". This is what he did  between  paragraphs  [69]  and
       [71] of his decision. None of the additional  matters  raised  today
       affect the grant of permission. They relate to matters raised in  Mr
       Muman's skeleton argument but  Mr  Muman  accepted  at  the  hearing
       permission had only been granted on the above point. The  additional
       arguments were not matters upon which permission was sought.

   30. The Judge carried out a credibility assessment as he  was  obligated
       to do. In the circumstances I find there are no errors  in  law  and
       uphold the First-tier's decisions.

Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeals.

Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
