
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04989/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th May 2016                               |On 18th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Pascoe, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order in this case.  Unless  the
    Upper  Tribunal  or  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report  of   these
    proceedings  or  any  formal  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify the original Appellant.  This direction applies to,
    amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this direction
    could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, with permission appeals against
    the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who  dismissed  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  to  grant
    asylum on humanitarian protection under the Immigration  Rules  HC  395
    (as amended).

 3. The basis of his claim to  asylum  was  his  fear  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities based on political opinion imputed to him.  This was on the
    basis of his support for the LTTE and assistance  given  to  them  from
    2005 to 2008 and his arrest by the authorities in June 2010 in which he
    was  detained  and  seriously  ill-treated  whilst  in  detention.   In
    addition in the United Kingdom he had been actively involved in pro-LTT
    sur place activity.

 4. The claim was refused by the Secretary of State  in  a  decision  dated
    10th March 2015 which was accompanied by a detailed reasons for refusal
    letter which provided reasons as to why that claim was refused,  namely
    that  the  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the   Appellant   had
    established a well-founded fear of persecution, that his claim was  not
    credible in many respects and thus had not demonstrated that there were
    substantial grounds for believing that he would face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka nor  that  he  would
    qualify for humanitarian protection or that his  removal  would  breach
    any of the Articles of the ECHR.

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and in support of his
    appeal produced expert evidence in the form of a medical report dealing
    with the scarring to his body and a psychiatric report.  There was also
    a statement which dealt with the issues of credibility  that  had  been
    raised by the Secretary of State in the refusal letter.

 6. In a determination promulgated on  27th  January  2016  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed his appeal reaching the conclusion that he  had  not
    given a credible account as to having any  significant  role  with  the
    LTTE or that he had been detained and tortured and would thus not be at
    risk of harm if returned to Sri Lanka in accordance  with  the  country
    guidance decision of GJ and Others  (Post  civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    permission was granted on 30th March 2016.

 8. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, the Appellant was represented
    by Ms Pascoe and the Secretary of State by Ms Pal.   Ms  Pascoe  relied
    upon the grounds that had been placed before the Tribunal in support of
    her submissions that overall the determination was unsafe and should be
    set aside.  In addition she made oral submissions in that respect also.
     Ms Pal on behalf of the Secretary of State also made oral  submissions
    which I have had regard to when reaching  a  decision  on  whether  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal discloses material  errors  of
    law.

 9. The grounds of challenge relate to the credibility findings made by the
    judge and also the assessment and approach to the medical evidence.   I
    intend to deal with the grounds in which it is asserted that the  judge
    did not properly analyse or consider the medical evidence in  the  form
    of the report  relating  to  his  injuries  and  also  the  psychiatric
    evidence that had been advanced on his behalf.  The first report is set
    out at page 10 of the Appellant's bundle.  The expert concerned saw the
    Appellant on 12th June 2015 and there was  a  three  hour  consultation
    which took place with  the  Appellant  and  the  expert  sets  out  the
    documents that he has also seen to assist in  the  compilation  of  his
    report.

10.  The report makes reference to the Appellant's account of ill-treatment
    including that of being beaten with hands and beaten  with  sticks  and
    also including having been kicked  following  which  he  had  sustained
    bruising which had left no permanent disability save intermittent pain.
     There was also the reference to some sexual interference.  The  report
    also made reference to scarring  upon  the  Appellant's  body  and  the
    mechanism upon  which  those  injuries  had  been  inflicted  upon  the
    Appellant.  The opinion of the expert that in view of the position  and
    sizes of the scars on the body that they could not be  from  any  other
    means other than a burn.  He also reached the conclusion  that  he  was
    confident that there were two separate instruments used to inflict  the
    burn wounds leaving the scars which he went on to consider later in the
    report.  Having described the characteristics of the  scars  and  their
    clinical features and having seen similar scars on  several  occasions,
    his conclusion was that they were caused by heated metal equipment such
    as an iron rod.  As to the age of the scars, whilst he stated  that  it
    was  difficult  to  clinically  age  scars  more  than  two  years,  he
    considered  that  they  were  approximately  five  years   old   having
    considered  the  pigmentation,  location,  distribution   and   healing
    processes involved.

11. The report went on to consider four separate alternative causes for the
    scars that had been described in the report  including  self-infliction
    which he ruled out for the reasons given, whether they were caused by a
    medical condition which he also ruled out and whether they were  caused
    by any accident or wounds from childhood injuries but  found  that  the
    scars  were  inconsistent  with  any  form  of  accident.    The   last
    alternative cause is whether or  not  it  was  caused  deliberately  to
    mislead.   He  clinically  concluded  that  it  was  not  possible   to
    scientifically differentiate between deliberately inflicted wounds at a
    third party's behest from wounds inflicted from any  trauma.   This  is
    not a case of their being provided by any form of ritual  or  religious
    festival thus his conclusion overall that the injuries and the scarring
    was consistent with the account given by the Appellant.

12. The judge considered the medical evidence at paragraphs 30 and 31.   He
    found there was an inconsistency in the report as to the aging  of  the
    scars, the judge found it hard to believe that  the  burn  marks  would
    heal as quickly as the Appellant had claimed and that when  looking  at
    the location of the scars that it seemed "odd  that  there  were  scars
    only on the back and nowhere else on the body".

13.  As to causation the judge considered the expert's report as to whether
    the burn marks could have been deliberately caused and stated that  "in
    light of that conclusion and bearing in mind  the  inconsistencies  and
    general lack of credibility that he could not rule out that  the  scars
    had not been caused deliberately in order to mislead."  Thus he was not
    satisfied that the presence of the scars on the Appellant's back  meant
    that he had been detained, interrogated and tortured as claimed.

14.  Ms Pascoe relied upon the grounds and in addition provided a  copy  of
    the decision of KV (Scarring and medical  evidence)  Sri  Lanka  [2014]
    UKUT 230  which  provides  guidance  on  self-infliction  by  proxy  of
    scarring.  Ms Pal on behalf of the Secretary of State submitted that it
    had been open to the judge to make those findings as set out above  and
    in particular the inconsistency as to the ability to age such scars and
    that overall the judge did not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    tortured and that it was open to him to attach  little  weight  to  the
    report.

15. Having heard the submission  of  the  advocates  and  having  read  the
    determination and the evidence as a whole,  I  accept  the  submissions
    made by Ms Pascoe when considering the medical evidence.

16.  Dealing firstly with the age of  the  scars,  the  reasons  given  for
    rejecting the report was that the  judge  had  found  an  inconsistency
    concerning the expert's conclusion that he was able to date the scar to
    "about five years" which would be consistent with  the  chronology  put
    forward by the Appellant.  In his analysis  of  the  report  the  judge
    considered that that finding was inconsistent with  what  he  had  said
    earlier that it was difficult to clinically age scars of more than  two
    years.  However there is no agreed consensus at which it is  impossible
    to chronologically determine the age  of  scars  (see  decision  KV  at
    paragraph [229]).  Whilst in KV reference was made to  the  possibility
    of dating scarring up to two  years,  in  this  case  the  expert  gave
    reasons as to why he had reached the conclusion that he could date  the
    scars to a later date after considering the pigmentation, location, the
    distribution and the healing process.  Consequently there  was  nothing
    to support the view that there was any inconsistency  or  that  it  was
    improbable that he could not clinically age the scars in the  way  that
    he did.

17. Furthermore the judge went on to state that the Appellant did not  have
    any treatment for those wounds and reached the conclusion  "I  find  it
    hard to believe that the burn marks would  heal  as  quickly  as  being
    claimed and that the Appellant would  not  seek  treatment  for  them."
    However that was not based on any evidence and the report at  paragraph
    [7] and [8] made reference to the doctor's clinical  findings  in  this
    respect and that he was not simply relying on the  Appellant's  account
    and gave specific clinical evidence as to how  the  wounds  had  healed
    (see page 7 and page 8).

18. Dealing with the issue of causation  the  expert  gave  four  different
    alternative causes for the scars before reaching  the  conclusion  that
    the burn wounds and scarring were consistent with the account given  by
    the Appellant.

19.  The judge made reference to this at paragraph [30] and stated

         "He considers the alternative causation for the scars and at page 8
         rules out the possibility  of  self-inflicted  injury  because  the
         burns specifically are not in an area where the patient could  have
         easily caused them himself. ... He concludes  that  clinically  the
         patient could not have caused the wounds himself on  the  back  and
         quite high up on the left arm and on the lower  lumbar  regions  as
         shown on the body map.  However it does seem  odd  that  there  are
         scars only on the back and nowhere else on the body.  It  does  not
         make sense that if the persons who  were  detaining  the  Appellant
         were intent on causing harm to the Appellant that they would  limit
         the burn marks simply to his back."

    The Judge then went on to set out the expert's view as to whether  they
    have been deliberately caused and the judge went on to state "In  light
    of that conclusion and bearing in  mind  the  inconsistencies  and  the
    general lack of credibility of the Appellant, I also  cannot  rule  out
    that these  scars  have  not  been  caused  deliberately  in  order  to
    mislead."  The analysis of the judge is not  strictly  correct  as  the
    Appellant's account of ill-treatment did not only include burns on  the
    back but also ill-treatment in the form of beating and kicking but also
    some sexual interference.  Furthermore there  is  no  support  for  the
    judge's view, which is speculative, that because there were scars  only
    on the back that this was inconsistent with the Appellant's account  of
    ill-treatment.  There was no evidence upon which it could  properly  be
    said that as there were only burn marks on his back that they could not
    have been inflicted in the way stated.

20. Also as to causation the judge found that he could not  rule  out  that
    the scars had been caused  deliberately  in  order  to  mislead.   This
    conclusion was reached, it appears because the expert had ruled out the
    possibility of self-inflicted injury given the location  of  the  burns
    but on the judge's analysis that it was odd that there were scars  only
    on the back.  Ms Pascoe referred the Tribunal to the decision of KV (as
    cited).  It is plain from reading the determination that there needs to
    be presenting features  in  the  evidence  and  that  those  presenting
    features can either be clinical or non-clinical (but are not exhaustive
    in that sense).  The decision also sets  out  an  issue  of  procedural
    fairness between paragraphs [296] and [300] and that if a judge  wishes
    to explore with the Appellant the possibility of  SIBP,  that  requires
    there to be some presenting features.  It  does  not  appear  from  the
    evidence that this issue was ever explored during the hearing and there
    was no consideration of whether there were any presenting  features  to
    support the conclusion of  the  judge  that  this  was  a  possibility.
    Whilst the judge is not required to make a definitive finding, the  way
    that the finding is expressed and the earlier comment that it was  "odd
    that there were scars only on the back" gave  the  appearance  of  SIBP
    being considered as a real possibility.  As this was not  explored  nor
    was there  any  reference  to  any  evidential  foundation  by  way  of
    presenting features, I accept the submission made  by  Ms  Pascoe  that
    that conclusion was not one open to the judge  and  further  undermined
    his overall analysis of the medical evidence in this respect.

21. The psychiatric evidence was also rejected (see paragraph [31]) on  the
    basis that the findings of both the medical expert and the psychiatrist
    that their evidence was inconsistent with the ability of the  Appellant
    to obtain a student visa and continue his studies.

22. In reaching the decision,  the  judge  did  not  consider  the  witness
    statement of the Appellant (paragraph [30]) in which he made  reference
    to his inability to study.  Furthermore he did not analyse  the  report
    and its contents in the light of the other additional material relevant
    to the Appellant's mental health.  The doctor  made  reference  to  the
    slight improvement to his mental health when he came to the UK and that
    the memories  of  torture  and  nightmares  had  gradually  reduced  in
    frequency and intensity and thus he was able to cope with his  studies.
    The report made reference to deterioration in 2012 (due to  his  father
    being in detention) and  to  the  extent  that  the  Appellant  stopped
    attending college.  There was an assessment  of  his  presentation  and
    also  there  were  medical  records  referring  to  albeit  later  GP's
    assessments, but also the reference to counselling which the  Appellant
    had undertaken of eleven sessions.  It would  have  been  open  to  the
    judge to reject the psychiatric report or attach little weight to it if
    there had been an analysis of the content of the report in the light of
    the evidence as to his mental health as a whole, however to  reject  it
    solely on the basis that he had been able to study did  not  take  into
    account the other evidence available in this respect.

23. The importance of the medical evidence  to  the  Appellant's  claim  is
    central given the nature  of  the  claim  to  have  been  detained  and
    tortured and the interest of the authorities shown  to  him  on  return
    thus it is not possible to say but for the other matters set out in the
    determination it is sustainable.

24. The grounds make reference to a number of further issues including  the
    adverse credibility findings in which it is asserted that the judge  in
    essence accepted the credibility matters set out in the refusal  letter
    and did so without  considering  in  any  real  respect  the  statement
    provided by the Appellant after the service of the  refusal  letter  in
    which he provided an explanation and further evidence  in  relation  to
    those credibility points.  There are also issues raised  about  failure
    to claim asylum and sur place.

25. In relation to the sur place issue the judge had before him evidence of
    his  sur   place   activities   including   having   attended   various
    demonstrations and events and that he was a volunteer for the TGTE (and
    he had provided an ID card and a  letter).   The  judge  at  [31]  made
    reference to him being "highly suspicious" due  to  the  timing  making
    reference to the Appellant having joined after he had claimed asylum.

26.  Whilst  the  decision  of  GJ  made   reference   to   attendance   at
    demonstrations by itself not being sufficient to create a real risk  of
    adverse attention, in this case the judge did not consider the issue of
    the status of the TGTE which is a proscribed organisation and has since
    been proscribed since the decision of GJ and what  questions  would  be
    asked on arrival of the Appellant which may  include  a  membership  of
    this party a point specifically raised in the submissions made.

27.  The judge dealt with alternative findings that even  if  he  had  been
    detained he would not be at risk because he  would  be  of  no  adverse
    interest to them but even on the alternative version  if  he  had  been
    detained and tortured in the way he claimed, it is likely that he would
    be identified upon arrival and thus questions  relating  to  sur  place
    activities may have given rise to  a  risk.   Those  matters  were  not
    considered in an assessment of risk.

28. As I have set out other  grounds  made  reference  to  the  credibility
    findings.  Not all of those  grounds  I  consider  are  made  out,  for
    example, the ground upon which he said that the judge's findings on his
    delay in claiming asylum were not credible.  However it is  plain  from
    reading the determination that in relation to that specific  issue  the
    judge gave adequate and sustainable reasons as to why he  rejected  his
    explanation for the delay and it could not be  said  that  he  had  not
    considered that in the light  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  given  in
    interview but also in his oral evidence and that of his statement.

29.  One of the other grounds relied upon related to the finding  that  the
    Appellant was able to  leave  on  his  own  passport  (paragraph  [34])
    however that by itself is not indicative of a finding of there being no
    adverse interest and that finding  did  not  consider  the  Appellant's
    evidence that there were contacts at the  airport  as  set  out  in  GJ
    (paragraph [170] and [394]) and the reference to the corruption at  the
    airport.  However it is not necessary for me to  consider  the  grounds
    any further in the light  of  the  analysis  of  the  medical  evidence
    (including the psychiatric evidence set out above as  I  consider  that
    that was central to the credibility findings as a whole and as  such  I
    accept the submission made by Ms Pascoe that the  determination  should
    be set aside.

30. Both parties submitted that in the event of an error of law being found
    and the decision being set aside, that it should be remade in the First-
    tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law such that  it
must be set aside.  The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
for a hearing in accordance with Section 12(2)(b) of the  Tribunal's  Courts
and Enforcement Act and paragraph 7.2 of  the  Practice  Statement  of  10th
February 2010 (as amended).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
