
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04730/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 April 2016                          |On 28 April 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                               Haroon Hassani
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Halim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born  on  1  January  1986.   He  is  a  national  of
    Afghanistan.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his  asylum
    claim dated 4 March 2015.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 19 February 2016, Judge Hosie (the  judge)
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal  to
    grant him asylum.  She did not find him to be a credible  witness  with
    regard to events in his own country, nor did she find that he would  be
    at risk on return.  The grounds claim the judge erred in law because of
    a procedural  unfairness,  in  particular,  that  proceeding  with  the
    hearing was unfair and caused prejudice to  the  appellant.   That  was
    because the appellant's Counsel had sought an adjournment.   There  had
    been a previous decision of Judge Pedro in fast track dated 25 February
    2013.  The judge took Judge Pedro's findings  as  the  starting  point.
    The judge said in light of new evidence and a fresh claim  before  her,
    she did not accept all of Judge Pedro's  findings.   Nevertheless,  she
    found the appellant's credibility  was  adversely  affected  for  other
    reasons.   In  addition,  she  accepted  that  Judge  Pedro  found  the
    appellant's cousin's evidence to be incredible.

 4. The grounds described the history.  The appellant had an earlier appeal
    dismissed in fast track.  Ordinarily Devaseelan principles would  apply
    to a second appeal, however, recent litigation in the Court  of  Appeal
    had found that the 2014 First-tier Tribunal fast track Procedure  Rules
    were structurally unfair.  The President in a number of linked  appeals
    had  set  aside  any  decisions  heard  under  that  regime,   due   to
    unlawfulness,  Detention  Action  v   SSHD   [2015]   EWCA   Civ   840.
    Accordingly, on 12 August 2015 the appellant applied  to  the  Tribunal
    under Rule 32 to set aside the earlier decision and for the  appeal  to
    be remade afresh.  As of the date of the hearing before the judge,  the
    President had adjourned the application along with others on the  basis
    that he felt the matters needed to be considered by the High Court,  in
    particular, on the issue of the lawfulness  of  the  2005  Rules.   The
    appellant's appeal had been previously subject to the 2005  fast  track
    procedure system (the time limits found to be the  root  of  unfairness
    were the same and in terms of listing,  more  strict  in  the  previous
    incarnation of the Rules) and the President had  identified  a  generic
    method of setting aside such  decisions  reached  through  an  unlawful
    system by the application of Rule 32.

 5. In the meantime, the appellant's appeal  against  the  refusal  of  the
    fresh claim had been listed to take place on 8 January  2016.   It  had
    been hoped that the  Rule  32  application  would  have  been  resolved
    earlier but that proved to be not the case.  As the generic application
    had been adjourned, the appellant applied to adjourn  his  own  appeal.
    The appellant's argument before the judge was  that  in  light  of  the
    outstanding Rule 32 application, the judge was  unable  to  proceed  to
    resolve the appellant's appeal.  The argument  was  that  if  the  2005
    Procedure Rules were structurally unfair and thus unlawful, the earlier
    decision of Judge Pedro, reached in that process was  equally  unlawful
    such that no regard should be had to it.  That was a preliminary  issue
    that needed to be resolved before further analysis of  the  appellant's
    claim since the status of the previous  decision  of  Judge  Pedro  was
    fundamental.

 6. Judge Shimmin granted permission  to  appeal  on  15  March  2016.   He
    considered it was arguable that the decision of Judge Pedro should  not
    have featured in the appellant's appeal in any form.

 7. The respondent lodged a Rule 24 response.   She  submitted  inter  alia
    that the judge directed herself appropriately.  In particular, that the
    facts surrounding the adjournment application were  thoroughly  covered
    at [13]-[18] of the decision.  It was properly open  to  the  judge  to
    refuse to exercise her discretion.  There were no  procedural  arguable
    errors of law and that the judge gave sound  reasons  at  [18]  of  her
    decision not to adjourn.

Submissions on Error of Law

 8. Mr Halim relied upon the grounds.  He submitted that  the  judge  erred
    because it was apparent that the previous decision was at the forefront
    of her mind and particularly so because  it  was  relied  upon  by  the
    respondent.

 9. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was nothing wrong  with  the  judge's
    decision.  She had not relied upon Judge Pedro's findings in making her
    own adverse credibility findings.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10. The judge set out Judge Pedro's findings  in  detail  at  [38]  of  her
    decision.  The judge said that she took Judge Pedro's findings  as  the
    starting point, although she did not accept all of  his  findings.  She
    found the appellant's credibility was affected for other reasons  which
    she set out at [52]-[58] of her decision.

11. The judge relied upon two findings of Judge Pedro.  Firstly,  that  the
    appellant's cousin was not credible.  The judge said at [47]  that  the
    cousin chose not to give evidence before her and  there  was  no  other
    evidence with regard  to  him.   Secondly,  the  judge  accepted  Judge
    Pedro's finding that failure to claim asylum in either Greece or France
    was inconsistent with a genuine claim for asylum by a refugee  in  need
    of international protection.

12. The judge adopted a twin approach in terms of the  limited  application
    of Devaseelan  and  Judge  Pedro's  findings  and  also  made  her  own
    independent assessment, in particular with regard to  the  new  medical
    evidence.

13. I find the judge erred in the difficult analysis she had given  herself
    (particularly bearing in mind the outstanding Rule 32 application),  in
    distinguishing facts she could rely upon from the evidence before  her,
    rather than the findings of Judge Pedro on the evidence before him.

14. Whilst the  judge  rightly  observed  that  it  is  not  beneficial  to
    continually adjourn hearings  in  terms  of  indeterminate  timescales,
    bearing in mind the extant Rule 32 set  aside  application  before  the
    Court of Appeal and the fact that both sides were either keen  to  have
    or were sympathetic to an adjournment, that was perhaps the wise course
    to take.

15. I find the judge carried out an inadequate analysis at [52]-[58] of her
    decision, her views having become infected by  the  findings  of  Judge
    Pedro. As the judge decided not to adjourn and to hear the appeal,  the
    findings of Judge Pedro should have played no part in her analysis  and
    decision.

16. In my view, none of the judge's findings should stand.   The  appellant
    has shown errors of law in the decision such  that  it  should  be  set
    aside and heard again de novo once the stay has been  lifted  involving
    all cases in the fast track category.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  errors  of  law,  is  set
aside and shall be remitted to the First-tier to  be  heard  again  de  novo
following the lifting of the stay.

Anonymity direction not made.






Signed                              Date  25 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

