
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04359/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & reasons           |
|On 23 October 2014                            |Promulgated                  |
|                                              |On 7 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between
                             MS MOLAVINIA NARJES
                         (anonymity order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant born on 21 April 1972, a citizen of Iran appealed against
    the decision of the respondent dated 5 June 2014 to  grant  her  asylum
    and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.  First-tier Tribunal
    Judge James said that the appellant has leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom until 2015 and therefore she has no right of appeal and that he
    has no  jurisdiction  to  hear  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to remove from the United Kingdom.

 2. The Judge erred when he concluded that the appellant had valid leave to
    remain until 2015. The reasons for refusal letter refers only to  leave
    until 16 May 2012 and to the subsequent removal  decision  made  on  13
    June 2014 and to the earlier determination of  Judge  Roopnarine-Davies
    in March 2013 which also refers to the appellant having leave until  16
    May 2012. Mr Hodson stated that he cannot confirm  that  the  appellant
    has leave until 2015. The Judge fell into material error when he  found
    that the appellant had leave until 2015. He  therefore  erred  when  he
    stated that he has no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

 3. At the hearing it was agreed between the  parties  that  the  appellant
    does have an in country right of appeal and that the Judge  erred  when
    he stated in his determination that this was not a statutory appeal and
    that the appellant had extant leave in excess of one year. It was  also
    agreed that the appeal be sent back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    findings of fact to be made.

 4. I find that the respondent's decision to remove the appellant  in  June
    2014 gave rise to an in country right of appeal to the appellant.


   5. Both parties agreed that the appeal ought to be sent back to the First
      tier- Tribunal so that findings of fact can be  made.  I  agreed  that
      this was the proper course  of  action  to  take  in  this  appeal  in
      accordance with section 7. 2 (b) (i) the Senior  President's  Practice
      Statement of 25 September 2012 as I was of the view  that  the  appeal
      requires judicial fact-finding and should  to  be  considered  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal.



   6. The re-making of the decision on appeal will be undertaken by a First-
      tier Judge  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge James on a date to be notified.






    Decision




   7. The appellant's appeal is allowed and the determination of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge James is set aside.  The case is remitted to the First-
      tier Tribunal for determination.



Signed by

Mrs S Chana                              Dated  this  5th  day  of  November
    2014

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

