

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04860/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 November 2013                           |On 11 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     MT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Treharne instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 2 January 1979.  He
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 9 April 2013 and two days later  made
      a claim for asylum. On 8 May 2013 the Secretary of State  refused  the
      appellant's application for asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  and
      made a decision to refuse him leave to enter with proposed removal  to
      Iran.

   3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      dated 21 June 2013, Judge A Cresswell dismissed the appellant's appeal
      on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human  rights  grounds.   The
      Judge made an adverse credibility finding.  The Judge did  not  accept
      that the appellant had been detained and seriously ill treated  for  8
      days in December 2009  and  January  2010  because  of  his  political
      opinion and that during the detention he had been lashed.   The  Judge
      also did not accept that that shortly before he  left  Iran  in  March
      2013, he was wanted by the  authorities  after  anti-regime  materials
      were found in his home following a raid by the Etelaat.

   4. The appellant was initially refused permission to appeal by the First-
      tier Tribunal.  On 19 August  2013,  however,  UTJ  Pitt  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Thus,  the
      appeal came before me.

The Submissions

   5. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Treharne  submitted  that  the  Judge's
      decision, in particular his adverse  credibility  finding,  could  not
      stand for a number of reasons.

   6. First, he submitted  that  the  Judge  had  made  a  mistake  of  fact
      (amounting to an error of law) when in para  21(x)  he  had  concluded
      that the appellant did not have any scars on his  back.   Mr  Treharne
      relied upon a report prepared by Dr Nelki dated 26 September  2013  at
      pages A7-A18 of the appellant's UT bundle.

   7. Secondly, Mr Treharne submitted that the Judge had been wrong  not  to
      consider adjourning the appeal on the basis that the appellant  was  a
      vulnerable adult as a result of being tortured.  He relied upon  Joint
      Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: Child, Vulnerable  Adult  and
      Sensitive Appellant Guidance, at para 3.

   8. Thirdly, Mr Treharne submitted that  the  Judge  had  wrongly  counted
      against the appellant that, as the Judge saw it,  that  the  appellant
      had given three different dates of birth.  Mr Treharne submitted  that
      the appellant's date of birth had never been recorded  in  Farsi  and,
      given  the  similarity  between  the  various  dates  given,  it   was
      unreasonable and irrational for the Judge at para 21(viii) to conclude
      that the appellant was being untruthful  rather  than  there  being  a
      transliteration of the dates.

   9. Fourthly, Mr Treharne submitted that the Judge had placed undue weight
      on differences in the appellant's  evidence  given  in  his  screening
      interview (and arrest interview) and  in  his  asylum  interview.   Mr
      Treharne submitted that the Judge had failed to take into account that
      the purpose of the screening interview  was not be provide details but
      rather to establish the general nature of an individual's case.

  10. Finally, Mr Treharne submitted that the Judge had failed to assess the
      appellant's evidence in the light of  the  background  evidence  which
      demonstrates that pre-election in 2009 and 2013 there were  crackdowns
      on political opponents.

Discussion

  11. Whilst I do not accept  all  of  Mr  Treharne's  submissions,  I  have
      concluded that the Judge's adverse credibility finding  cannot  stand.



  12. I do not accept Mr Treharne's submission that the Judge was  wrong  to
      draw on differences between  the  appellant's  account  given  in  his
      screening (and arrest) interview and later in his asylum interview.  I
      do not accept that the  Judge  fell  into  error  by  contrasting  the
      "different" accounts given on the  two  occasions,  in  particular  to
      refer to the more recent events in 2013 which the appellant now claims
      in his asylum interview led him to leave Iran.  That reasoning is,  in
      my view, entirely consistent  with  that  of  the  Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal's views in YL (Rely on  SEF) China [2004] UKIAT 00145 at [19]
      where it is stated that:

           "Asylum seekers are still expected to tell the truth and answers
           given in  screening  interviews  can  be  compared  fairly  with
           answers given later."

  13. That approach was approved in KD (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
      1384 by Moses LJ at [8].  Providing that  a  Judge  is  alive  to  the
      limitation of the questioning in a screening interview and the dangers
      that an asylum seeker maybe tired  after  a  long  journey,  there  is
      nothing inherently improper in contrasting two accounts  (where  there
      are significant differences) given in a screening interview and  later
      in an asylum interview.

  14. Further, I do not see how Mr Treharne can pray in aide the  report  of
      Dr Nelki which was not before the Judge and  was,  in  fact,  prepared
      after the hearing.  That the appellant maybe able to show on  evidence
      now available that he has scars on his back  cannot  demonstrate  that
      the Judge was wrong,  for  that  reason  alone,  to  conclude  on  the
      evidence before him that the appellant had  not  proved  that  he  had
      scars on his back.

  15. That said, it emerged during the course of the  submissions  that  the
      appellant (who was not represented at the hearing)  had  indicated  to
      the Judge that he had scars on his back and that he would show them to
      the Judge.  It does not appear from the determination that  the  Judge
      took the opportunity that the appellant offered him. At one  time,  it
      was not unusual (though not commonplace) for judges to look  at  scars
      on the body of any appellant as part of the appellant's  case.    That
      practice seems to have waned in recent years.  The change in  practice
      may arise from a greater sensitivity to carrying out such examinations
      in a public tribunal room.  It may also be that expert reports dealing
      with injuries claimed to have been suffered by appellant's have become
      more available and more the norm in appeals.

  16. In this appeal, the appellant was unrepresented and was  offering,  in
      effect, to  provide  real  evidence  of  his  claimed  injuries.   The
      appellant claimed that these injuries had been caused  whilst  he  was
      detained in  2009  and  lashed  by  his  captors.   His  injuries,  if
      established and linked to events he said occurred in 2009, would  have
      supported his account and therefore his credibility. In many  (perhaps
      most) cases, pertinent evidence relating to scarring can and should be
      in the form of expert evidence.  Here  that  was  not  available,  not
      least  because  of  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was  not  legally
      represented and, so it would seem, his  previous  representatives  had
      not obtained any expert report.    In those  circumstances  the  Judge
      was, in my view, required to give careful consideration as to  whether
      (and how) he should take the opportunity to view  what  the  appellant
      claimed were scars  on  his  back.   I  do  not  accept  Mr  Richards'
      submission that even if he had done  so  he  would  have  been  in  no
      position to assess their cause and therefore he cannot be faulted from
      failing to view the scares.  Whilst it is, of course,  true  that  the
      Judge would not be in a position to form a view (which only an  expert
      could do) as to the etiology of the scars,  their  presence  would  at
      least be consistent with the appellant's  account.   Their  assessment
      would be one, and only one, factor in the Judge's consideration of the
      totality of the evidence.  But, it would deflect any adverse inference
      which might be drawn from the absence of any  supportive  evidence  of
      scarring.  That is an inference which the Judge comes close to making,
      or perhaps does in fact make, in para 21(x) of his determination.

  17. Also, the evidence of the appellant's date of  birth  was  undoubtedly
      confusing.  It was capable of giving rise  to  an  adverse  inference.
      But, equally as the appellant's date of birth in Farsi  had  not  been
      recorded it is also possible that the differences in date were  caused
      by mistranslations.  In his screening interview the  appellant's  date
      of birth is recorded as 2 January 1979.  In his asylum interview it is
      recorded as 22 January 1979 with 2 January 1979  scored  through.   In
      his arrest interview the appellant's date of birth is recorded  as  22
      March 1980 but that is clearly written over a date including "/01/79".



  18. Mr Richards accepted that there was some potential anomaly with  these
      dates but that they were peripheral and did not go to the core of  the
      appellant's claim.  The latter is no doubt correct.  However, in  para
      21(viii) even though the Judge recognised that  fact  he  went  on  to
      conclude that "it is indicative of his attitude  to  being  truthful".
      In my  judgement,  the  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reason  for
      concluding that  the  dates  were,  in  fact,  differences  reflecting
      untruthfulness by the appellant rather than potentially mistranslation
      given the similarities  between  the  dates.    I  was  told,  and  Mr
      Richards did not challenge this, that the appellant's actual  date  of
      birth when translated in 22 March 1979.  As can  be  seen,  all  three
      parts of this date, namely 22nd day, the month of March and  the  year
      1979 feature in the various recorded dates in the interviews.

  19. I do not say that a Judge could not, ultimately, take  the  view  that
      this Judge did in relation to the dates.  However,  in  reaching  that
      view the Judge in this appeal had  at  least  to  consider  and  given
      reasons for concluding that the differences stem  from  the  appellant
      giving different dates (and therefore  questioning  his  truthfulness)
      rather than errors in translation (which would not call into  question
      his veracity).  The appellant was, of  course,  unrepresented  at  the
      hearing and this  only  heightened  the  Judge's  obligation  to  give
      anxious scrutiny to the appellant's claim including the evidence.

  20. It is not necessary for me to consider Mr  Treharne's  submissions  in
      respect of the judge's failure to adjourn the hearing in order for the
      appellant to be legally represented and that he  fell  into  error  by
      making findings  not  in  the  context  of  the  background  evidence.
      Suffice it to say that these submissions  did  not  impress  me.   The
      errors I have identified,  however,  lead  me  to  conclude  that  the
      Judge's  adverse  credibility  finding  cannot  stand.  I  cannot   be
      satisfied that the Judge would necessarily have  reached  his  adverse
      credibility finding if he had considered the evidence  concerning  the
      appellant's scars on his back and had not counted  as  "indicative  of
      his attitude to being truthful" that the  appellant  had  given  three
      different dates for his birth rather than considering the  possibility
      that they were mistranslations.

Decision and Disposal

  21. For these reasons, the  Judge's  adverse  credibility  finding  cannot
      stand and I set it aside.

  22. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
      hearing.   At that hearing, the Judge will be  able  to  consider  the
      totality of the evidence including the background evidence and  report
      of Dr Nelki which has now been prepared as a result of  the  appellant
      obtaining legal representation.



                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
























