
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04509/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
| on 29th October 2015                |On 4th January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MS E M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. The appellant was a minor when  the
claim was made and she fears reprisals from her  family.  Unless  the  Upper
Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or
any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the
original Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all  parties.
Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hashim, Counsel, instructed by Davjunnel
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr.C.Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Although it is the respondent who is appealing for convenience  I  will
    continue to refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Albania, born in  March  1997.  She  was
    encountered in March 2014 and claimed asylum. The basis  of  her  claim
    was that her father took her out of school and arranged her marriage to
    his friend. She did not want this and when she  said  this  her  father
    would be threatening and physically abusive towards her.  Her  maternal
    uncle agreed to help her leave the country and in March 2014  took  her
    by car to meet an agent. She stayed in a house until later  that  month
    when she travelled to the United Kingdom in a  lorry.  She  claimed  to
    fear her father: Kunan law required him to honour his  promise  to  his
    friend.

 3. Her claim was refused  by  the  respondent  on  29  January  2015.  The
    respondent did not believe the claim engaged  the  Refugee  convention.
    The respondent did not raise  credibility  issues  but  concluded  that
    there were sufficiency of protection for the appellant in  Albania  and
    if necessary she could relocate within the country,  for  instance,  to
    the  capital,  Tirana.  No  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
    identified. In respect of private life she retains  ties  to  her  home
    country. No exceptional circumstances were identified.

 4. Her appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Graham  at  Birmingham  on  11
    June 2015. The appeal was allowed under the immigration  rules  and  on
    freestanding article 8 grounds. The judge had a report from  Ms  Andrea
    Balint in which she states that  she  is  a  clinical  psychologist  in
    Hungary in the process of  registration  in  the  United  Kingdom.  She
    concluded that the appellant was suffering from  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder and severe depression  and  was  at  risk  of  self-harm.  Her
    condition had deteriorated from when she  was  first  assessed  a  year
    earlier.

 5. The judge accepted the evidence of  Ms  Balint.  The  judge  found  the
    appellant could not meet the high threshold required for article  3  to
    be engaged. The judge accepted that appendix FM did not apply and  that
    the appellant had not been in the United Kingdom long  enough  to  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules.  However
    the judge concluded that there would be very significant  obstacles  to
    her reintegration into Albania because  of  her  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder and her mother and her maternal uncle could not help  as  they
    where fearful of her father.

 6. In addition to allowing the appeal  under  the  immigration  rules  the
    judge concluded the circumstances  were  exceptional  and  justified  a
    freestanding article 8 consideration. Her appeal was  allowed  on  this
    basis also. Referring to the proportionality assessment, the judge said
    the appellant had studied in the United Kingdom; should be able to find
    employment; would not be a burden upon the taxpayer and had no criminal
    convictions. The judge said regard  was  had  to  the  public  interest
    considerations in section 117.



The Upper Tribunal

 7. In seeking permission to appeal the respondent contended that the judge
    in considering paragraph 276ADE (vi) failed to have any regard  to  the
    mental  health  care  available  in  Albania.  In   relation   to   the
    freestanding article 8. Assessment it  was  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to have any regard to the agencies that  could  support  her  as
    referred  to  at  paragraph  35  in  the  context  of  sufficiency   of
    protection. It was also contended that the  medical  evidence  did  not
    establish a return to Albania would cause a deterioration  and  it  was
    pointed out there had been no past self harm and he was not in  receipt
    of  any  counselling  or  medication.  It  was   suggested   that   the
    proportionality assessment  was  inadequate  because  of  the  lack  of
    comment about these factors.

 8. At hearing. Mr Avery  pointed  out  that  the  judge  at  paragraph  38
    acknowledged that the appellant's medical condition could not meet  the
    article 3 threshold and this in turn was relevant to  the  276ADE  (iv)
    and freestanding article 8 consideration. The appellant had been in the
    country just over a year and  the  judge  should  have  regard  to  the
    support available to her in her home country. Mr Avery  questioned  how
    article 8 was engaged and submitted there was also  no  proper  section
    117 assessment.

 9. In response Mr Hashim relied on the rule 24 response. Paragraph  10  of
    the response stated that the report from Ms Balint was central  to  the
    appeal and emphasised the appellant's mental state.

10. Mr Avery was of the view that if I found an error of law then  I  could
    go on to determine the appeal without  a  further  hearing.  Mr  Hashim
    asked that if an error of law was found that instructing solicitors  be
    given an opportunity to obtain a full medical report.

Consideration.

11. The appellant said she arrived in the United Kingdom on the 20th  March
    2014. At that stage she was 17 years old. She had lived all her life in
    Albania with her parents and brothers. By the time of  the  appeal  she
    was eighteen years of age. Paragraph 276  ADE  (v)  requires  a  person
    between 18 and 25 to have spent a continuous period  of  at  last  half
    their life before leave to remain  can  be  granted  on  the  basis  of
    private life. The rule reflects the respondent's attempt at controlling
    immigration by rules of universal application compliant with article 8.
    The appellant does not come close to meeting this. The only  basis  she
    can remain  under  this  is  (vi),  that  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to her reintegration.

12. She is linguistically and culturally familiar  with  Albania.  She  has
    been resourceful enough to travel to the United Kingdom and  to  adjust
    to life here. She has enrolled in the course of education.  Immigration
    Judge Graham in paragraph 40 says that she is vulnerable because of her
    age, gender, and lack of support in Albania. Her age  and  gender  have
    not been obstacles in the United Kingdom. I cannot see why  they  would
    be so in Albania. In the United Kingdom. She was treated as a child  by
    the local authority and has a social worker to support her.  The  judge
    does not make reference  to  what  social  services  are  available  in
    Albania but acknowledges there are protection agencies.  The  principal
    obstacle advanced relates to her mental health.

13. Ms Balint  reports  that  the  appellant  was  referred  for  cognitive
    behavioural therapy and attended six relaxation  sessions.  The  report
    indicates that the uncertainty pending  a  decision  on  her  case  was
    increasing her anxiety and when her claim for asylum was  refused,  she
    returned asking for a further assessment. A third assessment  indicated
    deterioration and Ms Balint contacted her GP seeking a  referral  to  a
    psychiatrist and consideration of medication. The report  is  dated  20
    September 2015. Ms Balint, using diagnostic  tools  concludes  she  was
    suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, depression  and  a  very
    high level of distress  with  a  moderate  suicide  risk.  The  medical
    management however, appears limited. She has been  in  this  country  a
    year and a half and was supervised by social services.  However,  there
    is no reference to her being seen by to  the  community  mental  health
    team or a psychiatrist. There is no  history  of  self-harm.  There  is
    nothing in Judge Graham's decision to indicate that the availability of
    health care in Albania was  factored  into  the  consideration  of  the
    viability of her return.

14. It is my conclusion that the judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  the
    approach taken to rule 276ADE (iv) and the question of the  appellant's
    reintegration. A balanced assessment would require consideration of the
    facilities in Albania on her return. This did not take place. The  same
    consideration applies  with  regard  to  the  article  8  private  life
    considerations.

15. It is my conclusion that the decision allowing the appeal under  276ADE
    (iv) and on the basis of freestanding article 8 rights  is  flawed  and
    will have to be remade. In fairness to the appellant, bearing  in  mind
    her age and the fact her account has not been  challenged,  the  matter
    should be  remitted  for  a  hearing  de  novo  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. This will give her representatives  an  opportunity  to  seek
    full medical evidence and to  provide  objective  evidence  as  to  the
    facilities which would be available in Albania.

Decision

16. The decision allowing the appeal is set aside. The matter  is  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

                                                Appeal Number: AA/04509/2015


                                   Between

                                   MS E M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Directions.

      1. Re list for a de novo hearing in the first-tier Tribunal  excluding
         First tier Judge Graham.

      2. In preparing for the new hearing  the  appellant's  representatives
         should provide such medical evidence  as  they  feel  necessary  to
         demonstrate why she should be  allowed  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

      3. The appellant's representatives and the respondent  should  provide
         country information about healthcare and social service support  in
         Albania for someone in the appellant's situation.




    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


