
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04885/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|on 12 February 2016                  |on 19 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              AHSANULLAH NIAZAI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rendle instructed by Wai Leung Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Norton Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Robison promulgated on the  17  September  2015  in  which  the
       appellants appeal against the refusal  of his claim for asylum or for
       leave on any other basis was dismissed.

    2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Parkes on the basis it was said  to  be  arguable  the
       Judge failed to  deal  with  the  issue  of  the  appellant  becoming
       westernised given his time in the UK or to address the provenance  of
       photographs  provided  which  are  said  to  show  the  body  of  the
       appellants father in a coffin. Judge Parkes recognised  that  further
       consideration may not assist the appellant but that the  grounds  are
       arguable.

Error of law discussion


    3. The Judge took as her starting point, in accordance with the decision
       in Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 00702, the previous determination of  then
       Immigration Judge Andonian promulgated following a hearing at  Taylor
       House on the 8 July 2011. This is a legally correct position and that
       approach not disputed.

    4. Having considered  the  evidence  Judge  Andonian  found  there  were
       substantial inconsistencies in the  appellants  account  even  taking
       into account his age and being very cautious with  the  evidence.  It
       was specifically found that "I do not think that there  would  be  so
       many inconstancies in the Appellants evidence if what he said had the
       ring of truth" [24]. It was found  there  is  an  available  internal
       flight option to Kabul [36] and that the appellant did not  have  the
       profile that made it unduly harsh for him to do so.

    5. In relation to the claim by the appellant that his father worked  for
       the Taliban and then  the  Americans,  this  was  rejected  by  Judge
       Andonian 'for the reasons set out in the determination' [40].

    6. In paragraph 45 Judge Andonian found:

       "45.   There was no evidence before me that  the  Appellant's  father
           had been killed by the Government and  assassinated  as  alleged
           and that the appellant would be  next  in  line.   There  is  no
           evidence that the Appellant's father worked for the  Taliban  or
           for the American forces as  an  Interpreter  and  there  was  no
           evidence that the Americans have visited the Appellants house to
           look for him and I do accept  that  the  Taliban  have  targeted
           young people in the past but they are  a  spent  force  and  the
           likelihood of this happening is far less than before.  I find it
           incredible that the Appellant's uncle would  sell  his  business
           and car in order to arrange and pay for an  agent  to  take  the
           Appellant out of the country and  not  give  the  Appellant  any
           information about where he could find  him  in  Afghanistan  and
           where members of his family would be in  that  respect.   Surely
           the Appellant's uncle would want to know whether the money  that
           he paid for his Agent is put to good use in taking the Appellant
           to a safe country  and  it  is  simply  not  credible  that  the
           Appellant would not know where to contact  his  family  in  that
           regard."

    7. The appellant was not found to be credible or to have discharged  the
       burden of proof upon him to the required  standard  to  show  he  was
       entitled to a grant of asylum or international protection.

    8. That determination was challenged on six grounds although  permission
       to appeal was only granted on three relating to the  risk  on  return
       and Judge Andonian's treatment of the reasonableness of relocation in
       light  of  the  appellants'  age  and  lack  of  evidence  about  the
       whereabouts of his family in Afghanistan.

    9. Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt heard the initial, error of law, hearing at
       Field House on the 30 May 2012.  It  is  noted  by  Judge  Pitt  that
       permission to appeal to challenge the  adverse  credibility  findings
       was not granted and that the asylum claim  has  been  comprehensively
       rejected [2]. Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt made the following findings:

       "8 This appellant has therefore not provided  any  credible  evidence
           that he is unable to contact his family or that  they  would  be
           unable to meet him in Kabul and  care  for  him  on  return,  in
           Kabul, if necessary.  As in [7] of ZH (Afghanistan) [2009]  EWCV
           Civ 470 there  is  an  "an  evidential  lacuna  which  only  the
           appellant himself can  fill"  concerning  his  circumstances  on
           return. The burden of proof remains on him to  provide  credible
           evidence about his ability to contact and live with  his  family
           on return even when he is a minor, confirmed  by  the  Court  of
           Appeal in [34] of HK (Afghanistan) & Ors v SSHD [2012] EWCA  Civ
           315 and in [133] of AA.  Both those authorities confirm that  to
           be so even where, as here, the respondent has not complied  with
           her duty to attempt to trace the appellant's family.  It was not
           necessary  to  consider  the  separate  issue  in  HK   and   DS
           (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  305  concerning   the
           respondent's duty to attempt to trace the appellant's family and
           her duty under s.55 of the UK Borders, Citizens and  Immigration
           Act 2009 where the point was not argued  before  the  First-tier
           Tribunal or on the written or oral grounds before me."

       9  Where the appellant has not shown that he is an unattended  minor,
           he cannot come within the ration of AA.  He  also  cannot  argue
           that it would be unreasonable to expect his family  to  relocate
           to Kabul to care for him.   The  country  guidance  case  of  AK
           (Article 15(c) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) states  in
           paragraph B (iv) of the head note that:

                "(iv) Whilst when  assessing  a  claim  in  the  context  of
                Article 15(c) in which the  respondent  asserts  that  Kabul
                city would be a viable internal relocation  alternative,  it
                is  necessary  to  take  into  account  (both  in  assessing
                "safety" and reasonableness) not only the level of  violence
                in that city but also the difficulties experienced  by  that
                city's poor and also the many Internally  Displaced  Persons
                (IDPs)  living  there,  these  considerations  will  not  in
                general make return to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable." "

   10. The first ground relied upon by Mr Rendle  is  the  claim  the  Judge
       failed to deal with the appellants submission that he will be at risk
       on return to Kabul as he has become westernised. A submission to this
       effect is noted by the Judge in  the  determination  under  challenge
       [21]. This claim has no arguable merit. When asked what evidence  was
       before the First-tier Tribunal to support the claim to be at risk  on
       this basis, Mr Rendle referred to an article at pages 98-106 dated 16
       July 2015 from the Bureau of Investigate  Journalists  written  by  a
       Maeve McCleneghan as part of a journalistic project tracking a number
       of asylum seeking children. At page 105 it is written:

           "Despite the scale of the return programme, little is  known  of
           what happens  to  those  that  are  sent  back  to  Afghanistan.
           Refugee Support Network is currently  undertaking  a  long  term
           research tracking the experiences of these  young  men.  So  far
           they have found that a quarter of those tracked have experienced
           difficulties  as  a  result  of  being  viewed  as  "westernised
           outsiders" "

   11. At pages 107-111 is a further article dated 16  July  2015  from  the
       same journalist. At page 109 it is written:

           'Case study: Hakim's return to Kabul

           This is what happened to Hakim  (name  changed  to  protect  his
           identity). He spent six years in the UK after arriving aged  13.
           He went to school, made close friends and assumed his life would
           be spent in this environment. But when he was 19 he was put on a
           charter flight and flown to Afghanistan.  He was unable to  find
           his family and ended up living in a derelict warehouse.

           Hakim told the Bureau: "When I returned back to  Afghanistan  it
           was the worst situation for my life. No one  helped  me  at  all
           because I was completely different ... I was strange to them and
           they were or me.  I  dressed  differently  I  was  not  able  to
           communicate with anyone."

           Hakim was kidnapped by theives who demanded he pay a  ransom  to
           be released.  He said after paying a  portion  of  the  demanded
           money he managed to escape. He now hopes  to  leave  Afghanistan
           again.'

   12. The evidence from this journalist has not been shown to  warrant  the
       same weight being attached to it as a report from  a  country  expert
       and there is no indication that the information provided by  such  as
       Hakim has been verified, although  it  is  accepted  that  there  are
       criminal elements in Afghanistan including Kabul and that  if  it  is
       perceived a  person  has  money  that  they  might  be  targeted  for
       extortion. In the appeal under consideration it is relevant to recall
       the finding of Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt that the appellant will  not
       be abandoned without the support of his family as he  had  not  shown
       that he is an unattended minor and also cannot argue that it would be
       unreasonable to expect his family to relocate to Kabul  to  care  for
       him. The degree of vulnerability a person living on  the  street  may
       experience is not made out in this appeal.

   13. The appellant failed to identify any arguable real risk sufficient to
       warrant a finding that he is entitled to  a  grant  of  international
       protection. It has not been shown he cannot re-adjust to the life  he
       had prior to coming to the UK. No language or  cultural  issues  have
       been made out and even if the appellant has the mannerisms of a young
       person who has lived in the UK for some time it has  not  been  shown
       they represent a fundamental belief that it  is  not  permissible  to
       expect him to change or adapt his behaviour to hide as per HJ  (Iran)
       [2010] UKSC 31.  No real risk was made out on the basis the appellant
       is 'westernised' per se. Any error made by the Judge in this  respect
       has not been shown to be material.

   14. The second head of challenge relates to the photographs  provided  by
       the appellant the provenance of which was explained in  the  evidence
       of the appellant's witness, his cousin, who gave oral evidence of the
       First-tier Tribunal.

   15. Judge Andonian made the specific  finding  at  paragraph  45  of  the
       earlier determination that there was no evidence before him that  the
       appellants father had been killed by the Government and  assassinated
       as alleged. This was the claim made.

   16. The appellants witness before Judge Robison, his cousin  Imarn  Ahmed
       Niazi, stated in his witness statement [A's  appeal  bundle  page  15
       para 4 - 6],  that his mother had told him the appellant's father had
       been murdered in 2012  and  that  the  photographs  showed  that  the
       appellants father had been killed. Paragraph 5 is  in  the  following
       terms:

       "5 The villagers told my mother that they had been posted though  the
           door. This is a traditional practice of the Taliban.  When  they
           have murdered someone they will send pictures of  their  funeral
           as a warning."

   17. Many have been killed by the Taliban in  Afghanistan  but  the  claim
       they send photographs of the funeral to  family  members  is  not  an
       argument often heard. There is no country material to show  that  the
       Taliban give those they deem traitors who they kill a funeral. It  is
       also noted that even though the claim was that the appellants  father
       was initially involved with  the  Taliban  and  thereafter  with  the
       Americans, his claim before Judge Andonian was  that  the  government
       were responsible for his assassination whereas his cousin appears  to
       be suggesting it was the Taliban, which is inconsistent.

   18. Judge Robison clearly considered this evidence  and  found  that  the
       photographs do not prove the fact the appellants  father  was  killed
       [41]. That is factually correct for even if the pictures are  of  the
       appellant's father all they show is that he is dead not the causes of
       his death.

   19. Mr Rendle correctly acknowledged that this is a matter that  depended
       upon the credibility of the appellants claim. Although Judge  Robison
       does not set out in clear terms findings in relation  to  the  weight
       given to the cousin's evidence it is clear that the finding made  was
       that the photographs did not prove cause of death.

   20. Judge  Robison  was  required  to  conclude,  having  considered  the
       evidence, whether there had been a material change such as to  enable
       her to depart from the previous findings. It was concluded there  was
       not which is  a  sustainable  finding  on  the  facts.  Although  the
       appellant was found  to  be  slightly  younger  than  thought,  Judge
       Andonian had a clear  view  of  the  appellant's  maturity  and  made
       particular reference to the appellant's own assertion in relation  to
       his age. Judge Andonian took a view as to credibility which  included
       an assessment and appreciation of the fact the appellant was a  minor
       at that time. It has not been shown the adverse credibility  findings
       made by Judge Andonian are in any way unsafe.

   21. No legal error material to the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  has
       been made out. The determination shall stand.



Decision

   22. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

   23. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12 February 2016

