
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04530/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 June 2015                               |On 13 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              AZ (afghanistan)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Brown, Counsel instructed by Kasar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Alex Everett, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Both parties appeal to the Upper Tribunal  from  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Boyd sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  7  August
    2014) dismissing the appellant's  appeal  on  international  protection
    grounds against the decision to refuse to grant him  further  leave  to
    remain, and to remove him by way of directions under Section 47 of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, but allowing  his  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.  The First-tier  Tribunal  made
    an anonymity direction in the appellant's favour, presumably because he
    was pursuing an international protection claim, and on  that  ground  I
    consider that the appellant should  be  accorded  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Although the Secretary of State appealed first, and the appellant  then
    cross-appealed, it is convenient to maintain the  same  designation  of
    the parties as was assigned to them in the First-tier Tribunal.

The Respondent's Appeal

 3. The respondent appealed against the decision under  Article  8  on  the
    ground that the judge had erred in  law  in  misapplying  the  guidance
    outlined in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 where  the  Upper  Tribunal  held
    that after applying the requirements of the Rules, "only if  there  may
    be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  them  is
    it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether  there
    are compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them".

 4. The judge had incorrectly found the appellant's circumstances had  been
    exceptional, and had applied too lower a threshold in finding that  his
    circumstances were compelling.  He failed to take into account the fact
    that  his  circumstances  were  sufficiently   recognised   under   the
    Immigration Rules.  He was a single adult male with  no  dependants  or
    family ties to the UK, and so his circumstances  were  not  compelling.
    The judge materially erred in law by allowing his appeal on  Article  8
    grounds.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on 23 September 2014.

The Appellant's Cross-Appeal

 6. In the meantime the appellant cross-appealed, and on 18  November  2014
    Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Murray  gave  his  reasons  for
    refusing permission:

         "3.  The grounds of application state the judge failed to  use  the
             Devaseelan   principle   as    the    appellant's    brother's
             determination was not before the judge and it cannot be  right
             to say that his brother is not at risk on return neither  will
             the appellant be at risk, especially  when  the  determination
             was not provided.  They state  the  judge  was  wrong  in  his
             credibility findings and the appellant was  a  minor  when  he
             made his first appeal and the judge made no reference  to  the
             appellant's responses to the  points  raised  in  the  refusal
             letter.  They state  the  judge  was  wrong  in  his  findings
             relating to the appellant's age and he  gave  no  reasons  for
             finding the appellant's claimed age was incorrect.  They state
             the judge had not considered the objective  evidence  relating
             to the Taliban which supports the appellant's  account.   They
             state the judge erred in his findings of internal  relocation,
             giving no reasons for finding it would not be unduly harsh for
             the appellant to relocate  in  Afghanistan.   They  state  the
             judge erred in the way he dealt with paragraph 276ADE  of  the
             Rules as the appellant's evidence is that he has  no  ties  to
             Afghanistan.

         4.   Both parties must have been prepared  to  go  ahead  with  the
             hearing without the appellant's brother's determination  being
             before the judge.  This is not an error.  The judge makes some
             reference to his brother's evidence and the facts of his  case
             at paragraph 37.  Based on what was before him  he  refers  to
             inconsistency of the appellant's and  his  brother's  evidence
             and the last sentence of that paragraph is a general  finding.
             The judge refers  to  the  appellant's  age  and  to  the  age
             assessment being Merton compliant.  It is clear  that  he  was
             aware that the appellant was a minor when he came to  the  UK.
             He gives proper reasons to the appellant not being at risk  on
             return to Afghanistan for a Convention reason,  at  paragraphs
             23 to 38.  At paragraph 4 he refers to all the evidence before
             him and nothing in the determination makes me believe  he  did
             not consider all of this  evidence,  including  the  objective
             evidence when he made his decision.  The judge's  findings  on
             internal relocation are  supported  by  the  country  guidance
             cases in the objective evidence.  At paragraph  43  the  judge
             deals adequately with paragraph 276ADE and gives  reasons  for
             finding its terms cannot be met.  He then  deals  with  public
             interest and Article 8, finding there is something exceptional
             in this claim in allowing the human rights appeal.

         5.   There is no arguable error of law in the judge's determination
             based on the matters raised in the grounds of application."

 7. The appellant made a renewed application for permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal, on 11 March  2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy
    granted permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "1.  ... The appellant now appeals against the decision to  dismiss
             his appeal on asylum grounds  on  the  basis  that  the  judge
             relied on  evidence  that  was  not  before  him:  namely  the
             evidence in the appellant's brother's appeal  which  had  been
             dismissed.

         2.   I considered the grounds of appeal are arguable."

The Background

 8. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, who has an assessed date of
    birth of 5 November 1995.  He is recorded as having been encountered by
    the police at Dover on 6 January 2010, and to have been transferred  on
    the same day into the care of Social Services.  On 19 January  2010  he
    made a statement in support of his asylum claim.  He came from  Helmand
    Province.  His father told him before he died that his  date  of  birth
    was 5 November 1997.  Three years ago  his  father  had  an  office  in
    Lashkagah with his business partner H.  His older brother  also  worked
    with them.  They had their own business.  It was a money  exchange  and
    money transfer business.  His father dealt with money transfers, and  H
    dealt  with  money  exchange.   The  Taliban  visited  his  father  and
    requested him to transfer their money to Dubai.  His father refused and
    the next day the Taliban came to their house.  They held a gun  to  his
    brother's head, and took his  father  away.   They  said  that  if  his
    brother did not take care of the money transfer, they would kill  their
    father.  His brother was advised by H to  report  this  matter  to  the
    police.  He did so.  The police commander said he would sort it out and
    told his brother not to worry.  Next evening the  Taliban  brought  his
    father and the money to their house and said that if his  brother  sent
    the money to Dubai, they would let his father go.  This  visit  by  the
    Taliban coincided with the police going to  the  house  to  make  their
    enquiries (pursuant to the brother's complaint).  The  police  and  the
    Taliban started fighting each other.  The appellant  ran  away  in  one
    direction,  and  his  brother  ran  away  in  another  direction.   The
    appellant went to the house of H.  He stayed there for three nights and
    then went to visit his brother who was staying with  a  man  whom  they
    called uncle, and whose name was K.

 9. H said that his father had died in the fighting as he had been  hit  in
    the crossfire.  He also said that the Taliban thought that his  brother
    had alerted the police, and so the Taliban blamed his brother  for  the
    police being there.  He said that both he and  his  brother  endangered
    the Taliban and they would need to leave the country.  H had  a  better
    relationship with the Taliban  than  the  appellant's  family,  so  the
    Taliban did not blame H, who arranged for  his  brother  to  leave  the
    country straightaway.  The agent told his brother  that  the  appellant
    would follow later by air as he was too young to travel overland.   His
    brother was now in the UK, but the appellant did not know where he was.



10. The appellant stayed with H for the next six  months.   His  house  was
    about five to ten houses away from the appellant's family home.   After
    about six months the Taliban came looking for him.  H's wife hid him in
    the baking oven.  The Taliban told H that if they found  the  appellant
    hiding in the house, they would kill him.  The police also thought that
    the brother had brought them into a trap, and so the police  were  also
    looking for him and his brother.  H decided to move to Griskh  village,
    and he said that the appellant should pretend  to  be  his  son.   They
    stayed in Griskh village for  about  ten  months  but  they  then  left
    because they believed somebody had reported him to the  Taliban  saying
    that he was not H's son.  The Taliban  came  to  search  the  house  in
    Griskh, but the appellant was hiding in the basement amongst the  wood,
    and he was not found by the Taliban.

11. H then moved him to Musa Qala for about six months.  While  there,  the
    Taliban came to look for him again.  H's  wife  took  him  out  of  the
    backdoor, and he hid in a neighbour's house.  So again the Taliban  did
    not find him.

12. Finally, H moved to Lashkagar for about ten months, but  he  then  said
    the appellant had to leave as he was putting his whole family in danger
    by staying with him.  He was fed up lying for the appellant to both the
    Taliban and the police.  The police contacted H many times and  visited
    his business, accusing him of hiding the appellant and telling  him  to
    hand the appellant over to them.  But the  police  never  came  to  H's
    homes in the various places where they stayed.

13. The appellant attended a substantive asylum interview for  children  in
    February 2010, and an age assessment report was produced by Kent Social
    Services  in  March  2010.   The  report  ran  to  twenty  pages.   The
    conclusion of the report was that A's emotional,  social  and  physical
    presentation (as commented upon by,  among  others,  Appledore  Support
    Staff Group and the person who conducted a MCAS Educational Assessment)
    was consistent with a young person possibly in his 15th or  16th  year:
    "The assessing team decided to give [A] the benefit of  the  doubt  and
    assessed him as being  in  his  14th  year."  The  appellant  was  thus
    assessed to have a date of birth of 5 November 1995.

14. On 30 June 2010 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing to
    recognise him as a refugee.  His brother (B) claimed asylum in  the  UK
    on 26 November 2006, and his claim was refused on 19 January 2007.  The
    asylum claim was recorded as being appeal rights exhausted on  9  April
    2008.  Examining that  part  of  the  appellant's  claim  that  alleged
    harassment by the Taliban, and a fight  between  the  Taliban  and  the
    police, consideration had been given  to  the  evidence  given  by  his
    brother.  The appellant's evidence was that  he  had  run  out  of  the
    backdoor while his brother had run out of  the  front  door.   But  his
    brother stated in his evidence that he ran out of the backdoor, and  he
    did not know what had happened to the appellant.  His brother said that
    when he fled the village, it was then bombed by a British plane.   This
    was inconsistent with the appellant's evidence that he went to stay  at
    the house of H which was only ten houses  away  and  was  in  the  same
    village.  The appellant had  made  no  mention  of  the  village  being
    bombed.

15. The respondent refused to grant the appellant  discretionary  leave  on
    the basis that he was free to return  to  Afghanistan  with  his  adult
    brother.

16. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt  sitting  at
    Taylor House 4  November  2010.   At  paragraph  7  of  his  subsequent
    decision, the judge noted that the appellant's older  brother's  asylum
    claim had been refused on the same basis as the appellant's  claim  and
    account.  He found that the Secretary of State's decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law as the appellant's  application  had  not  been
    considered  under  the  Home  Office   guidelines   with   regards   to
    unaccompanied asylum seeking children in the United  Kingdom.   So  the
    appeal was allowed on a limited basis,  without  consideration  of  the
    substantive claim.

17. The appellant's application for asylum was  re-refused  on  4  February
    2011.  The reasons given for rejecting  the  credibility  of  the  core
    claim included the reasons given in the earlier refusal arising from an
    examination of his elder brother's claim.  Home Office  records  showed
    that his brother was detained on 14  September  2010  and  returned  to
    Afghanistan on 5 October 2010.  So it was accepted that his brother was
    now in Afghanistan.

18. The respondent said that consideration had been given to  the  evidence
    given by his brother at his appeal hearing heard on 19 March 2008.  The
    brother's account was not accepted as  credible  by  Immigration  Judge
    Parker as his brother was unable to describe in any detail the workings
    in the exchange business.  Furthermore, the judge did  not  accept  his
    older brother's account that either the Taliban or  drug  barons  would
    have found it necessary to bully  an  unwilling  money  exchanger  into
    transferring money to Dubai for them.  It was  not  accepted  as  being
    reasonably likely by the appeal judge, as it was more likely the  money
    exchange office sympathetic  to  their  cause  could  have  been  found
    amongst the twenty to  25  money  exchanges,  which  according  to  his
    brother, operated in Helmond Province.  Because of  this  finding,  the
    appellant's account of his father's abduction was not accepted.

19. It was not accepted the Taliban or the police  were  looking  for  him.
    But even if this was accepted, in  the  year  that  he  was  living  in
    Lashkar Gah he did not experience any problems with the Taliban or  the
    police.  Furthermore, there was a sufficiency of protection  in  Kabul.
    As someone with no particular profile, he  would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return to Kabul.

20.  The  appellant  was  granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  as  an
    unaccompanied asylum seeking minor to the age of 17�.

21. The appellant applied for further leave to remain before the expiry  of
    his discretionary leave.  He relied on a  witness  statement  dated  23
    April 2013 in which he sought to  address  the  reasons  given  by  the
    Secretary  of  State  in  the  refusal  letter  of  February  2011  for
    disbelieving his claim inter alia on the basis of a comparison  of  his
    account with  that  given  by  his  brother.   There  was  no  material
    inconsistency.  There were two backdoors to the house, and he  ran  out
    of one of them while his older brother ran out of the  other  backdoor.
    The reason why he had not mentioned the bombing was  that  he  had  not
    been  asked  the  question  in  his  asylum  interview.    There   were
    bombardments of their village on a  daily  basis.   The  whole  village
    would not have been destroyed as a result of one bomb  from  a  British
    plane.

22. On 3 July 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing the
    appellant's application for further leave to remain.  Consideration had
    been given as to whether the issues raised in his application for leave
    should be regarded as a fresh  asylum  claim.   The  contents  of  that
    application had been carefully examined and it had been decided not  to
    treat his representations as a fresh  asylum  claim  as  he  stated  he
    wished to maintain his original claim for asylum and he had not adduced
    any further evidence in support of his application for further leave to
    remain that warranted further consideration.

23. He said in his statement that the  age  assessment  conducted  by  Kent
    Social Services was unfair.  But it was Home Office  policy  to  accept
    the findings of a Merton compliant age assessment.  He had provided  no
    documentary evidence in support of his claimed date of birth  as  being
    15 November 1997.  Also his previous appeal against refusal  of  asylum
    was dealt with on the basis that it was accepted that he was an  Afghan
    national with a date of birth of 5 November 1995.

24.  His  alleged  fear  of  return  was  confined  to  certain  areas   of
    Afghanistan, namely Helmand Province.  It was not accepted  he  was  at
    risk in his home area, but if he felt uncomfortable in returning to his
    home village, then sufficiency of protection would be available to  him
    a place of relocation such as Kabul.

25. It was noted from his previous appeal determination  that  his  brother
    was an adult Afghan whose claim for asylum  was  refused  on  the  same
    basis as his own claim.  The supplementary  statement  raised  concerns
    about him being forced to become a suicide bomber.  He was now over  18
    years old, and so he no longer fell into the age group usually targeted
    by the Taliban as a child recruit.  Furthermore, background information
    indicated that many thousands of  Afghans  had  already  returned  from
    abroad in circumstances very similar to his own, without incident.   It
    was not accepted he had demonstrated a well-founded fear of persecution
    from the Taliban, so he did not qualify for a grant of asylum for  this
    reason.

26. The hearing of the appellant's appeal was scheduled for 7 August  2014.
    On 17 July 2014 the  appellant's  representatives  wrote  to  the  Home
    Office seeking disclosure of the determination and  documents  relating
    to his brother's asylum claim.

27. In the February 2010 letter, the respondent said that consideration had
    been given to the evidence given by his brother at his  appeal  hearing
    heard on 19 March 2008.  The brother's  account  was  not  accepted  as
    credible by Immigration Judge Parker  as  his  brother  was  unable  to
    describe  in  any  detail  the  workings  in  the  exchange   business.
    Furthermore, the judge did not accept his older brother's account  that
    either the Taliban or drug barons would  have  found  it  necessary  to
    bully an unwilling money exchanger into transferring money to Dubai for
    them.  It was not accepted as being reasonably  likely  by  the  appeal
    judge, as it was more likely the money exchange office  sympathetic  to
    their cause could have been  found  amongst  the  twenty  to  25  money
    exchanges,  which  according  to  his  brother,  operated  in   Helmond
    Province.  Because of this finding,  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    father's abduction was not accepted.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

28. At the hearing before Judge Boyd, the respondent was  not  represented.
    The appellant was represented by Mr Abdar of Kasar & Co Solicitors.  In
    his skeleton argument, he argued that the respondent was debarred  from
    relying on evidence which had not been disclosed to the appellant or to
    the Tribunal, namely the evidence given  by  the  appellant's  brother.
    The respondent was not permitted to  give  hearsay  evidence  from  the
    appellant's brother.  Accordingly, there was no evidence  to  find  the
    appellant incredible.  Also, the respondent was seeking to rely on  the
    appellant's brother as a witness against the appellant.   If  that  was
    the case, the appellant was entitled to  test  that  evidence,  perhaps
    even by cross-examining his brother as a hostile witness, which was not
    possible.  For these reasons, the Tribunal was requested  to  disregard
    the  brother's  purported  evidence  altogether.   Alternatively,   the
    Tribunal was requested to attach very little weight to it and, in doing
    so, also to consider the cogent evidence of the appellant and  what  he
    said of his brother's evidence.

29. He went on to submit the appellant had given a consistent, detailed and
    entirely plausible  account  of  the  events  leading  to  him  fleeing
    Afghanistan in search of safety.

30. In his subsequent decision, Judge Boyd said at paragraph [37]:

         "I note it was argued that the majority of the  credibility  issues
         are in relation to a  comparison  with  the  appellant's  brother's
         claim and the documents in relation thereto have  not  been  lodged
         but  the  appellant's  brother's  claim  has  been  considered  and
         refused.  There is no evidence other than that the  factual  matrix
         is the same for both appeals.  It is clear from the  account  given
         by the appellant that his brother was in  the  same  position,  the
         only difference being that his brother was older and therefore left
         Afghanistan earlier.  Consistency alone in  decision  making  would
         note that in the circumstances the  appellant's  brother  with  the
         same factual matrix was not at risk upon return so neither could it
         be said the appellant would be and this in relation to the  alleged
         incidents within Afghanistan."

31. The judge went on at paragraph [38] to hold that he was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant was of any interest to the Taliban or to the  police
    and to that extent  he  would  not  be  at  any  risk  upon  return  to
    Afghanistan.  At paragraphs [39] and [40] he addressed the question  of
    whether the appellant  was  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection,  or
    whether there was a real risk on return to Afghanistan of the appellant
    facing ill-treatment of such severity as to violate  Articles  2  or  3
    ECHR.  He answered these questions in the negative,  and  proceeded  to
    address the appellant's claim under Article 8 ECHR.

32. At paragraph [43], he held that, having left Afghanistan at the age  of
    14, the appellant still  remembered  the  language,  and  much  of  the
    culture of that country.  He was sent to the United Kingdom by Mr G and
    Mr K (whom he referred to as his uncle, although he  was  not  a  blood
    uncle).  So there was no evidence to suggest that they would not  still
    be there for  him.   His  brother,  although  untraced,  was  still  in
    Afghanistan.  The appellant would be returned as an 18 or 19  year  old
    man, and so it was not shown he had no ties within the meaning of  sub-
    paragraph (vi) of paragraph 276ADE.

33. The judge went on to consider an Article 8 claim outside the Rules, and
    he set out the considerations in Section 117B which he needed  to  take
    into account.  The judge continued:

         "47. Applying the foregoing to the appellant's case, the  appellant
             has been in the United Kingdom for over four and a half years,
             he has been schooled here and spoke excellent English  at  the
             hearing.  He has finished schooling and is now  working  part-
             time in a restaurant and is looking for other employment.   He
             is also studying at college.  He does not appear to be totally
             financially independent  but  is  heading  towards  that.   He
             appears to have fully integrated  into  British  society.   He
             lived with foster parents for four years and gets on well with
             all of their family as evidenced by the witnesses before me in
             their statements.  He did well at school as confirmed  by  his
             supervising social worker, Mr Gumbrell.  His private life  was
             also established while his immigration status  was  precarious
             as  much  of  this  was  established  after  he  was   [given]
             discretionary leave by the respondent.

         48.   Accordingly,  therefore,  I  am  not   satisfied   that   the
             requirements of  Section  117B  referred  to  above  adversely
             affect the appellant's Article 8 claim ...

         51.  The appellant's circumstances are verging on  the  exceptional
             for  someone  who  speaks  very  good  English  and  is  fully
             integrated into British society such as him  and  has  clearly
             formed very close relationships with his  foster  family  who,
             although not family in terms of Appendix FM,  have  in  effect
             become familial substitutes for  him.   It  would  be  a  very
             severe wrench to take this young man out of society with which
             he has integrated and away from the people he now knows as his
             family  to  return   him   to   Afghanistan.    Although   not
             exceptional, his circumstances are  certainly  compelling  and
             compassionate.

         52.  Whilst I note the terms of Section 117B in relation to  public
             interest that the maintenance of effective immigration control
             is in the public interest, his circumstances  do  establish  a
             good arguable case, in my opinion, outside the Rules such that
             his removal would be disproportionate and therefore  a  breach
             of Article 8 of the ECHR."

The Error of Law Hearing

34. At the hearing before me, Miss Brown developed the arguments which  she
    had advanced in the application for permission to appeal.   She  stated
    that the appellant  did  not  know  why  his  brother's  case  was  not
    believed, and his brother's determination should have been in the  Home
    Office bundle for the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   She
    produced a letter from her instructing solicitors that had been sent to
    the Home Office a few weeks before the hearing.  She  agreed  that  the
    appellant's representative at the hearing had not sought an adjournment
    on the ground that the documents requested in the letter had  not  been
    disclosed.  But she submitted that this did not make any difference.

35. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Miss Everett relied on the Rule 24
    response settled by her colleague, Karen Pal, on 14 April 2015:

         "3.  The judge has made adequate findings of fact in respect of the
             appellant's well-founded fear of persecution  as  set  out  in
             paragraphs 26 to 38.  The  judge  may  have  referred  to  the
             appellant's brother's claim however the  judge  considered  it
             independently of his brothers.

         4.   The judge has also considered risk on return to Afghanistan as
             set out at paragraphs 39 to 40 of the determination.

         5.   The judge has also considered whether the appellant meets  the
             requirements of 276ADE.  The judge adequately deals with  this
             at paragraph 43 of the determination."

36. Miss Brown submitted that, following YM Uganda, the judge  should  have
    been applying the latest  version  of  Rule  276ADE,  rather  than  the
    version of the Rules that was in force at the date of  decision.   Miss
    Everett submitted that arguably the new version of the Rules imposed  a
    higher test, and any error by the judge was therefore not material.

37. In regard to the Secretary of State's  error  of  law  challenge,  Miss
    Everett submitted that paragraph [47] was the key paragraph,  and  that
    the judge had clearly erred in finding  that  the  appellant's  private
    life was not established while his immigration status  was  precarious,
    in the light of AM (Malawi).  There were also more  nuanced  criticisms
    that could be made of the judge's proportionality assessment, but  this
    error alone was sufficient to vitiate the decision. On the facts  there
    was only one possible outcome, which  was  that  the  Article  8  claim
    outside the Rules should be dismissed.

38. In reply, Miss Brown submitted that the Secretary of State  should  not
    be allowed to rely on the AM (Malawi) point as it had not  been  raised
    in the application for permission to appeal.  Alternatively, there  was
    no material error.  The judge had given adequate reasons for finding in
    the appellant's favour outside the Rules.  The judge  had  applied  the
    correct legal test in paragraphs [44] and [49], referring  to  Gulshan,
    and the grounds of appeal amounted to no more  than  an  expression  of
    disagreement with findings on Article 8 which were reasonably  open  to
    the judge.

Discussion

39. It is convenient to deal first with the error of law challenges mounted
    by the appellant.  The strongest ground of challenge is that identified
    by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy when granting permission to appeal  on
    a renewed application.  This is ground 1, "failure to  apply  the  case
    law of Devaseelan".

40. The central premise which underlies ground 1 is that Judge Boyd did not
    have any evidence before him (a) as to the brother's claim and  (b)  as
    the findings made by Judge Parker when dismissing  brother  B's  appeal
    against the decision by the respondent to reject his claim.   For  Miss
    Brown submits in paragraph 14 of her permission application that  Judge
    Boyd did not  have  "any  evidence"  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    brother's claim/appeal before him.

41. This is only half true.  The judge did not have the Reasons for Refusal
    Letter directed to B,  nor  did  he  have  a  copy  of  Judge  Parker's
    determination dismissing B's appeal.  But the judge had evidence of the
    brother's claim, and the outcome of the brother's  appeal,  from  three
    different sources.

42. The appellant's brother was an inextricable  part  of  the  appellant's
    narrative, and it was not disputed before Judge  Boyd,  or  before  me,
    that B had advanced the same  core  claim  (with  minor  variations  on
    points of detail) as the appellant had done.  Another important  source
    was Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt, who had made an unappealed finding of fact
    in his decision of 2010 that the older brother's asylum claim had  been
    refused "on the same basis as the appellant's claim and  account",  and
    that, upon exhaustion of the brother's rights of  appeal,  the  brother
    had been removed from the United Kingdom to Afghanistan on or  about  5
    October 2010.  The third source of evidence that Judge Boyd was able to
    draw upon was the evidence contained in the letter  of  February  2011,
    which not only reiterated  the  variations  in  the  brother's  account
    relied  on  as  demonstrating  that  the  appellant  and  his   brother
    contradicted each other on some aspects of the  core  claim,  but  also
    some of the reasons given by Judge Parker for  finding  that  the  core
    claim was not credible.

43. The fact that the account of what the brother said, and the account  of
    what Judge Parker found, is embedded in the refusal letter of  February
    2011 does not mean that the account has no probative value; or that  on
    procedural fairness grounds the evidence  should  have  been  excluded.
    Clearly the best evidence of what the brother had said, and what  Judge
    Parker had found, was to be found in Judge Parker's determination.  But
    the same representatives had been acting for the  appellant  since  the
    outset of his application for leave to remain, and the initial strategy
    which was adopted was an acceptance of the reliability of  the  account
    of the brother's claim given in the refusal letter  of  February  2011.
    Hence, a witness statement was taken from the appellant in  support  of
    the application for leave to remain in which he sought to  address  the
    alleged inconsistencies between his account and his brother's  account.



44. Accordingly, the request on  17  July  represented  a  significant  and
    inexcusably late change of  strategy.  For  the  first  time  the  same
    representatives demanded  production  of  the  determination  of  Judge
    Parker, and other documents evidencing  the  brother's  claim,  on  the
    ground that it was procedurally unfair for the  appeal  hearing  to  go
    ahead without such disclosure.

45.  Whilst  the  disclosure  request  was  a  proper  one   to   make   by
    representatives exercising due diligence, it ought to  have  been  made
    much sooner when the appellant's representatives were  considering  how
    best to take forward  the  asylum  claim  that  had  been  rejected  in
    February 2011 on the basis of, inter alia, the content and  outcome  of
    the older brother's claim.

46. In any event, Judge Boyd was not faced with the difficult  decision  of
    whether to grant an adjournment for the production of the determination
    of Judge Parker in response to a late request for its production.   The
    appellant, through his representatives, was content to proceed with the
    hearing on the evidence as it stood.

47. There is a subtle, but  important,  inconsistency  between  the  stance
    taken by Miss Brown in the application for permission, and  the  stance
    which she took before me in oral  argument.   In  the  application  for
    permission, Miss Brown did  not  submit  that  the  judge  should  have
    disregarded the evidence pertaining to the brother's claim  altogether.
    It was argued  that  little  weight  should  have  been  given  to  the
    respondent's reliance on the brother's evidence,  and  that,  as  Judge
    Parker's determination was not before the Tribunal, it should have been
    treated as only the starting point for any decision on the  appellant's
    appeal, if in fact the factual matrix  was  identical).   But  in  oral
    argument, she took the absolutist  line  that  the  judge  should  have
    disregarded altogether the evidence pertaining to the  brother's  claim
    and its outcome.

48. However, as  indicated  earlier  in  this  error  of  law  ruling,  the
    absolutist stance only has traction if the underlying  central  premise
    is correct, which is that Judge Boyd did not have "any evidence" before
    him in  relation  to  the  appellant's  brother's  claim/appeal.   This
    premise is wholly fallacious, for the reasons given above.

49. Accordingly, there was no procedural unfairness  in  the  judge  taking
    into account what was said in the refusal letter of February 2011 about
    the details of the brother's claim, or what was said about the findings
    made by Judge Parker.  As Judge Boyd said  at  paragraph  [26]  of  his
    decision, although the brother's account had not been "produced", there
    was no reason  to  doubt  that  the  brother's  account  had  not  been
    accurately reported.

50. As the core claim of the brother was the same as the core claim of  the
    appellant, and each of them was  an  inextricable  part  of  the  other
    brother's narrative, it was open to Judge Boyd to treat  the  rejection
    of the older brother's claim, and the  dismissals  of  his  appeal,  as
    being significant and  persuasive  -  both  on  the  question  of  past
    persecution and on the question of future risk  This is what the  judge
    was indicating when he referred to "consistency in decision making"  on
    a claim with the same factual matrix.   He  was  not  saying  that  the
    outcome of the brother's appeal was conclusive of the issues  which  he
    had to decide.

51. As submitted in the Rule 24 response,  the  judge  also  addressed  the
    appellant's core claim on its own merits.  At paragraph [27], he  found
    that it was unlikely that there were two backdoors, as alleged  by  the
    appellant by way of explanation of his  older  brother's  account.   He
    found there was an inconsistency between the appellant stating  at  one
    point the Taliban came in the evening, and  stating  at  another  point
    that they had come during the day  time,  rather  than  at  night.   At
    paragraph [28], the judge explained at some length why he did not  find
    it credible that the police believed that the appellant's  brother  had
    set a deliberate trap for them because the Taliban had arrived  earlier
    than planned.  On the contrary, the judge found, the police,  who  were
    lying in wait for the Taliban, would have  seen  that  the  appellant's
    father had been brought back to  the  property  as  a  hostage  to  the
    Taliban, which in itself corroborated the account they had been  given.
    Accordingly, the judge concluded at paragraph [29], the  appellant  had
    not shown to the lower standard of  proof  that  the  authorities  were
    looking for him and his brother.  At paragraph [30], the judge went  on
    to observe that the alleged incident with the police  and  the  Taliban
    occurred around September 2006, according to  the  appellant.   On  the
    appellant's account of his date of birth, he would only have been eight
    years old at the time.  The judge  found  it  extremely  unlikely  that
    either the Taliban or the police would have any interest in an  8  year
    old boy or (accepting the social worker's assessment of his  age)  that
    they would have any interest in a 10 year old boy.

52. Accordingly, ground 1 is not made out.  The remaining grounds of appeal
    (grounds 2 to 6) were not singled  out  by  Judge  McGeachy  as  having
    intrinsic merit, and I find that they have no  merit  for  the  reasons
    succinctly stated by Designated Judge Murray.

53. I only find it necessary to  elaborate  on  my  reasons  for  rejecting
    ground 3 (failure to give reasons in assessing the appellant's age), as
    the appellant's true age was  and  is  of  pivotal  importance  to  the
    question of risk on return, and in particular  whether  the  appellant,
    unlike his older brother, could claim refugee status on LQ grounds.

54. The judge's reasoning on the question of the appellant's  true  age  is
    very brief.  At paragraph [24] he finds that  a  Merton  compliant  age
    assessment was carried out by Kent Social Services which found that his
    date of birth was 11 November 1995, making him now 18 years  old,  and,
    despite  the  appellant's  insistence  to  the  contrary,   the   judge
    pronounced himself satisfied on the evidence before him that  the  date
    of birth of 11 November 1995 was the more likely date.

55. As submitted by Miss Brown, the judge has not in terms engaged with the
    extensive submissions made  in  the  skeleton  argument  that  the  age
    assessment was not Merton compliant, and that the judge  should  accept
    the appellant's "cogent evidence  of  his  age".  This  alleged  cogent
    evidence consisted of what the appellant claimed he had  been  told  by
    his father, as  confirmed  by  his  brother,  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's foster parents along with  other  witnesses  had  confirmed
    that at the time of his entry to the UK, the appellant, "appeared,  for
    all intents and purposes, as a minor of the claimed age or at least  as
    being younger than 14, as assessed by Kent Social Services."

56. The weaker the case that is being advanced, the less that  is  required
    by way of reasoning by the judicial decision maker in disposing of that
    case.  The grounds advanced for alleging that the  age  assessment  was
    Merton non-compliant are simply untrue.  The central criticism made  in
    the skeleton argument is that the social  workers  did  not  take  into
    account the history the  appellant  had  given  or  at  least  make  an
    assessment of his credibility.  But the  social  workers  explained  in
    their report the difficulties they faced in this regard.  At page 13 of
    the report, they said:

         "It was decided that given [A's] apparent  confused  demeanour,  no
         further clarification or  explanation  for  these  moves  [or]  the
         conflicting information regarding the father's death, or [A's]  age
         when his father died, was sought.  [A] was not clear about why,  or
         when, he left Afghanistan."

57. At page 9 of the report, it is recorded that A told social workers that
    his mother had died from an illness six years ago when he  was  aged  8
    years of age.  So on this basis A was now 14.  The  authors  took  into
    account that A said he knew that  his  correct  date  of  birth  was  5
    November 1997, because his father had told him, but equally  they  took
    into account the fact that A had no documentation to support his stated
    age.

58. At page 10 of the report, seven different social workers  are  recorded
    as having reached the conclusion that,  on  the  basis  of  his  social
    presentation, the appellant was not as young as he claimed to  be,  but
    was at least in the 14 to 16 year age range.  They  were  unanimous  in
    this opinion.

59. For the reasons given elsewhere in Judge Boyd's decision, the appellant
    was not found to be a credible witness anymore than  his  brother  was.
    So essentially  the  case  for  the  appellant  rested  on  the  highly
    tendentious proposition that the judge  should  prefer  the  subjective
    evidence of lay people such as the appellant's foster carers  over  the
    evidence of professionals with experience and  expertise  in  assessing
    the age of an asylum seeking child.

60. In the circumstances, I find the judge did not err  in  law  in  simply
    relying on the fact that when Social Services had conducted a  thorough
    age assessment which was Merton  compliant,  and  which  had  not  been
    challenged by the solicitor who was acting for  the  appellant  at  the
    time (see page 2 of the age assessment report).

The Secretary of State's Appeal

61. The central criticism in the Secretary of State's  appeal  against  the
    decision under Article 8 ECHR is that  the  judge  conducted  a  flawed
    proportionality assessment.  Although his approach to Section  117B  is
    not singled out for particular criticism, I consider that the ground of
    appeal sufficiently broad to encompass the criticism of paragraph  [37]
    advanced by Miss Everett at the hearing.  The judge was  clearly  wrong
    to treat the appellant as not having built up his private life  in  the
    UK  while  his  status  was  precarious.   The  judge  has  failed   to
    acknowledge that the appellant had no legitimate expectation  of  being
    able to extend his stay in the United  Kingdom  once  the  purpose  for
    which he  had  been  given  discretionary  leave  to  remain  had  been
    fulfilled, which was the protection of his interests as a  minor.   Now
    that he had reached  the  age  of  majority,  little  weight  could  be
    attached to the fact that he had resided in the United Kingdom for some
    four and a half years in circumstances where he only had  discretionary
    leave to remain until he was aged 17�.

62. The specific error identified in the commissioned application  is  also
    made out.   The  judge  muddled  the  intermediate  or  threshold  test
    propounded in Gulshan with the higher test required for  an  Article  8
    claim outside  the  Rules  to  actually  succeed,  after  all  relevant
    proportionality considerations had been taken into account.

63. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the  judge's  decision  on  Article  8
    outside the Rules is vitiated by a material error of law, such that the
    decision should be set aside and remade.

The Remaking of the Decision under Article 8 ECHR

64. For the purpose of remaking the decision under Article 8 ECHR, I  begin
    by considering whether the appellant can bring himself within  the  new
    version of Rule 276ADE of the Rules.  The evidence relied  upon  before
    the First-tier Tribunal in support of the Article 8 claim was  evidence
    heavily directed towards the life which the appellant  had  established
    here, rather than towards the obstacles which the appellant would  face
    in reintegrating into life in Afghanistan on return.  The Red Cross did
    not have sufficient information to be able  to  trace  the  appellant's
    brother in Kabul, which was the city to which he was removed.  It  does
    not follow that the appellant will not be able to find his  brother  in
    Kabul, but it is not essential that he should be able to do so.   Prima
    facie, the appellant is sufficiently mature  to  establish  himself  in
    Kabul without the assistance of his brother  or  another  close  family
    member.  The skills and qualifications which the appellant has acquired
    in the United Kingdom will enhance his employability or assist  him  in
    establishing himself in business.   So  I  do  not  consider  that  the
    appellant can bring himself within Rule 276ADE.

65. Turning to an  Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules,  I  accept  that
    questions 1 and 2  of  the  Razgar  test  should  be  answered  in  the
    appellant's favour in respect of the establishment of private  life  in
    the United Kingdom.  The appellant does not enjoy family life  for  the
    purposes of Article 8.  He left the care of his foster parents  at  the
    end of June 2014, and has been living in independent accommodation ever
    since.  While he remains part of the family in a loose sense,  he  does
    not enjoy family life with his foster  parents  and  siblings  for  the
    purposes of Article 8.

66. I answer questions 3 and 4 of  the  Razgar  test  in  the  respondent's
    favour, and on the crucial question  of  proportionality  I  take  into
    account the public interest considerations set out in Section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act.  As illuminated by the Upper Tribunal in AM (Malawi), the
    considerations in the appellant's favour ultimately carry  less  weight
    than the public interest considerations which militate in favour of his
    removal.  On analysis, there are no compelling circumstances which  tip
    the scales in the appellant's favour.  Now that he has reached the  age
    of majority, he has no legitimate expectation of being able  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom unless he can qualify for further leave to remain
    under a specific Immigration Rule, such as a Tier 4 (Student)  Migrant.
    In common with other failed asylum seekers who have reached  their  age
    of majority, it is governmental  policy  as  expressed  inter  alia  in
    primary legislation that he should carry on his  private  life  in  his
    country of origin.  The fact that he has integrated particularly  well,
    or that he is particularly fluent in English, or that he  has  laudable
    aspirations, such as looking for a job at Barnardos because he wants to
    help other young people, does not, and indeed cannot in  the  light  of
    established jurisprudence, tip the scales in his favour.  The  decision
    appealed against is proportionate to the legitimate public  end  sought
    to  be  achieved,  namely  the  maintenance  of  firm   and   effective
    immigration controls.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
on asylum, humanitarian protection and  human  rights  (Articles  2  and  3)
grounds did not contain an  error  of  law,  and  accordingly  the  decision
stands.  However the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  claim
under Article 8 ECHR did contain  an  error  of  law,  and  accordingly  the
decision is set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is  substituted:  the
appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

