
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04891/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2 April 2015                               |On 23 April 2015                 |
|                                              |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SHAHAGHA ZABED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Saleem, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the claimant is an unsuccessful asylum seeker this  is  not  a
    case where there is any reason to find him at  risk  just  because  his
    identity is made known. There is no good reason to  restrict  reporting
    in this case and I make no order.

 2. The appellant in this appeal, hereinafter  "the  Secretary  of  State",
    appeals with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss  an  appeal  by  the  present  respondent,   hereinafter   "the
    claimant", against the decision of the Secretary of  State  on  9  June
    2014 to refuse him asylum.

 3. The claimant is a national of Afghanistan who was born in 1990 and  who
    has lived in the United Kingdom since February 2006.  The claimant said
    that he was  a  refugee  or  alternatively  that  he  was  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection or alternatively that removing him would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his private and family life and that
    in any event he was entitled to remain  under  something  described  as
    "the Legacy Policy".

 4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal   on   international
    protection grounds without making a finding on the claim  that  removal
    would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The Tribunal  allowed  the
    appeal in part in the following terms:

         "The appeal under the Immigration Rules is allowed to  the  limited
         extent  that  the  matter  is  remitted  to  the   respondent   for
         consideration of the [claimant's] claim under the Legacy Policy."

 5. This decision was challenged by the Secretary of State  essentially  on
    the grounds that there is  no  Legacy  Policy.   The  grounds  complain
    particularly that the First-tier Tribunal failed to follow the decision
    in AZ (asylum - "legacy" cases) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00270 (IAC).

 6. The appeal came before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  J  M  Lewis  in
    November 2014.  He was concerned by points raised and  gave  directions
    for skeleton arguments for the better  progress  of  the  appeal.   The
    claimant was to serve on the Tribunal and  the  Secretary  of  State  a
    detailed skeleton argument by 24 November 2014 and by 22 December  2014
    the Secretary of State was to serve a skeleton argument in reply.

 7. Neither party complied with the directions.  I  do  not  know  why  the
    claimant did not comply.  I do know that  the  claimant  did  supply  a
    skeleton argument on 9 March 2015 which is a long time after  the  time
    specified.  For some reason this had not cone to Mr Wilding's attention
    but he did serve on the Tribunal a skeleton argument on 27 March  2015.
    Mr Wilding was being as helpful as he could.  He could not  respond  to
    the claimant's skeleton argument because he had not seen it but he  did
    outline his case to the Tribunal as well as he understood it.

 8. As Deputy Judge Lewis had allowed four working weeks to reply  I  would
    have given Mr Wilding more time if he had needed it to respond  to  the
    claimant's  skeleton  argument.   Mr  Wilding  had  an  opportunity  to
    consider his position and decided that the skeleton  argument  did  not
    catch him by surprise and he did not need more time.

 9. The appeal arises from the decision of the Secretary of State explained
    in a letter dated 9 June 2014.  Essentially the Secretary of State  did
    not believe the claimant's case  and  found  that  the  claimant  could
    establish himself in Afghanistan.  Removal  would  not  contravene  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention
    on Human Rights.  Further, the Secretary of State acknowledged that the
    claimant had made reference to the  "Legacy  Programme"  but  concluded
    that the claimant was not entitled to any kind of leave as a result  of
    the "Legacy Programme".

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge said at paragraph 18:

         "There is merit in Mr Saleem's submission that  the  [Secretary  of
         State] has not given proper consideration to whether the [claimant]
         is eligible for leave to remain under the Legacy Programme,  beyond
         simply stating, without more, that the appellant's  application  is
         declined.  I find that the refusal to consider his  eligibility  is
         not in accordance with the law and that the appropriate  remedy  is
         to remit the matter to the [Secretary of State] for a consideration
         of the [claimant's] case under the Legacy Programme."

11. The Secretary of State particularly  relied  on  a  decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kopieczek decided in the Upper Tribunal and published as
    AZ (asylum - "legacy" cases) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  270  (IAC).   The
    headnote of that case, which, like all headnotes in reported  decisions
    of the Tribunal was drawn by the Tribunal is in the following terms:

         "(i) Where an appellant in an asylum  appeal  had  previously  been
         informed that his case is being considered as a 'legacy  case'  but
         no  decision  under  the  process  had  been  made,  a   subsequent
         immigration decision following a  rejection  by  the  Secretary  of
         State of his asylum claim is not rendered unlawful by reason of the
         failure to make a decision under the legacy process.

         (ii) There is no obligation on a  Tribunal  to  adjourn  an  asylum
         appeal so as to allow for a decision to be made  under  the  legacy
         process."

12. In short, the Upper Tribunal appears to have  decided  previously  that
    the Secretary of State is not obliged to make a specific decision under
    the legacy process in circumstances such as these.

13. Mr Wilding  adopted  that  argument  but  further  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State had made a decision in the sense that it  was  clear
    from the decision that "legacy" had been considered and  found  not  to
    assist the claimant.

14. Mr Wilding's skeleton argument essentially made two points.  It  relied
    on the headnote in AZ and paragraph of the decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in SH (Iran) & Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1469  at  paragraph
    65 where Davis LJ said:

         "I add a footnote.  The position with regard  to  legacy  cases  on
         these particular points is now to be taken as laid to rest.   There
         have been many decisions in the  last  two  years  on  the  salient
         points, all of which  are  in  substantial  accord.   There  is  no
         separate legacy 'policy'.  There is no basis for relying  on  delay
         as, in itself, a ground for obtaining leave to remain.  There is in
         the ordinary case no relevant legitimate  expectation,  other  than
         that the case will be considered on applicable law  and  policy  at
         the time the decision is made.  There is no basis for  saying  that
         there is a commitment on the part of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
         'conclude' a case either by effecting actual removal or by granting
         leave to remain."

15. Mr Saleem's skeleton argument sets out something of the history of  the
    legacy scheme and it pays particular attention to  the  aspirations  of
    the administration including dealing with a backlog of cases.  He noted
    that amongst the cases included in the Case Resolution  Programme  were
    "asylum applications which had been refused but there is no  indication
    that the applicant has left the UK".  His point was that a  case  could
    still be within the scope of the Case Resolution Programme  even  after
    an asylum application had been refused.

16. I read this rather differently from the way urged by Mr Saleem. I  find
    that the policy was contemplated cases being  in  the  Case  Resolution
    Programme after an asylum decision had been refused but when  where  no
    removal decision had been made.  Until fairly recently  it  was  common
    practice for asylum to be refused but the appellant not to be  removed,
    at least not immediately.  Very often there was  no  removal  decision.
    In the instant case there has been a refusal of leave to enter which is
    an appealable decision and, on my reading, means that there is no  need
    for the Case Resolution Programme to be involved.

17. Mr Saleem makes much  in  his  grounds  about  factors  that  would  be
    considered at any particular time and points out  how  they  have  been
    changed and how they are now harder to satisfy.  All this seems  to  me
    perfectly correct but I cannot agree with the conclusion for  which  he
    is arguing.  It is the nature of asylum cases that circumstances change
    and an application that succeeds when it is made would not  necessarily
    succeed on the same facts some time later.  Not everyone who  has  been
    given refugee status loses  it  when  there  is  a  change  in  country
    conditions.  Such a policy would be impossible  to  implement  and  may
    well be undesirable because  it  would  give  people  no  incentive  to
    integrate  into  the  new  community.   Perhaps  the  reasons  are  not
    important, at least not to the Tribunal.  It  is  settled  law  that  a
    person's application will be decided in accordance with the  Rules  and
    policy in force when the decision was made.  It is  irrelevant  that  a
    person might have been successful if the case had been decided  earlier
    just as it is no answer to a successful asylum application to say  that
    it could have been refused if it had been considered earlier.  From the
    point of view of litigant who sees his circumstances being  essentially
    the same as someone who had a different outcome this seems  unfair  but
    it is, ironically, the likely consequence of an attempt to impose order
    on a system of deciding appeals.

18. Mr Saleem sought to distinguish  the  case  from  the  decision  in  AZ
    because in AZ there had been no decision on his "legacy  case"  whereas
    here there was reference to the legacy scheme  albeit  without  showing
    much depth of analysis. Mr Saleem has produced copies of chapter  3  of
    the Enforcement Instruction and Guidance in 2011 and 2014.   Mr  Saleem
    argued that the case of AZ was decided wrongly.  He drew  my  attention
    to various points which he said were factually wrong or mistakes in the
    judgment.

19. This submission, which may not be well-founded in any event, misses the
    point.  As was explained by the Court of Appeal in SH (Iran)  there  is
    no "legacy policy" in the sense that the  legacy  provisions  create  a
    separate set of Rules or  identify  separate  considerations  that  put
    people in a more advantageous position than they would be if their case
    was decided only with reference to the Rules.  So called "legacy cases"
    are decided with reference to the Rules.  The legacy  provision  is  an
    attempt to organise and explain the way in  which  all  cases  will  be
    decided.  It is conceivable that a person might want to say that his or
    her case should be decided under the legacy policy but that is  not  an
    argument about how it is decided but an  argument  that  it  should  be
    decided.  Here the decision has been made and the  appellant  does  not
    like it.

20. I have reflected carefully on Mr Saleem's arguments which were put in a
    measured but forceful way.  I have read his skeleton argument.  I  note
    that he is inviting me to say much more than I am inclined to do.  I do
    not see any point.  It seems to me that the approach of the claimant in
    this case is fundamentally wrong.  He has not  been  able  to  identify
    anything  that  ought  to  have  been  considered  that  has  not  been
    considered by the Secretary of State.  All that has happened is that he
    had suffered delay.  I do not mean to trivialise the  position.   Delay
    must be frustrating.  It can, conceivably, make  a  difference  to  the
    outcome in particular circumstances but that is  entirely  a  different
    point from the one argued before me  that  the  decision  ought  to  be
    considered under the legacy policy.  There is no legacy policy.

21. Although this is my  primary  reason  for  deciding  the  case  in  the
    Secretary of State's favour I also make the point that if the case went
    back to the Secretary of State there would be nothing for the Secretary
    of State to do.  The Secretary of State had said in the refusal  letter
    that the legacy scheme had been considered.  There is nothing  to  show
    it has been considered irrationally or  inconsistently.   The  job  has
    been done.  The fact that Mr Saleem  is  not  able  to  articulate  how
    consideration  under  the  policy  would  make  any  difference   draws
    attention to the fact that there  is  no  policy  that  determines  the
    outcome of cases.

22. I do not agree that Judge Kopieczek's alleged failure to recognise that
    the policy extended beyond decided asylum cases makes any difference to
    anything.

23. Here the alleged additional obligation by the policy is to consider the
    possibility that a person who had been found not to be a refugee  might
    still come within the scope of the Case Resolution Programme.

24. I have to conclude that on this occasion the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    misunderstood and should  not  have  ruled  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  The decision has been made in accordance with
    the law and it is a decision that the appellant does not like.  That is
    an entirely different point.

25. The appeal must be decided with reference to Article 8 of the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  I do not see how the appeal can be allowed
    responsibly under the Convention with regard to the Rules or at all.

26. The appellant is now 25 years old.  He has lived in the United  Kingdom
    since he was 16 years old.  He does not allege that he has any children
    or a life partner who might, in  some  circumstances,  create  a  heavy
    weight in favour of allowing him to remain whatever the strict  reading
    of the Rules might require.  He is an apparently healthy young man  who
    can return to his country of nationality and establish  himself  there.
    He has not lived in the United Kingdom for long enough to have acquired
    any right to remain.  He is not a partner or  a  parent  and  there  is
    nothing to support a finding that  there  would  be  "very  significant
    obstacles to the applicant's integration" into Afghanistan.

27. He cannot satisfy the requirements of the Rules to remain on Article  8
    grounds.  There is nothing here that would justify a  decision  outside
    the Rules in his favour.

28. It follows therefore that I find the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law.
    I set aside the decision allowing the  appeal  to  the  limited  extent
    indicated above and substitute a decision dismissing the  appeal  under
    the Rules and with reference to Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights.  Otherwise the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  shall
    stand.


Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  decision
that the Secretary of State's decision is not in accordance with the law  if
set aside and a decision dismissing the claimant's appeal on the  additional
ground that it is not contrary to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligation  under
article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights is substituted.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 20 April 2015                  |








