
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04701/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th December 2014                         |On 6th March 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           mr amir ibrahim sirraH
                          (no ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sudan born  on  1st  January  1990.   The
    Appellant claims to have left Sudan in November 2013 and  travelled  to
    Libya.  Alternatively the Appellant claims to have left Sudan  in  July
    or August 2013.  The Appellant however claims to have arrived in the UK
    on 11th April 2014 by lorry and claimed asylum at the Asylum  Screening
    Unit in Croydon the same day.

 2. On 18th June 2014 the Home Office served the Appellant with a notice of
    refusal of his application.  In refusing the application the  Secretary
    of State noted that the Appellant claimed to be at persecution in Sudan
    on account of his political opinion as he was a deserter from the  army
    and had attended anti-regime demonstrations and consideration was  also
    given to his Nuba ethnicity and whether this would mean that he was  at
    risk on return to Sudan.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Ransley sitting at Manchester on 8th September 2014.   In
    a determination promulgated on  10th  September  2014  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on both asylum and human rights  grounds  and  the
    Appellant was found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 4. On 22nd September 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 2nd October 2014 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Molloy granted permission to  appeal.   Judge  Molloy  noted  that  the
    Grounds of Appeal alleged that the Appellant had intended to be present
    for his appeal hearing scheduled for 8th September  2014  but  was  not
    aware of that date.  His solicitors furnished not only this explanation
    but also documentary evidence in support from  the  Appellant  and  his
    caseworker.  Although this was entirely unknown by Judge Ransley at the
    time Judge Molloy found that there may well have been an error  of  law
    committed by the Tribunal in not informing the Appellant  of  the  date
    for the full hearing of his appeal.

 5. On 21st October 2014 the Home Office served the  Secretary  of  State's
    response to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24  response
    noted that the Appellant claimed that due to an administrative error he
    was not properly notified of the Tribunal hearing but pointed out  that
    it would be for the solicitors to demonstrate that this was the case at
    the next hearing particularly  as  the  address  was  verified  at  the
    hearing and there was no mention at that stage that the solicitors  had
    an incorrect address  on  record.   The  response  continued  that  the
    Tribunal may however feel satisfied, having  considered  the  evidence,
    that the Appellant was not aware of the  notice  of  hearing  and  that
    determination cannot be sustained as a result of procedural unfairness.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Brown.   Mr  Brown  is  familiar  with  this  matter  having
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and being  the  author  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr McVeety.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. The matter is considerably  assisted  by  the  concession  made  by  Mr
    McVeety on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  in  accepting  that  the
    grounds are made out by showing that the Appellant was  not  personally
    served with the notice of hearing  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He
    accepts that that creates an element of  unfairness  and  is  agreeable
    that the matter should be set aside  and  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

10. The concession made by Mr McVeety requires the endorsement of the Upper
    Tribunal.  I do not seek to go behind that endorsement.  If there is  a
    procedural unfairness then that must constitute an  error  of  law  and
    justify an Appellant having his case reheard.  He emphasised that there
    can be no criticism of Judge Ransley who was completely unaware of this
    scenario when she heard the appeal at first instance but I  acknowledge
    that the paper trail does indicate that the Appellant did  not  receive
    the requisite notice albeit that I must admit that it is  strange  that
    his instructed solicitors failed to ensure he was present  particularly
    bearing in mind that they managed to arrange for Counsel to  appear  on
    his behalf.  In such circumstances I am prepared to find that there  is
    a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and that the matter be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing and that none of the findings of fact are to stand.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  is  set  aside  and  the
matter is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  reheard  by  any
Immigration Judge other  than  Immigration  Judge  Ransley.   The  following
directions are made:

      1) That  the  appeal  be  reheard  on  the  first  available  date  at
         Manchester 28 days hence with an ELH of three hours.


      2) That with none of the findings of  fact  to  stand  the  matter  be
         reheard before any Immigration Judge  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         other than Immigration Judge Ransley.


      3) That there  be  leave  to  either  party  to  file  and  serve  any
         additional evidence upon which they seek to  rely  at  least  seven
         days pre-hearing.


      4) That a Sudanese Arabic interpreter is required (not a North African
         Arabic interpreter).


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 16th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

