
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04058/2014
                                                               AA/04060/2014
                                                               AA/04059/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport    |Decision promulgated                 |
|On: 3 February 2015                  |25 March 2015                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                 SJ, MN, MM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge B Lloyd in which he  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellants,
    citizens of Pakistan, against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse asylum.

 2. The First Appellant and the Second Appellant are partners and the Third
    Appellant is their daughter. The First Appellant arrived in the  United
    Kingdom on 3 April 2012 with leave to enter as a  student  valid  until
    August 2015. The Second Appellant has been in the United  Kingdom  from
    2002 and made an unsuccessful claim for asylum and thereafter  remained
    without leave. The Third Appellant was born in the United Kingdom.

 3. On 20 April 2014 the First Appellant claimed asylum with the Second and
    Third Appellant as her dependents. The application  was  refused  on  3
    June 2014.  The Appellants exercised their right of appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal.  This is the appeal which came before Judge Lloyd on  25
    July 2014 and was dismissed. The Appellants applied for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The application was  refused  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lever on 29 August 2014 but on renewal to the Upper
    Tribunal permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
    on 14 October 2014 in the following terms

         The grounds assert that (1) the judge failed to determine the free-
         standing state and  non-state  agent  asylum  claim  based  on  the
         conceded lack of marital status and child born out of wedlock;  and
         (2) rejected core issues on mere speculation rather than  evidence.
         The grounds raise an arguable error of law.

    The Respondent submitted a rule 24 response dated 5 November  2014  and
    on 13 November 2014 the Appellants' representative submitted a reply to
    that response.

 4. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Chelvan  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants and Mr Richards represented the Respondent. Mr Chelvan asked
    that the First and Second Appellants' second child, ZM born on 4 August
    2014, be added as a dependent to the claim.  Mr  Richards  agreed  that
    this was the appropriate course.

Background

 5.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that on her arrival in the United Kingdom as a  student
    the First Appellant stayed with a family at their home in East Ham. The
    Second Appellant also lived at  the  property.  The  First  and  Second
    Appellant commenced a sexual relationship and within  45  days  of  her
    arrival the First Appellant became pregnant. The  relationship  between
    the First and Second Appellant continued  and  still  continues.  Their
    child, MM, was born on 13 January 2013. At the time of the  refusal  of
    her claim for asylum the First Appellant was seven months pregnant with
    her second child (referred to above).

 6. The First Appellant claimed asylum on 20 April 2014.  The  Respondent's
    refusal letter summarises the basis of her claim at paragraph 3

         "Your claim for asylum is based on your fear that if  you  returned
         to Pakistan you would face mistreatment due to your having a  child
         out of wedlock. This has led your family to threaten your  life  as
         they feel you have dishonoured them and your religion"

 7. In the refusal letter the Respondent accepts that the First and  Second
    Appellants are in a relationship (paragraph  10)  and  that  the  Third
    Appellant is a child of that  relationship.  The  Respondent  does  not
    accept that this would cause the First Appellant  to  face  any  danger
    from her family (disregarding what can only be a typographical error at
    paragraph 14 of the refusal letter) because the  Respondent  considered
    that the First Appellant's family would have been aware that the Second
    Appellant was living at the  premises  where  she  went  to  stay.  The
    refusal letter does not address the issue of any  difficulty  that  the
    First Appellant may face from the Pakistani authorities  or  non  state
    agents in Pakistan.

 8. The notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal is  in  generic  terms.
    The skeleton argument submitted to the First-tier Tribunal is  detailed
    and makes it  clear  that  the  First  Appellant's  claim  is  to  fear
    persecution not only from her family  but  also  from  the  authorities
    because she has committed adultery  which  is  a  criminal  offence  in
    Pakistan. The skeleton argument submitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    refers in some detail to the expert's report from Uzma Moeen and  deals
    at length with the potential consequences of the crime of zina.

Submissions

 9. For the Appellant Mr Chelvan referred to the  grounds  of  appeal.  The
    determination does not  address  the  issues  at  stake.  There  is  no
    reference in the determination to the  issue  of  state  and  non-state
    persecution outside the family. This is clearly  a  material  error  of
    law. The expert's report appears to be accepted by the Tribunal and the
    Judge specifically comments upon the expert's qualifications. No reason
    is given for the statement  (paragraph  73)  that  the  report  is  not
    corroborative of the First  Appellant's  claimed  fear  that  she  will
    suffer death violence or revenge from the authorities when  the  report
    is on the face of it clearly corroborative of such fear. The fact  that
    the First Appellant is unmarried is accepted  by  the  Respondent.  The
    crime of zina is evidenced by the birth of the child. It  is  a  Danian
    point.

10. So far as the second ground is concerned Mr Chelvan said that  Tribunal
    should not rely on a hunch. The Judge is simply saying that he does not
    believe the First Appellant but his  grounds  for  disbelief  are  pure
    speculation. He does not give  reasons  for  not  believing  the  First
    Appellant other than lack of corroboration. The Judge merely says  that
    he does not believe that events would have happened as they  did.  This
    is pure speculation.

11. For the Respondent Mr Richards said that the essential evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal was  that  the  First  Appellant's  father  was
    powerful in Pakistan and he would organise the prosecution  and  severe
    punishment of the adult Appellants. The Country of  Origin  information
    suggested that there had been no prosecutions mainly due to  evidential
    difficulties. In this case the Judge found that  he  had  been  told  a
    series of lies and he was entitled to  reach  such  a  conclusion.  The
    Second Appellant did not give evidence. The Judge had to take a view of
    the credibility of the First Appellant's evidence. He did so setting it
    against the background of Pakistani society at large. He was  compelled
    to do that. He could have said that  her  evidence  had  the  'ring  of
    truth'; instead he took the opposite view. He took the view that it was
    all a set up. Paragraph 76 of  the  determination  is  illustrative  of
    this. He found based upon this that there was no possibility of adverse
    treatment at the instigation of the First Appellant's family.  On  that
    analysis it is difficult to establish how the Appellants would come  to
    the adverse attention of the authorities. There was  no  evidence  that
    the  authorities  take  independent  action.  The  findings   are   not
    speculative; all the Judge had was the evidence of the First Appellant.

12. In response Mr Chelvan said that there was no assertion  by  the  First
    Appellant that her family would  report  her.  She  says  she  will  be
    prosecuted and there is no evidence to suggest that she will not.  Even
    taking out the family issue the  First  Appellant  is  a  refugee.  Her
    account is clearly not a mere fabrication. She has given birth  to  two
    children out of wedlock, if there is even a one in ten chance that  she
    will be prosecuted she is entitled to international  protection.  There
    is a real risk.

13. I reserved my decision.

Error of law

14. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  are  straightforward.  The
    first asserts that the Judge failed to engage with what is said to be a
    free-standing state and non state agent asylum claim  based  on  having
    children born out of wedlock.  The  second  asserts  that  the  Judge's
    credibility findings in respect of the factual basis of her  claim  are
    based on mere speculation and cannot stand.

15. So far as the first ground is concerned there can be no doubt that  the
    issue of persecution from state and non-state agents  was  live  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is demonstrated by the skeleton  argument
    referred to above and also by the determination  which  in  identifying
    the basis of the Appellants' claim states at paragraph 3

         "... If the Appellants now return to Pakistan the repercussions are
         likely to be felt not only from the First  Appellant's  family  but
         from other quarters of Pakistani society including the  authorities
         and extremists"

16.  In  dealing  with  the  facts  the  First-tier  Tribunal  begins   its
    credibility findings at paragraph 62

         "I find that all three Appellants are  citizens  of  Pakistan.  The
         First and Second Appellants have cohabited in the  UK  as  partners
         since shortly after the First Appellant's  arrival  in  the  United
         Kingdom as a student on 3 April 2012. A child of the  relationship,
         the Third Appellant MM, was born on 13 January 2013"

    The Judge goes on to find in paragraph 63

         "(The First Appellant) is at the time of this appeal pregnant  with
         her second child ... the First Appellant had a sexual  relationship
         with the Second Appellant and on her own acknowledgment  within  45
         days of arriving in the UK she was pregnant with her first child"

    Referring later in his determination to the expert's report  the  Judge
         says

         "I acknowledge the expert report from Ms Usma Moeen as  an  erudite
         academic analysis of the law and issues relating  to  adultery  and
         sexual relationships in Pakistan. I do not accept that this  report
         is corroborative of the First Appellant's contention that she  will
         suffer death, violence or  revenge  from  the  authorities  or  her
         family in the circumstances as we know them; namely she  is  in  an
         unmarried sexual relationship with the Second appellant, they  have
         a child and a second child is on the way"

17. It is very clear from the three passages quoted above  that  the  Judge
    accepts, indeed it was not  challenged  by  the  Respondent,  that  the
    Appellants are not married, that they have had and continue to  have  a
    sexual relationship and that their relationship  is  evidenced  by  the
    birth of two children.

18. Given this acceptance and the basis of the appeal it was incumbent upon
    the Judge to deal  with  the  claim  that  the  Appellants  would  face
    persecution in Pakistan from the authorities or from extremists due  to
    their unmarried sexual relationship evidenced as it was by the birth of
    a child. The determination does not deal with that at all. Findings are
    made as to the credibility of the First Appellant's account of how  she
    began her relationship with  the  Second  Appellant  and  her  parents'
    knowledge of  that  relationship  but  no  mention  is  made  of  their
    commission of the crime of zina or of the risk from the authorities  or
    extremists until paragraph 72

         "I find that there is no real risk to the Appellants on  return  to
         Pakistan  from  either  the  First  Appellant's  parents   or   the
         authorities or from Pakistani society at large."

19. No reason is given for the conclusion that there is no real  risk  from
    the authorities or Pakistani society at large.  Equally  the  following
    paragraph referring to the expert's report states that  the  report  is
    not corroborative of the First Appellant's  contention  that  she  will
    suffer death, violence or revenge from the authorities or  her  family.
    No reason is given for this finding which appears to fly in the face of
    the report and I will refer to this further below.

20. In any event it is apparent from the determination that the  Judge  has
    not engaged with the issue of persecution by state or not state  agents
    in the light of the accepted facts. This is in my judgement a  material
    error of law and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  must  be  set
    aside.

21. Having come to this conclusion I will deal only briefly with the second
    ground of appeal being  the  assertion  that  the  Judge's  credibility
    findings are based upon mere speculation and cannot stand. It is  quite
    clear from examining the Judge's credibility findings that he  believed
    the basis of the Appellants' claim, if not the fact of their  unmarried
    sexual relationship, to be fabricated. The credibility  findings  start
    at paragraph  66  with  the  phrase  "I  do  not  believe  in  all  the
    circumstances ..." and continue in similar vein over the ensuing  three
    paragraphs. In short the Judge does not believe that events happened as
    claimed but the basis for his  lack  of  belief  is  not  founded  upon
    inconsistencies or discrepancies but on what he considers to be a  lack
    of plausibility taking account of what he believes is  more  likely  to
    have happened. The Judge does not believe, for example, that

         " ... a young single daughter of a successful middle  class  Muslim
         family in Pakistan would have placed herself in circumstances where
         she would be living with a young single man in the same  house  and
         would be having unsupervised contact with him..."

    or that this having happened

         "she neglected to tell her parents ..."

    The basis of the Judge's lack of belief does appear to be firmly rooted
    in how he thought a young, single Muslim woman would act or the control
    that he believed her parents would exercise over her. There  is  in  my
    judgement good reason to assert that such findings are unsafe.

Remaking the decision

22. Having found a material error of law and the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal having been set aside the circumstances are  such  that  I  am
    able to remake the decision. The basis of the Appellants' claim is that
    they will face persecution or serious harm in  Pakistan  due  to  their
    unmarried relationship and the resultant birth of their  two  children.
    The expert's report, accepted by the First-tier Tribunal as an  erudite
    academic analysis of the law and issues relating to adultery and sexual
    relationships in Pakistan commences with a very specific  opinion  that
    she will face difficulties

         "... I say at the outset that in core respects  my  assessment  ...
         stands independent of truth or falsity of (the  First  Appellant's)
         claims ... because if she were  to  return  to  Pakistan  with  her
         children born out of wedlock and her unmarried partner and live her
         life there as an independent family unit this couple would face the
         difficulties and risks of harm that I set out below. This  risk  of
         harm, mainly due to the reason that she has illicit relations  with
         her partner and has children born out of wedlock, can be very  well
         assessed from the back ground material available  in  the  form  of
         various well researched academic writings  along  with  the  entire
         case law developed under the draconian zina law relating to illicit
         relationships, adultery and raising  such  children  who  would  be
         labelled as illegitimate and/or born as a result of fornication  or
         adultery" (paragraph 10)

23. The report goes on to describe the crime of 'zina' as  meaning  illicit
    sex covering any form of extra-marital sexual intercourse. There is, it
    says, no room for extra marital relations within Pakistani society.  It
    a grave infringement of the sexual morality  of  Islam  and  a  serious
    crime against the laws of God.

         "Grave punishments, in the view of many people  even  extending  to
         stoning to death, are therefore seen as the proper  punishment  for
         such non-marital sexual acts. While officially no  person  has,  so
         far been  stoned  to  death  under  state  law  in  Pakistan  as  a
         punishment for zina, given  the  increasing  influence  of  Islamic
         extremism, men and women accused of zina are exposed to the risk of
         extra legal 'justice' and to a risk of honour  killings  by  family
         members or some extremist individuals/groups" (Paragraph 15)

24. The report quotes from the law relating to adultery  in  Pakistan.  The
    definition  of  zina  is  simply  wilful  sexual  intercourse   outside
    marriage. The penalty can  be  stoning  to  death  or  severe  corporal
    punishment. Evidence can include pregnancy or  the  birth  of  a  child
    (paragraph 18) so long as there was also evidence that the woman was  a
    consenting party (paragraph 19/20). After dealing with what appears  to
    be a softening of the stance of the Pakistani authorities in respect of
    zina following the Women's Protection Act 2006 the report summarises at
    paragraph 35

         "In my opinion (having direct relevance to the present  case)it  is
         to be noted that even after the  passing  of  WPA  2006  Pakistan's
         (partly  repealed  now)  under  Hudood  Ordinance   extra   marital
         pregnancy or giving birth to an illegitimate child is considered as
         proof of zina. So it becomes absolutely necessary for the woman  to
         justify birth of her child born out of wedlock either  by  claiming
         rape  or  a  valid  marriage  and  if  she  fails  to  do  so  then
         pregnancy/birth becomes a proof of public zina without the need for
         four witnesses or a confession."

25. The report concludes in this section that it is likely that  the  First
    Appellant could be prosecuted but in any event the First Appellant  may
    fear

         "...not only the wrath of her own family, but also of the religious
         extremists in Pakistan. The effect of the Islamisation and in  fact
         Talebanisation of Pakistani laws over the years  has  clearly  been
         that such 'immoral women' or couples have very reason to  fear  for
         their lives"

26. It is in my judgement clear on the accepted facts that  the  First  and
    Second Appellant are guilty of the crime  of  zina.  This  is  a  crime
    which, according to the  expert's  report,  carries  severe  punishment
    which if imposed would amount to  either  death  or  inhuman  treatment
    reaching the level of torture. It can be  little  comfort  that  it  is
    unusual for the  state  to  prosecute  the  offence  particularly  when
    according to the expert's report the punishment for such an offence may
    be  extra  judicial.  There  is  nothing  to  contradict  the  expert's
    conclusion that persons in the Appellants' position have  every  reason
    to fear for their lives and it is for this reason that this appeal must
    be allowed.

Summary

27. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. I set aside  that  decision  and  remake  it  by
    allowing the Appellants appeal on Refugee Convention and  Human  Rights
    Convention (Article 2 and 3) grounds.



Signed:     Date: 3 March 2015

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
