
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04422/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd October 2015                  |On 12th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     DS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah of Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male Sri Lankan citizen born 31st December 1991  who
    claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 24th October  2013  and
    claimed asylum on that date.

 2. The application was refused on 14th June 2014 for reasons set out in  a
    detailed letter of the same date.

 3. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appeal  being
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Swaniker (the judge) on  21st
    April 2015 and dismissed on all grounds in a  decision  promulgated  on
    15th June 2015.

 4. The Appellant's case in brief summary is that he fears persecution from
    the Sri Lankan authorities on account of his imputed political  opinion
    and ethnicity.  The Appellant is of Tamil ethnicity and claims that  he
    was beaten and tortured in Sri Lanka because he was suspected of  being
    a member of the LTTE.

 5. The judge refused an application made on behalf of the Appellant for an
    adjournment, in order to obtain up-to-date medical evidence in relation
    to his  mental  health.   No  evidence  was  given,  but  having  heard
    submissions from both representatives the judge did not accept that the
    Appellant had given a credible account although it was accepted that he
    had been arrested and detained as claimed.  The judge  did  not  accept
    the Appellant's account of his escape from detention and found that the
    authorities did not have any adverse interest in him,  as  he  did  not
    have any political profile and/or any links with the LTTE.

 6. The judge found that the Appellant was able to leave  Sri  Lanka  using
    his own passport because the authorities had no continuing interest  in
    him.  In relation to the medical evidence that had been  provided,  the
    judge accepted that the Appellant  was  suffering  some  mental  health
    issues, but did not accept that the extent of this  had  been  reliably
    established and there was no credible evidence to link the  Appellant's
    mental health issues to his arrest and detention in Sri Lanka.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ford  on
    27th July 2015.  Directions were issued that there should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision contained an error of law such that it  must  be  set
    aside.  The appeal came before me on 2nd October 2015.

Error of Law

 8. The Appellant's grounds of challenge are lengthy but can be  summarised
    succinctly in the following terms;

      i) the judge erred in refusing to grant an adjournment to  enable  the
         Appellant to obtain further expert  evidence  in  relation  to  his
         mental health;

     ii) the judge erred in concluding that the Appellant's mental state was
         not connected to his past mistreatment in Sri Lanka  or  indicative
         of a subjective fear of return.

 9. In making  oral  submissions  Ms  Jegarajah  relied  upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission to appeal, pointing out
    that  psychiatric  evidence  could  have  assisted  the   Tribunal   in
    considering the reliability of the Appellant's  evidence,  and  it  may
    have persuaded the judge to conclude that the Appellant  had  not  been
    untruthful in relation to certain aspects of his account.

10. Mr Whitwell relied upon a response dated 13th August 2015  pursuant  to
    rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  It  was
    submitted that the judge had not erred in law and  the  position  would
    not have been any different had an adjournment  been  granted,  as  the
    Appellant did not give evidence.

11. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

12. The judge noted that an application for an adjournment had been made by
    fax on 16th April 2015 and had been refused,  the  judge  refusing  the
    application had noted that the  appeal  had  been  ongoing  for  almost
    twelve months, and the Appellant had a report  from  Professor  Lingam,
    and had seen Dr Persuad in November 2014.  It was  concluded  that  the
    Appellant had been given every opportunity to produce what evidence  he
    wished, and there had been a previous hearing in  November  2014  which
    had been adjourned for medical reports to be obtained.  The  judge  did
    not consider that there was any reason to reach a different decision on
    the renewed adjournment application.

13. The principles to be taken into account when considering an adjournment
    request are set out in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT
    00418 (IAC) the headnote of which I set out below;

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FTT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
         to a fair hearing?  See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

14. The concern of the judge  that  the  appeal  had  been  ongoing  for  a
    substantial length of time is understandable.  However each application
    for  an  adjournment  must  be  considered  taking  into  account   the
    circumstances of  that  particular  application.   The  judge  who  had
    refused the adjournment application prior to the hearing would not have
    had as part of the adjournment application, a letter dated  17th  April
    2015 from the senior family therapist from Freedom from Torture, nor  a
    preliminary psychiatric report dated 20th April  2015  prepared  by  Dr
    Persuad.

15. The judge at the hearing was provided with these documents.

16. In my view  the  judge  erred  in  not  granting  an  adjournment,  and
    thereafter going on to make adverse findings in relation to the lack of
    comprehensive mental health evidence.  These findings are contained  in
    paragraphs 18 and 19 of her decision.  The judge found that  she  could
    not rely upon the letter from Freedom from  Torture  dated  17th  April
    2015 as an expert report, but in my view it was not submitted with  the
    intention of being an expert report.  The judge found that  the  extent
    to which Dr Persuad's report could be relied upon was limited.   Again,
    this was only a preliminary report and both this report and the  letter
    from Freedom from Torture indicated that there needed to  be  a  proper
    and comprehensive assessment of  the  Appellant's  mental  health.   Dr
    Persuad indicated that although he had  had  a  consultation  with  the
    Appellant, he had been unable  to  prepare  a  full  report  until  the
    Appellant's medical records had been provided.

17. Professor Lingam's report dealt with the separate  issue  of  scarring,
    but also indicated that in his view there needed to be a  comprehensive
    psychiatric report.  The Freedom from Torture letter indicated that the
    Appellant's mental health had deteriorated significantly.  That  in  my
    view  is  relevant,  and  in  view  of  the  fact  that  there  was   a
    recommendation from three separate medical  professionals,  that  there
    should be a full psychiatric report, the judge erred in not granting an
    adjournment so that such a report could be obtained.   The  absence  of
    such a report and the subsequent adverse findings as to the  inadequacy
    of medical evidence presented, meant that the Appellant did not have  a
    fair hearing.

18.  Although  the  Appellant  did  not  give  evidence,  a   comprehensive
    psychiatric report may have assisted  the  Tribunal  in  assessing  the
    credibility of the Appellant's account, his capacity to give  evidence,
    whether he had a subjective fear of return to Sri Lanka, his ability to
    withstand questioning by the authorities  on  return,  and  the  likely
    impact on his mental health if returned to Sri Lanka.

19. I therefore conclude that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  must
    be set aside.  Both representatives indicated that if an error  of  law
    was found, it would be appropriate  for  no  findings  of  fact  to  be
    preserved, and the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    to be heard afresh.

20. I have taken  into  account  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement of 25th  September  2012  and  decided  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal because  of
    the extent of judicial fact-finding which is necessary.

21. The appeal will be heard before the First-tier Tribunal at  the  Taylor
    House Hearing Centre by a judge other than Judge Swaniker.  The parties
    will be advised in writing of the date and time of  the  hearing.   The
    appeal is to be heard de novo and no findings are preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction.  I continue that  order
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
As a consequence there is a prohibition on the disclosure or publication  of
documents or information relating to the proceedings or  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the Appellant.


Signed   Date 5th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and there is no fee award.


Signed   Date 5th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

