
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04995/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 January 2014                            |On 23 January 2014           |
|Delivered orally                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                                ehsan kabiri

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Messrs
                    Jackson & Canter, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   I note that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal has  been  set
    aside for error of law and by consent and at the request of the parties
    and in accordance with the provisions of Rules  39  and  40(3)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I remit the decision of
    the appeal to be reconsidered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor
    House, in its entirety without any findings of fact preserved.

2.   It is apparent  from  the  decision  of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Hanbury, dated 14 October 2011, when setting aside the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal for error of law, that as agreed with the  parties,
    there are highly compelling reasons falling within  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 7.2(b) of the Senior President's Practice Statement as to why
    the decision should not be made by the Upper Tribunal and  that  it  is
    clearly in the interests of justice that the appeal of the Appellant be
    heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

3.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its decision  should  be
    set aside.  I remit the remaking of  the  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Taylor House to be heard before a First-tier Tribunal Judge
    other than First-tier Judge De Haney or  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Hanbury, on 2 May 2014.  The hearing is to  have  a  time  estimate  of
    three hours.  I am told there will be  three  witnesses  including  the
    Appellant and that for this purpose an interpreter will be required  in
    Farsi.


Signed                                  Date 22 January 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein


