
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04107/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 31st October 2016                         |On 17th November 2016          |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                 SHAHIN [N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin, Counsel instructed by Morden Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Abone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Afghanistan born  on  1st  January
    1974.  She arrived in the UK on 19th November 2013 when she applied for
    asylum.  That application was refused for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    Respondent's letter of 13th February 2015.  The Appellant appealed, and
    her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Robertson (the
    Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 28th  October  2015.   She  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights
    grounds for the reasons given in her Decision dated 3rd November  2015.
    The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and eventually such
    permission was granted on 5th January 2016.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge found that it was likely that the  Appellant  had  worked  in
    Kunduz for an NGO called the Peace Window  for  Women's  Rehabilitation
    Organisation of Afghanistan (PWWROA).  The Judge dismissed  the  appeal
    because otherwise she did not find the  Appellant's  evidence  credible
    and therefore was not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  a  profile
    sufficient to be targeted  and  that  her  son  and  husband  had  been
    kidnapped.  The Judge identified  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
    evidence which she also described  as  vague,  and  believed  that  the
    Appellant had embellished her account.  In the alternative,  the  Judge
    found that even if the Appellant was  at  risk  in  Kunduz,  she  could
    safely relocate to  Kabul  where  she  would  have  a  support  network
    consisting of her brother and mother.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Martin argued that the Judge had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to this conclusion.  The Judge had made a factual  error  as  to
    how long the Appellant had  remained  in  Kunduz  after  she  had  been
    threatened and her husband had been kidnapped.  Further, the Judge  had
    not given  the  proper  weight  to  the  objective  evidence  that  the
    Appellant would also be at risk in Kabul.  This objective evidence  had
    been referred to in the Appellant's Skeleton Argument.

 5. In response, Mrs Abone referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    there was no such error of law.  The Judge had come to findings of fact
    which were open to her on the evidence and which she  fully  explained.
    The Judge accepted that the Appellant may have worked for an  NGO,  but
    gave reasons for her decision  that  that  did  not  give  her  a  risk
    profile.  In any event,  the  Judge  considered  the  position  of  the
    Appellant taking her evidence at its highest and found that she  had  a
    viable internal relocation option.  As the Appellant would be returning
    to family in Kabul, the Judge found that the Appellant was not at  risk
    there in accordance with the decision in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan
    CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC).  The Appellant's  grounds  amounted  to  no
    more than a disagreement with the decision of the Judge.

 6. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  I agree with the submission of Mrs  Abone  that  the
    Judge came to a finding of fact that the Appellant was not at  risk  on
    return to Kunduz because her evidence of threats and kidnaps there  was
    not credible which was open to her on the evidence and which she  fully
    explained.  In any event, any error of law in this respect, such as the
    error of fact as to how long the Appellant had remained in  Kunduz,  is
    not material because the Judge went on to find that it  was  both  safe
    and not unreasonable for the Appellant to relocate to Kabul.  This  was
    in accordance with a current Country Guidance case  regardless  of  the
    expert evidence of Dr Giustozzi which in any event the Judge dealt with
    at paragraph 29V of the Decision.  For these reasons I find no material
    error of law in the decision of the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.  I  make  no  order  for
anonymity.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

