
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04061/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 June 2015                       |On 11 June2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     VK
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Clarke, instructed by Kilby Jones Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a  national  of  Albania,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated  3  June
    2014 to refuse  her  application  for  asylum  in  the  UK.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Flower  dismissed  the  appeal  and  the  appellant  now
    appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the appellant came to the UK as a
    family visitor in June 2008. She says that she returned to Albania  and
    that she entered into a relationship with a man  against  her  family's
    wishes and that he subsequently forced her into prostitution in Albania
    and trafficked her to the UK in May 2011. She claims that  she  escaped
    from the traffickers in November 2011 and met an  Albanian  couple  who
    took her in. She says that she discovered that she was pregnant and her
    son was born in June 2012. She says that she  does  not  know  who  the
    father of the child is. She then moved in with  a  Turkish  businessman
    and his family. She claimed asylum on 18 July 2012. She claims that she
    fears the traffickers on return to Albania and  that  that  the  police
    would not protect her.

 3. The respondent accepted that the appellant is a national of Albania but
    did not accept the rest of the appellant's  account.  The  Judge  found
    that the appellant's account not to be credible and concluded that  the
    appellant had not demonstrated that she is at risk  of  persecution  on
    return to Albania. The Judge also dismissed the appeal under Article  8
    finding that the appellant and her child have a  family  life  together
    but that removal of the appellant and her son is proportionate  to  the
    respondent's legitimate aim of the maintenance of  the  economic  well-
    being of the UK.

Error of law

 4. The appellant contends that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  three
    errors of law in her determination.

 5. The first ground is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made two  errors
    in relation to her assessment of the appellant's account of a  shopping
    trip in July 2011.  The appellant says in her  witness  statement  that
    her captors brought to a shopping centre to buy her some  new  clothes.
    She said that when she was in a shop she activated a security tag on an
    item of clothing which attracted the attention of security  guards  who
    called the police and took her to a police station. She says  that  she
    told the police that she was Polish and that after she was released she
    was dragged into a car by her captors and taken back to the flat  where
    she was being held.

 6. Mr Clarke pointed to  the  appellant's  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    security tag. In her interview the appellant said in reply to  question
    98 that she 'purposely pulled the security tag off the clothes'. In her
    witness statement at paragraph 56 the appellant said that  she  'pulled
    the security tag on purpose in order to trigger the alarm and catch the
    attention of the security guard'. The First-tier Tribunal Judge said at
    paragraph 18, when summarising the appellant's claim, that 'she  pulled
    a security tag apart to trigger the alarm'. The Judge  considered  this
    issue at paragraph 34 where she said that she found it highly  unlikely
    that 'the appellant would be able to break the shop security tag  apart
    with her bare hands; they are extremely  tough  devices  made  of  hard
    plastic and metal, specifically designed  to  avoid  being  removed  by
    hand'.

 7. Mr Clarke submitted that in adding the word 'apart' at paragraph 18 the
    Judge went further than what the appellant had said and that  this  led
    to the Judge speculating as to how the appellant  removed  the  tag  at
    paragraph 34.Whilst I accept that the Judge did go a bit  further  than
    the appellant's evidence in relation to the removal of the tag I do not
    consider that any error arose from that. The appellant  said  that  she
    pulled the security tag off  the  clothes;  this  could  have  been  by
    ripping through the garment or by pulling the security tag apart or  by
    some other means. However the  appellant's  account  contains  no  such
    detail and the appellant said that her actions triggered an  alarm  and
    in my view the Judge therefore made a reasonable  assumption  based  on
    the appellant's own account and on common sense as to how the  tag  was
    removed. I do not accept that this is a material  error  going  to  the
    core of the appellant's account.

 8. It is further contended as part of the  first  ground  that  the  Judge
    erred in her finding at paragraph 35 that she found it 'highly unlikely
    that the security guards would have called the police if the  appellant
    had merely set off a security alarm tag whilst she was still within the
    shop. At that stage she would not have committed any offence; only when
    leaving the shop with an item of clothing would the  potential  for  an
    offence of attempted theft have occurred. She was not outside the shop,
    she was inside.' It is contended in the  grounds  that  the  Judge  was
    wrong to consider whether a criminal offence had  been  committed,  the
    issue was instead whether the security guard would  have  thought  that
    there was prima facie  evidence  of  a  criminal  offence  having  been
    committed justifying them calling the police. Mr Clarke submitted  that
    the Judge failed to apply anxious scrutiny in considering this issue.

 9. The Judge considered the appellant's account of the shopping  trip  and
    her arrest by the police in great detail at paragraphs 32  to  43.  The
    Judge raised credibility and plausibility issues in relation  to  every
    aspect of the appellant's account of  this  incident.  She  found  that
    there was a gap in the appellant's evidence as to what happened at  the
    police station and why she  was  released  [41].  She  found  that  the
    appellant's evidence that she did not tell the security guards  or  the
    police about her plight was incredible [36] -[40]  and  that  the  fact
    that the appellant claims that she pretended that she was  Polish  when
    she was interviewed by the police damaged her overall credibility [42].
    In the context of all of these findings about this incident  I  do  not
    accept that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  speculation  as  to  the
    likelihood of the appellant having committed a criminal offence such as
    to lead to the police being called was  a  significant  factor  in  the
    overall  assessment  that  the  account   of   this   incident   lacked
    credibility. Any error in relation to the criminal  law,  if  there  is
    one, is therefore not material to the assessment of the credibility  of
    the appellant's account of this incident.

10. The second ground of appeal contends that the Judge made a  mistake  of
    fact in relation to the appellant's means of escape from her captors in
    November 2011. In her interview in  answer  to  questions  112-117  the
    appellant said that there was a party in the flat and  that  keys  were
    left 'on the kitchen work-top' and that she  took  them  and  hid  them
    between her breasts and that she left the flat later.  In  her  witness
    statement she said the same thing at paragraphs 60 and 80.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge considered  this  issue  at  paragraph  48  of  the
    determination where she found the claim that the guards  left  keys  in
    the door of the flat to be lacking in credibility given that they  were
    said to be running an illegal operation and would be alert to the  risk
    of a captive running away if an opportunity to so arose if some of them
    had a drink. She found that it was highly unlikely that those acting as
    guards would have been so careless as to leave anyone  detained  within
    the house against their will 'with such an easy means  of  escape'.  Mr
    Clarke submitted that the Judge made a mistake of fact in  relation  to
    the keys which was materially different from  the  appellant's  account
    and which relates to a central feature of the claim. He submitted  that
    this shows a failure on the Judge's part to apply anxious  scrutiny  to
    the appellant's case.  Mr  Nath  submitted  that  there  was  a  slight
    difference in relation to where the keys  were.  However  he  submitted
    that this was not material as it relates to a less important issue  and
    when considered in the context of all of the credibility findings.

11. I accept that the Judge made a mistake  of  fact  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's account about the keys. The appellant's  account  was  that
    she had lifted them earlier from the kitchen work top and  hidden  them
    before escaping later. This differs from the  Judge's  assumption  that
    the keys were in the door. Had the Judge not made this mistake she  may
    or may not have reached the conclusion that it was highly unlikely that
    the guards would have been so careless as to leave the  appellant  with
    such an easy means of escape.

12. However I do not accept that this is a material error. This is  because
    the Judge made adverse credibility about many other  larger  issues  in
    the appeal and I am satisfied that  this  matter,  considered  only  at
    paragraph 48, was not material in the  Judge's  overall  findings.  The
    Judge made findings in relation to  the  appellant's  credibility  from
    paragraphs 31 to 58. The Judge made a series  of  negative  credibility
    findings about the shopping trip and the appellant's arrest and release
    from the police station. The Judge attached significant weight  to  the
    fact that the appellant claimed to have no contact with her siblings in
    the UK against the background of the previous successful  visit  appeal
    and the fact that they could have corroborated her claim that she  left
    the UK after her visit in 2008, a matter the respondent had  raised  in
    the reasons for refusal letter. The Judge attached  significant  weight
    to the appellant's failure to ask the  couple  with  whom  she  resided
    after her escape to give evidence to support her claim as to  how  they
    found her after her escape. He attached weight to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant failed to ask the Turkish business man with whose family  she
    resides to give evidence to support her  claim.  The  Judge  took  into
    account as damaging her credibility the appellant's delay  in  claiming
    asylum after her claimed escape and her failure to produce the  child's
    birth certificate.

13. I find that the Judge has given sufficient  reasons  for  her  decision
    that the appellant has not established that  she  was  trafficked  from
    Albania as claimed so that the decision can stand  despite  the  errors
    identified above. In light of all of the  findings  any  error  is  not
    material to the Judge's overall finding that the appellant's  claim  is
    not credible.

14. The third ground of appeal is that the Judge erred in her consideration
    of section 55 in relation to the appellant's child. The Judge  referred
    to section 55 at paragraph 79 and said that the child's best  interests
    are to be with his mother. She considered the circumstances in  Albania
    [80], the fact that there is no evidence that the child is not in  good
    health [82] and the fact that the appellant could work in Albania [83].
    Mr Clarke accepted that there was no evidence before the  Judge  as  to
    the child's best interests other than the appellant's evidence  in  her
    witness statement. I find that the Judge made an assessment of  section
    55 in the context of Article 8 which was open to her  on  the  evidence
    before her. There  was  no  other  evidence  as  to  the  child's  best
    interests which the Judge failed to consider. There is  accordingly  no
    error in relation to section 55.

15. For the reasons set out  above  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  did  not  make  a  material  error  of  law   in   the
    determination of this appeal.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on point of law.



Signed      Date: 9 June 2015

A Grimes
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed      Date: 9 June 2015

A Grimes
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

