

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04998/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 06 January 2016                     |On 28 April 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                    K A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B. Zeitler, Counsel instructed by STS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    This appeal, in common with the recent decision of the Upper  Tribunal
      in R (on the application of ZAT & Others) v SSHD  (Article  8  ECHR  -
      Dublin Regulation -  interface  -  proportionality)  IJR  [2016]  UKUT
      00061, requires the Tribunal to determine an Article 8 claim under the
      European Convention of Human Rights ("ECHR") in  a  Dublin  Regulation
      (Council Regulation EU 604/2013) context and raises  some  interesting
      questions relating to the interaction between the two legal regimes.

Background

2.    The facts of the claim, as  put  forward  by  the  appellant,  are  as
    follows. The appellant is a 25 year old Somali woman who  is  from  the
    Ashraf clan. She suffered serious harm  as  a  result  of  abuse  while
    living in a refugee camp in Ethiopia as an adolescent. She later  moved
    to Yemen. She married but suffered further abuse and violence from  her
    husband. She flew to France from Yemen in May 2013. Her  intention  was
    to join her brother who has been granted Humanitarian Protection in the
    UK. She was fingerprinted in France and an asylum claim was registered.
    The appellant says that she did not receive any paperwork and  was  not
    aware that a case was  pending.  She  says  that  she  entered  the  UK
    illegally on 29 May 2014. She attended the Asylum Screening Unit on  04
    June 2014 with the intention of making an asylum claim.

3.    On 24 June 2014 the respondent  refused  to  take  responsibility  for
    examining the appellant's asylum claim under the Dublin Regulation. The
    appellant made  further  representations  as  part  of  the  Pre-action
    Protocol procedure. The respondent treated  the  representations  as  a
    human rights claim. In a decision dated 10  July  2014  the  respondent
    refused the human rights claim but decided not to certify the claim  as
    'clearly unfounded' under section 94 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA  2002").  The  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    states:

            "Having carefully considered all of the  evidence  available  to
           her, the Secretary of State  has  refused  your  client's  human
           rights claim however at this time we  have  not  certified  this
           decision and find that there  are  family  claims  that  may  be
           addressed in [an] in-country appeal. The required appeal form is
           attached to this letter details as to where it should be sent is
           also included.


            It remains the UK Visas and Immigration's  intention  to  remove
           your client to France. However, arrangements  for  her  transfer
           will not be made until after the conclusion of  her  in  country
           appeal and her case has been determined."

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge T. Brown ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 30 September 2015.  The  judge  considered
    the limited medical evidence, as well as  the  evidence  given  by  the
    witnesses, which included the appellant and her brother. The judge  was
    satisfied that the appellant had given a consistent account of past ill-
    treatment where she said she was physically and  sexually  abused.  The
    abuse included two abductions when she was 12 and 15 years old. She was
    beaten and raped. The judge also accepted that she  suffered  abuse  at
    the hands of her first  husband,  including  marital  rape.  The  judge
    accepted that the appellant complained of "relatively moderate"  health
    concerns including "symptoms of  PTSD"  but  found  that  she  did  not
    complain of any "significant or very disabling physical or  psychiatric
    illness." The judge accepted that the DNA evidence established that the
    appellant and her brother were related as claimed.   He  accepted  that
    the appellant had no family or other connections in France.  The  judge
    noted that the appellant  lived  with  a  Somali  woman  but  was  also
    emotionally dependent, and to some extent financially  dependent,  upon
    her  brother.  They  had  been  separated  since  childhood   and   had
    established a family life  in  the  UK,  in  part,  because  they  were
    isolated from other family members. The judge was  satisfied  that  the
    relationship had the additional  elements  of  dependency  required  to
    establish a family life within the meaning of Article 8 of the ECHR.

5.    The judge went on to consider whether removal to France  would  amount
    to a disproportionate interference with her right to family life  under
    Article 8. He considered the five stage approach outlined in R  v  SSHD
    ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. The judge concluded that removal  would
    interfere with the appellant's family life in a sufficiently grave  way
    to engage the operation of Article 8. She would have no support network
    or family  members  around  her  and  would  be  physically  alone  and
    "probably isolated". He said that she was likely to be "exiled from her
    family members". She had achieved "relative peace and stability" in the
    UK, which would be disrupted if she were removed to France.

6.    The judge assessed  whether  the  interference  with  the  appellant's
    right  to  family  life  would  be  proportionate.  He  considered,  in
    substance, the public interest considerations outlined in section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIAA  2002").
    The judge referred to the Dublin Regulation and noted that Article 2(g)-
    (h) made provision for family members. He found that an  adult  sibling
    was not a "family member" or "relative" for the purpose of Article 2(g)-
    (h). He also considered the  terms  of  Articles  9-10  of  the  Dublin
    Regulation.  In assessing what weight to place on the  public  interest
    in maintaining an effective system of immigration control  through  the
    mechanism of the Dublin Regulation the judge concluded:

            "103.      Given that Dublin III is  concerned  with  applicants
           for international protection, it will be  the  case  that  many,
           perhaps most, applicants affected by it will be  vulnerable  and
           will have experienced ill-treatment or the risk of it. Yet  such
           applicants are restricted, under Dublin III, in where  they  may
           claim international protection. Being alone, and isolated, is  a
           common experience for refugees. That does not make it right,  or
           good, but it means that the appellant's case is, in that  sense,
           not especially unusual.

            104. The  appellant's  unlawful  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom
           therefore not only undermines domestic immigration control,  but
           frustrates an EU mechanism for handling claims for international
           protection. I consider the line drawn, as a matter of policy, by
           the EU legislature, in respect of member states'  responsibility
           to third country nationals to be  a  very  important  factor  in
           assessing whether the respondent can justify its decision.

            105. The nature of the proposed interference in the  appellant's
           private and family life is serious.  I  accept  that  she  is  a
           vulnerable young woman who has, at the  moment,  in  the  United
           Kingdom, a support network, comprising family and  private  life
           ties which would be disrupted by her removal to France.

            106. This is a weighty factor. But the respondent has  satisfied
           me that the factors on which the respondent  relies  to  justify
           the appellant's removal make removal proportionate  in  all  the
           circumstances. The appellant is entitled to have her  claim  for
           international protection determined by  France  and  France  has
           undertaken to determine it. The appellant's  relationships  with
           her  family  and  clan  members  in  the  United   Kingdom   are
           significant, but, given that the  appellant  is  in  the  Untied
           Kingdom unlawfully, those relationships are  not  long-standing,
           and have developed in a precarious environment, the  appellant's
           departure  from  France  to  the  United  Kingdom  subverts  the
           mechanism created by Dublin III,  and  given  the  other  public
           interest considerations  to  which  I  have  referred  above,  I
           consider that the appellant's right to respect for  her  private
           and family  life  is  substantially  outweighed  by  the  public
           interest in  securing  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  United
           Kingdom through effective immigration control.

            107. Had some of the factors weighing against the appellant  not
           been present -  [had]  she  been  able  to  speak  English,  for
           example, and/or if there had been evidence  that  the  appellant
           would be able to quickly to  achieve  financial  independence  -
           then  the  respondent  may  not  have  satisfied  me  that   the
           appellant's removal was proportionate, but considering,  in  the
           round, the factors weighing in favour of removal, I am satisfied
           in the circumstances which do  exist,  that  they  outweigh  the
           interference in the appellant's right to respect for her private
           and family life."

7.    The appellant seeks to appeal the decision on the following grounds:

      (i)   The First-tier Tribunal failed to consider other  provisions  of
           the Dublin Regulation relating to family life  and  humanitarian
           issues, which were  relevant  to  a  proper  assessment  of  the
           proportionality of removal under Article 8.

      (ii)  The First-tier  Tribunal  placed  undue  weight  on  the  public
           interest considerations  contained  in  section  117A-D  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIAA  2002"),
           which were arguably not relevant to the limited issue of whether
           the UK should  take  responsibility  for  examining  her  asylum
           claim.

8.    At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision. The  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal in ZAT was promulgated  on  29  January  2016.  I
    considered that it may have some relevance to the issues in  this  case
    and invited both parties  to  serve  any  further  written  submissions
    before I finalised the decision.  Only  the  appellant  served  further
    written submissions.

Legal Framework

9.     I  begin  by  examining  the  relevant  provisions  of   the   Dublin
    Regulation.  The  mechanism  for  "taking   responsibility"   for   the
    "examination" (i.e. determination) of claims for asylum and other forms
    of international protection by non-EU nationals lies at  the  heart  of
    the Dublin Regulation. The measure begins with  several  recitals.  The
    relevant recitals are as follows:

           (14)   In  accordance  with  the  European  Convention  for  the
                 Protection of Human Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms  and
                 with the Charter of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European
                 Union,  respect  for  family  life  should  be  a   primary
                 consideration  of  Member   States   when   applying   this
                 Regulation.

           (15)   The  processing  together   of   the   applications   for
                 international protection of the members of one family by  a
                 single Member State makes it possible to  ensure  that  the
                 applications are examined thoroughly, the  decisions  taken
                 in respect of them are consistent and the  members  of  one
                 family are not separated.

           (16)  In order to ensure  full  respect  for  the  principle  of
                 family unity and for the best interests of the  child,  the
                 existence  of  a  relationship  of  dependency  between  an
                 applicant and his  or  her  child,  sibling  or  parent  on
                 account of the applicant's pregnancy or maternity, state of
                 health or old age, should become a  binding  responsibility
                 criterion. When the applicant is  an  unaccompanied  minor,
                 the  presence  of  a  family  member  or  relative  on  the
                 territory of another Member State who can take care of  him
                 or  her  should  also  become  a   binding   responsibility
                 criterion.


           (17)        Any Member State should be able to derogate from the
                 responsibility criteria, in particular on humanitarian  and
                 compassionate grounds, in order to  bring  together  family
                 members,  relatives  or  any  other  family  relations  and
                 examine an application for international protection  lodged
                 with  it  or  with  another  Member  State,  even  if  such
                 examination is not its  responsibility  under  the  binding
                 criteria laid down in this Regulation.

10.   Article 2 of the Dublin Regulation outlines  definitions  to  be  used
    for the purpose of interpreting the regulation. Sub-paragraphs  (g)-(h)
    define family members as follows:

           (g)   'family members'  means,  insofar  as  the  family already
                 existed in the country of origin, the following members  of
                 the applicant's family who are present on the territory  of
                 the Member States:


              -        the spouse of the applicant or his or  her unmarried
                 partner in a stable relationship, where the law or practice
                 of the Member State concerned treats unmarried couples in a
                 way comparable to married couples under its law relating to
                 third-country nationals,
              -        the minor children of  couples  referred  to  in the
                 first indent or of the applicant, on  condition  that  they
                 are unmarried and regardless of whether they were  born  in
                 or out of wedlock or adopted as defined under national law,


              -        when the applicant is  a  minor  and  unmarried, the
                 father,  mother  or  another  adult  responsible  for   the
                 applicant, whether by law or by the practice of the  Member
                 State where the adult is present,
              -  when the beneficiary  of  international  protection  is  a
                 minor and unmarried, the father, mother  or  another  adult
                 responsible for him  or  her  whether  by  law  or  by  the
                 practice of the  Member  State  where  the  beneficiary  is
                 present;

           (h)   'relative' means the applicant's adult aunt  or  uncle  or
                 grandparent who is present in the  territory  of  a  Member
                 State, regardless of whether the applicant was born  in  or
                 out of wedlock or adopted as defined under national law;

11.   Chapter III establishes a hierarchy of criteria for determining  which
    Member State is responsible for examining an asylum  claim.  Article  7
    states:

          7(1)   The criteria for determining the Member  State  responsible
                 shall be applied in the order in which they are set out  in
                 this Chapter.


           (2)   The  Member  State  responsible  in  accordance  with  the
                 criteria set out in this Chapter shall be determined on the
                 basis of the situation obtaining when the  applicant  first
                 lodged his or her application for international  protection
                 with a Member State.


           (3)   In view of the application of the criteria referred to  in
                 Articles 8, 10  and  16,  Member  States  shall  take  into
                 consideration  any   available   evidence   regarding   the
                 presence, on the territory of a  Member  State,  of  family
                 members, relatives or any other  family  relations  of  the
                 applicant, on condition  that  such  evidence  is  produced
                 before another Member State accepts  the  request  to  take
                 charge or take  back  the  person  concerned,  pursuant  to
                 Articles 22 and 25  respectively,  and  that  the  previous
                 applications for international protection of the  applicant
                 have not yet been the subject of a first decision regarding
                 the substance.

12.   Article 8 sets out provisions relating to "Unaccompanied  Minors"  and
    provides for the Member State where the child's  relative  is  lawfully
    resident to take responsibility if certain conditions are met.  Article
    9 relates to "Family members who  are  beneficiaries  of  international
    protection" and  sets  out  provisions  for  a  Member  State  to  take
    responsibility  where  a  family  member   has   already   been   given
    international protection. Articles 10-11  deal  with  circumstances  in
    which several family members have made claims that could be  determined
    together. These provisions do not apply in the context of this appeal.

13.    In  addition  to  the   hierarchy   or   criteria   for   determining
    responsibility for an asylum claim, Chapter IV of the Dublin Regulation
    outlines provisions relating to dependents as  well  as  "discretionary
    clauses". Article 16 relates to dependents:

          16(1)  Where, on account of pregnancy, a new-born  child,  serious
                 illness, severe disability or  old  age,  an  applicant  is
                 dependent on the assistance of his or her child, sibling or
                 parent legally resident in one of the Member States, or his
                 or her child, sibling or parent legally resident in one  of
                 the Member States is dependent on  the  assistance  of  the
                 applicant, Member  States  shall  normally  keep  or  bring
                 together the applicant with that child, sibling or  parent,
                 provided that family ties existed in the country of origin,
                 that the child, sibling or parent or the applicant is  able
                 to take care of the dependent person and that  the  persons
                 concerned expressed their desire in writing.

           (2)    Where  the  child,  sibling  or  parent  referred  to  in
                 paragraph 1 is legally resident in  a  Member  State  other
                 than the one where the applicant  is  present,  the  Member
                 State responsible shall be the one where the child, sibling
                 or parent is legally resident unless the applicant's health
                 prevents him or her from travelling to  that  Member  State
                 for a significant period of  time.  In  such  a  case,  the
                 Member  State  responsible  shall  be  the  one  where  the
                 applicant is  present.  Such  Member  State  shall  not  be
                 subject to the obligation to bring the  child,  sibling  or
                 parent of the applicant to its territory. ......

14.   Article 17 allows Member States  to  exercise  discretion  and  depart
    from the hierarchy  of  criteria  for  determining  responsibility  for
    asylum claims:

           17(1) By way of derogation from Article 3(1), each Member  State
                 may decide to  examine  an  application  for  international
                 protection lodged with it by a third-country national or  a
                 stateless person, even  if  such  examination  is  not  its
                 responsibility  under  the  criteria  laid  down  in   this
                 Regulation.
                 ......
           (2)   The Member State in which an application for international
                 protection is made and which is carrying out the process of
                 determining the Member State  responsible,  or  the  Member
                 State responsible, may, at any time before a first decision
                 regarding the substance is taken,  request  another  Member
                 State to take charge of an  applicant  in  order  to  bring
                 together any  family  relations,  on  humanitarian  grounds
                 based in particular on family or  cultural  considerations,
                 even where that other Member State is not responsible under
                 the criteria laid down in Articles 8  to  11  and  16.  The
                 persons concerned must express their consent in writing.

15.   The central issue to be determined in this appeal is  whether  removal
    in consequence of the  decision  would  amount  to  a  disproportionate
    interference with the  Article  8  rights  of  the  appellant  and  her
    brother. In assessing what weight should be placed on  "public interest
    considerations" as part of a proportionality assessment  under  Article
    8(2) of the European Convention of Human Rights a court of tribunal  is
    required to take into account the factors set out in  Part  5A  of  the
    NIAA 2002 (sections 117A-D). The following sections are relevant  in  a
    non-deportation case:

            117A  Application of this Part


           (1)   This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
                 determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
                 Acts-
                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                       family life under Article 8, and
                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                       Human Rights Act 1998.
           (2)   In considering the public interest question, the court  or
                 tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                  117B, and
                  (b)   in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                       criminals, to the considerations  listed  in  section
                       117C.
           (3)   In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
                 the question of whether an  interference  with  a  person's
                 right to respect for private and family life  is  justified
                 under Article 8(2).


         117B          Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable
             in all cases

         (1)           The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
   in the public interest.
         (2)           It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                 the interests of the  economic  well-being  of  the  United
                 Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the
                 United Kingdom are able to speak English,  because  persons
                 who can speak English-
                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.
         (3)     It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                 interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
                 that persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                 Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons-
                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and
                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.
               (4)           Little weight should be given to-
                  (a)  a private life, or
                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
                 that is established by a person at a time when  the  person
                 is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5)      Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
                 established by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                 immigration status is precarious.
         (6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
                 the public interest does not require the  person's  removal
                 where-
                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and
                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom.

Decision and reasons

16.   The appellant does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules. Both parties agreed that the  Article  8  assessment  should  be
    undertaken  outside  the  rules.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's   factual
    findings regarding the appellant's vulnerability as a  result  of  past
    persecution are not challenged.  Nor are the findings relating  to  the
    serious nature of the interference with the appellant's right to family
    life that removal to France would entail. The only issue is whether the
    judge's proportionality assessment under Article 8(2) discloses  errors
    of law.

The first ground - Dublin Regulation

17.   There is no right of appeal against a decision taken under the  Dublin
    Regulation. In a statutory appeal brought on human rights  grounds  the
    context of removal under the Dublin  Regulation  is  relevant  to  what
    weight should be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  an
    effective system of immigration control.  Within  the  legal  framework
    controlling immigration are arrangements for allocating  responsibility
    for asylum claims within the European Union. It is  not  disputed  that
    the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to take into account the terms  of
    the Dublin Regulation as part of the overall proportionality assessment
    under Article 8(2).

18.   In its recent decision  in  ZAT  the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  the
    separate regimes established by the Dublin  Regulation  and  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998. The Upper Tribunal found that the two  regimes,  while
    distinct,  operate  alongside  one  another.  Neither  regime  has  any
    inherent value or status  giving  one  precedence  over  the  other.  I
    observe that within the legal structure of European law the distinction
    is recognised by the different roles played by the Court of Justice  of
    the European Union ("CJEU") and the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights
    ("ECtHR"). The first operates exclusively within the realm of  EU  law,
    while the second is concerned solely with the operation  of  the  ECHR.
    The two regimes exist alongside one another but at times  some  tension
    can be found between the transnational focus of the EU law  regime  and
    the individual rights focus of the ECHR regime.

19.   In ZAT the Upper Tribunal found that there  may  be  some  "interface"
    between the two regimes in individual cases.  The  applicants  included
    three unaccompanied children and a vulnerable young adult living  in  a
    migrant camp in Calais. They sought an order, by way of an  application
    for judicial review, compelling their entry to join  relatives  in  the
    UK. The judgment states at paragraph 52:

            "What is the correct approach to the Dublin regulation in a case
           of this kind? We consider that the Dublin Regulation,  with  its
           rationale and overarching aims and principles, has the status of
           a  material  consideration  of   undeniable   potency   in   the
           proportionality balancing exercise. It follows that  vindication
           of an Article 8 human rights challenge will require a strong and
           persuasive case on its merits.  Judges  will  not  lightly  find
           that, in a given context, article 8 operates in a  manner  which
           permits circumvention of the Dublin  Regulation  procedures  and
           mechanisms, whether in whole or in part. We consider  that  such
           cases are likely to be rare."

20.   The factual matrix of this appeal  is  different  from  that  of  ZAT,
    which serves to emphasise the fact  sensitive  nature  of  every  human
    rights claim. The appellant resists removal  to  France  by  way  of  a
    statutory appeal to the Tribunal. In my experience there are few claims
    where the respondent  does  not  certify  the  human  rights  claim  as
    'clearly unfounded' but still maintains a decision to remove to another
    Member State, thereby giving an in-country right of appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal on human rights grounds.  No  specific  submissions  were
    made on this point but it is reasonable to infer that, in the  majority
    of cases, if the respondent considers that there are compelling  family
    life reasons, or other compassionate reasons for an asylum claim to  be
    considered in the UK rather than  in  another  Member  State  she  will
    usually exercise discretion under Article 17  and  take  responsibility
    for examining the claim. That would be the end of the matter  in  terms
    of removal to another Member State. This is one of the relatively small
    number of cases in which the respondent still intends to effect removal
    under  the  Dublin  Regulation  even  though  she  accepts   that   the
    appellant's family life claim is not 'clearly unfounded'.

21.   In light of the above I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    correct to take into account the Dublin Regulation regime as a "weighty
    factor" in assessing whether removal was justified under Article  8(2).
    In doing so he  complied  with  the  requirement  outlined  in  section
    117A(2)-(3) and 117B(1) of the NIAA 2002 to have regard to  the  public
    interest in maintaining effective  immigration  control.  However,  the
    appellant argues that the judge  erred  in  failing  to  give  adequate
    consideration to the internal scheme and the underlying  principles  of
    the Dublin Regulation, which recognises family life  considerations  as
    part of the hierarchy of criteria for  determining  responsibility  for
    asylum claims.

22.   The judge noted, correctly, that the appellant is  neither  a  "family
    member" nor a "relative" within the  definition  contained  in  Article
    2(g)-(h) of the Dublin  Regulation.  The  terms  of  the  hierarchy  of
    criteria set out in Articles 8-11 of the Dublin  Regulation  (paragraph
    10 above) do not assist the appellant because  they  refer  largely  to
    "family members". The judge's  failure  to  consider  those  particular
    provisions was not material to a proper assessment of Article 8 in this
    particular case and discloses no error of law. However,  the  hierarchy
    of criteria contained in the Dublin Regulation includes provisions that
    are relevant to other family members who do  not  meet  the  definition
    outlined in Article 2(g)-(h).

23.   Recital 14 emphasises that  the  right  to  respect  for  family  life
    should be a "primary consideration" of Member States when applying  the
    Dublin Regulation. In an Article 8 appeal under the human rights regime
    what amounts to 'family life' must be considered by  reference  to  the
    relevant Strasbourg and national case law. In this case the  judge  was
    satisfied that the relationship between the  appellant  and  her  adult
    sibling had the additional elements of dependency required to amount to
    family life for the purpose of Article 8: see Kugathas  v  SSHD  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31 and Singh & Anor v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630.

24.   Article 7(3) of the  Dublin  Regulation  refers  to  "family  members,
    relatives  or  any  other  family  relations  of  the  applicant"   [my
    emphasis]. The wording distinguishes "family members"  and  "relatives"
    and allows for other types  of  "family  relations"  to  be  considered
    subject to certain conditions relating  to  the  timing  of  an  asylum
    claim.

25.   Recital 16, which  echoes  the  terms  of  Article  16(1),  refers  to
    relationships of dependency between an applicant and "his or her child,
    sibling or a parent" [my emphasis]. The  full  text  of  Article  16(1)
    recognises that where there is a "relationship of  dependency"  between
    an applicant and sibling Member States "shall normally  keep  or  bring
    together  the  applicant  with  that...sibling"  subject   to   several
    specified conditions.

26.   Recital 16  states  that  in  order  to  show  full  respect  for  the
    principle of family unity the existence of a relationship of dependency
    of that kind "should become a  binding  responsibility  criterion."  In
    light of those provisions it seems clear  that  the  Dublin  Regulation
    recognises other types of dependent family relationships,  which  might
    require a Member State to  take  responsibility  for  a  claim.  In  my
    assessment, the effect of these provisions is that  relationships  such
    as the one between the appellant and her brother should be  taken  into
    account in a human rights decision  made  within  the  context  of  the
    Dublin regime.

27.   In contrast, Article 17 is a "discretionary clause",  which  does  not
    bind a Member State.  Nevertheless,  it  continues  to  emphasise  that
    within the Dublin regime family relationships are of great  importance.
    Article 17(2) allows a Member State to request another Member State  to
    take charge of an applicant "in order  to  bring  together  any  family
    relations, on humanitarian grounds based in  particular  on  family  or
    cultural considerations, even where that  other  Member  State  is  not
    responsible under the criteria laid down in Articles 8 to 11  and  16".
    The discretionary clause does not limit family unity to the  definition
    outlined in Article 2(g)-(h) but makes wider reference to  "any  family
    relations".

28.   I draw the following conclusions from the above analysis:

      (i)   There is no right of appeal against a decision taken  under  the
           Dublin Regulation. The only current in-country right  of  appeal
           to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  against  the  refusal  of  an
           uncertified human rights claim.

       ii) The Dublin regime and the human rights regime are  separate  but
           co-exist. In individual cases there might  be  some  "interface"
           between the two regimes.

      (iii)  When  a  court  or  tribunal  has  regard  to  public  interest
           considerations as part of  a  proportionality  assessment  under
           Article 8(2), the Dublin regime will be a potent consideration.

      (iv)  In considering what  weight  should  be  placed  on  the  Dublin
           regime in family life cases, in so far as it forms part  of  the
           public interest in maintaining effective immigration control, it
           may be necessary to have regard to the  internal  provisions  of
           the regime. The Dublin Regulation emphasises the  importance  of
           the European Convention on Human Rights  and  makes  clear  that
           respect for family life should be a "primary consideration" when
           Member States apply the Dublin Regulation.

      (v)    The  Dublin  regime  sets  out  a  hierarchy  of  criteria  for
           determining responsibility for an asylum claim.  It  includes  a
           number of provisions relating to "family members" as defined  by
           Article 2(g)-(h) but also includes binding provisions that  take
           into account other dependent family relationships  in  specified
           circumstances. The discretionary clause also recognises that  it
           may be important to consider whether it is necessary  to  "bring
           together any family relations" on humanitarian grounds.

29.   It is clear that the judge gave careful  consideration  to  the  case.
    However, it becomes apparent from my analysis that,  in  confining  his
    assessment to whether  the  appellant  met  the  strict  definition  of
    "family members" under Article 2(g)-(h), the judge erred in failing  to
    consider other provisions of the Dublin Regulation, which were relevant
    to a proper assessment of what weight should be accorded to family life
    in the context of a Dublin removal decision.  The  provisions  underpin
    one of the important themes of the  Dublin  Regulation,  which  is  its
    emphasis on the respect to be accorded to family life.

The second ground -public interest considerations

30.    The  second  ground  asserts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  placed
    excessive weight on certain public interest considerations contained in
    section 117B of the NIAA 2002, which were not relevant to the  question
    of whether the United Kingdom should take responsibility for  examining
    the appellant's asylum claim. In assessing what weight to place on  the
    public interest the judge considered the factors  outlined  in  section
    117B with some  care.  In  the  final  paragraph  of  the  decision  he
    concluded [107]:

           "Had some of the factors weighing against the appellant not been
           present - had she been  able  to  speak  English,  for  example,
           and/or if there had been evidence that the  appellant  would  be
           able quickly to achieve financial independence - the  respondent
           may not have satisfied  me  that  the  appellant's  removal  was
           proportionate,  but  considering,  in  the  round,  the  factors
           weighing  in  favour  of  removal,  I  am   satisfied   in   the
           circumstances  which  do   exist,   that   they   outweigh   the
           interference in the appellant's right to respect for her private
           and family life"

31.   The appellant argues that the factors  relating  to  English  language
    and financial independence have little relevance to a proper assessment
    of proportionality in the context of the Dublin regime. At  this  stage
    the appellant is not necessarily  asserting  a  freestanding  right  to
    remain in the UK under Article 8  but  seeks  to  remain  in  order  to
    benefit from the support provided by friends and  relatives  while  she
    makes an asylum claim.

32.   A number of recent decisions of the Upper  Tribunal  seek  to  explain
    various aspects of Part 5A of the NIAA  2002.  In  Dube  (ss.117A-117D)
    [2015] UKUT 00090 the Upper Tribunal found that judges are  duty  bound
    to have regard to the specified  considerations  outlined  in  sections
    117A-D. The Upper  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  wording  of  section
    117A(2) showed that the list of considerations was not exhaustive.  The
    introduction of Part 5A of the NIAA 2002 did not detract from the  need
    to conduct a focussed assessment of Article 8 in  line  with  the  five
    stage approach set  out  in  Razgar.  The  "public  interest  question"
    outlined in those provisions form  part  of  the  "proportionality  and
    justifiability" assessment relevant to  question  five  of  the  Razgar
    approach.

33.   In AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 the Upper  Tribunal  found
    that the duty to  consider  section  117B  only  extended  to  relevant
    considerations. For example, it is not incumbent on a court or tribunal
    to consider and discount section 117B(6) where an  applicant  does  not
    claim to have parental relationship with a child.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded that it was not an error of law if a  judge  failed  to  make
    reference  to  a  specific  provision   as   long   as   the   relevant
    considerations were dealt with in substance. In considering what weight
    to place  on  the  considerations  relating  to  English  language  and
    financial independence contained  in  sections  117B(2)-(3)  the  Upper
    Tribunal stated:

           "We are satisfied that s117B(2), and s117B(3), were intended  by
           Parliament to meet, and to finally  dispose  of,  the  arguments
           that have from time to time been advanced to the effect that the
           language and/or the financial requirements  of  the  Immigration
           Rules should either be  ignored  altogether,  or,  should  carry
           little weight, when the Tribunal is weighing the proportionality
           of a decision to remove in the context of the  consideration  of
           an individual's Article 8 rights; Bibi [2013] EWCA Civ 322,  and
           MM (Lebanon) [2013] EWCA Civ 985."

      The Upper Tribunal  concluded  that  the  considerations  outlined  in
    section 117B(2) and (3) were neutral factors that did  not  add  to  an
    appellant's case if the person is fluent  in  English  and  financially
    independent, but may be negative factors that weigh in  favour  of  the
    public interest question when not satisfied.

34.   The point was fortified  in  Forman  (section  117A-C  considerations)
    [2015] UKUT 00412. In that case the Upper Tribunal emphasised that  the
    list of public interest considerations outlined in sections 117B-C  are
    not exhaustive. A court or tribunal is entitled to  take  into  account
    other considerations provided that they are relevant and have a  proper
    bearing on the public interest question.

35.   In Deelah and others (section 117B - ambit) [2015] UKUT 515 the  Upper
    Tribunal analysed the considerations outlined in sections  117B(1)-(6).
    It identified sections 117B(4) and (5) as somewhat different in  nature
    to the other four provisions because of the instructive nature  of  the
    language. The tribunal concluded that this did not unlawfully constrain
    the scope of an Article 8 assessment undertaken by a court or tribunal:

                   "24.      The argument advanced by Mr Malik on behalf  of
                 the  Appellants  explicitly  acknowledges   that   if   the
                 statutory provisions under scrutiny are  possessed  of  the
                 clarity which I have  found  it  must  fail.   It  founders
                 accordingly.  To this I would add that there  is  no  legal
                 principle of which I am aware  confounding  the  conclusion
                 that an instruction  by  the  legislature  to  a  court  or
                 tribunal  to  attribute  little  weight  to   the   matters
                 specified in section 117B(4)  and  (5)  either  contravenes
                 some constitutional norm  or,  in  order  to  preserve  the
                 constitutional balance, must be construed as  narrowly  and
                 strictly as possible and in a manner which  unshackles  the
                 Judge from the constraints  imposed.  The  United  Kingdom,
                 being one of those  states  which  operates  the  so-called
                 "dualist" doctrine, it is by statute that Article  8  forms
                 part of the domestic law of this jurisdiction and it is  by
                 the same vehicle viz statute that Parliament has chosen  to
                 calibrate certain aspects of its  operation  in  our  legal
                 system.  I  consider   that   this   gives   rise   to   no
                 constitutional trespass or  imbalance.   ......   My  final
                 conclusion is that the statutory provisions under  scrutiny
                 do not have the  effect  of  abrogating  or  eclipsing  any
                 fundamental right or any principle  of  the  rule  of  law.
                 Every court or tribunal would be attributing little  weight
                 to the matters specified irrespective of the  parliamentary
                 instruction in primary legislation. Approached in this way,
                 these new statutory provisions may  be  viewed  both  as  a
                 reinforcement of established principles, all Judge made and
                 a reminder to Courts and Tribunals  of  the  need  to  give
                 effect to them."

36.   In my judgment the following principles emerge from these decisions:

      (i)   The considerations outlined in  Part  5A  form  one  part  of  a
           focussed assessment of Article 8 in line  with  the  five  stage
           approach outlined in Razgar.

      (ii)  The "public interest question"  relates  to  the  assessment  of
           whether an interference with a person's  right  to  respect  for
           private and family life is  justified  and  proportionate  under
           Article 8(2) i.e. the fourth and  fifth  questions  outlined  in
           Razgar.

      iii) In  considering  the  "public  interest  question"  a  court  or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard to the  considerations
           listed in section 117B (and 117C in deportation cases).


       iv) The public interest  considerations  outlined  in  Part  5A  are
           derived from principles outlined in the  immigration  rules  and
           existing case law of the Strasbourg and domestic courts.

       (v)    Some  specified  public  interest  considerations   are   more
           instructive in nature than others.

      (vi)  The considerations outlined in Part 5A  are  not  exhaustive.  A
           court  or  tribunal  is  able  to  take   into   account   other
           considerations provided that they have a proper bearing  on  the
           "public interest question".

      (vii) Not all of the specified public interest considerations  may  be
           relevant to the facts of a particular case.

37.   How do these principles apply in a  case  concerning  a  human  rights
    decision  made  within  the  context  of  removal  under   the   Dublin
    Regulation? The appellant seeks to remain  in  the  UK,  in  the  first
    instance, for the narrow purpose of making an asylum  application.  She
    has not made  a  human  rights  application  on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence or other significant ties to the UK. The human rights grounds
    are limited to the fact that she has family support in the UK available
    to her during the process of claiming  asylum.  The  Dublin  Regulation
    emphasises the importance of the right to respect for family  life  and
    makes provision for family unity  in  the  hierarchy  of  criteria  for
    determining responsibility for examining a claim.

38.   This is to be contrasted with the vast majority  of  Article  8  cases
    whereby applicants seek leave to remain on a long term  basis.  GEN.1.1
    of the immigration rules makes clear that  the  rules  now  incorporate
    consideration of private and family life issues, including  the  public
    interest considerations outlined in Part 5A of the NIAA 2002.

39.   The private and family life provisions contained  in  the  immigration
    rules tend to focus on long term  settlement  in  the  UK  with  family
    members or recognise long standing private life ties  to  the  UK.   In
    such circumstances it is clearly in the public interest that  a  person
    who lives in the UK should be able  to  speak  a  reasonable  level  of
    English and is financially independent. The stated  aim  is  that  this
    will enable a person "better able to integrate into society" and ensure
    that they "are not a burden  on  taxpayers".  Many  categories  of  the
    immigration rules require an applicant to produce evidence relating  to
    English language  or  financial  support.  This  underpins  the  public
    interest considerations contained in sections 117B(2)-(3). If a  person
    does not meet the private and family life provisions contained  in  the
    immigration rules it is possible for Article 8 to be engaged, but  only
    if  a  case  discloses  compelling   circumstances   not   sufficiently
    recognised under the rules: see SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

40.   In summary, the proportionality assessment in  this  claim  has  three
    main legal elements. The first  is  the  provisions  contained  in  the
    immigration rules. The second is  a  wider  proportionality  assessment
    outside the  rules  including  consideration  of  the  public  interest
    factors contained in Part  5A  of  the  NIAA  2002.  As  part  of  that
    assessment the third element consists of  the  principles  underpinning
    the hierarchy of criteria contained in  the  Dublin  Regulation,  which
    include  its  emphasis  on  respect  for  family  life  as  a  "primary
    consideration". The First-tier Tribunal's decision  must  be  evaluated
    through the lens of these provisions.


41.   In this case the judge had  regard  to  the  public  interest  factors
    outlined in section 117B as he was required to do. He placed weight  on
    the fact that the appellant did not speak English and was not likely to
    be financially independent. The  weight  he  placed  on  those  matters
    appeared  to  be  determinative  [107].  But   in   my   judgment   the
    considerations outlined in section 117B(2) and (3) are to be contrasted
    with those  in  sections  117(4)  and  (5)  which  require  judges,  in
    instructive terms, to place little weight on private and family life in
    certain specified circumstances.

42.   If a person applied for leave to remain as a family member  under  the
    immigration rules, but did not meet the requirements, then  failure  to
    meet the  underlying  requirements  relating  to  English  language  or
    financial independence is a matter that would  be  given  weight  as  a
    public interest consideration. In contrast, if the  appellant  were  to
    make an asylum claim in the UK she would not be required to satisfy  an
    English language test or provide evidence  of  financial  independence.
    The only requirement would be that she satisfies the criteria  outlined
    in Article 1A of the Refugee Convention  as  incorporated  through  the
    Qualification Directive (2004/83/EC) and the immigration rules. While a
    court or tribunal is required to  have  regard  to  the  considerations
    outlined in Part 5A it is difficult to see  how  English  language  and
    financial independence can have a significant  bearing  on  the  public
    interest considerations in the context of a Dublin  Regulation  removal
    case when, in most cases, the underlying human rights claim is  limited
    to an application to remain in order to claim asylum.

43.   I conclude that, although the judge was obliged  to  have  regard  the
    factors outlined in section 117B(2)-(3), when put in the narrow context
    of a removal decision made under the Dublin Regulation, the  weight  to
    be placed on those factors in a human rights appeal  should  have  been
    limited. The  combination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  failure  to
    consider the family life provisions of the Dublin Regulation,  and  the
    undue weight placed on the appellant's ability  to  speak  English  and
    financial independence, amount to material errors of law.

44.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error of law and  I  set  aside  the
    decision.

Remaking the decision

45.   There is no challenge to the factual findings made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. I remake the decision based on those findings. The judge  was
    satisfied that the appellant's relationship with her  brother  had  the
    additional elements of dependency required to establish family life for
    the purpose of Article 8. He was also satisfied  that  her  removal  to
    France, where she had no family or other connections, would amount to a
    serious interference with her right to family life. Having  found  that
    removal would amount to a serious  interference  with  the  appellant's
    right to family life the only issue to be determined is whether removal
    is justified and proportionate under Article 8(2).

46.   The respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  letter  dated  10  July  2014
    records that the appellant made clear that she came to the UK to  claim
    asylum in order to join her brother at  the  screening  interview  that
    took place on 13 June 2014. She said  that  she  suffered  from  severe
    headaches and found it  difficult  to  sleep.  In  subsequent  Rule  35
    (detention)  reports  she  provided  further  detail  about  past  ill-
    treatment. Despite the fact that the appellant had  family  connections
    to the UK, and had given a  brief  account  of  traumatic  experiences,
    there is no evidence in the documents relating to the take back request
    made on 17 June 2014 to suggest that the respondent considered  whether
    to  exercise  discretion  to  take  responsibility  under  the   Dublin
    Regulation before the decision  was  made  to  refuse  to  examine  the
    application on 24 June 2014.

47.   The subsequent decision to refuse the  human  rights  claim  dated  10
    July 2014 considers whether removal would breach the appellant's  human
    rights under Article 8. The letter touches on some  issues  that  might
    have  relevance  to  the  hierarchy  of  criteria,  for  example,   the
    respondent noted that she did not live with her brother and  could  not
    be  brought  in  line  with  her  brother's  claim   for   Humanitarian
    Protection. The respondent also noted that there  was  no  evidence  of
    dependency. While there is reference to the Dublin Regulation, as  well
    as oblique references to some aspects of the hierarchy of criteria, the
    reasons for refusal letter is somewhat confused. The letter goes on  to
    consider the claim under the immigration rules and makes  reference  to
    the common law. The only other reference to the Dublin Regulation is in
    a paragraph that appears to have been 'cut  and  pasted'  from  another
    decision because it refers to multiple "clients"  and  makes  incorrect
    reference  to  removal  to  "Austria".  The  reference  to  the  Dublin
    Regulation is confined to the take back request  but  there  is  little
    evidence to indicate that the respondent considered the import  of  the
    family life provisions contained within  the  Dublin  Regulation  in  a
    clear or structured way as part of her proportionality assessment under
    Article 8.

48.   In contrast to the respondent, who should consider  the  hierarchy  of
    criteria and any family life or humanitarian  considerations  prior  to
    making a 'take back' request (Article 7(3)), the tribunal  is  required
    to consider a human rights appeal in light of the circumstances at  the
    date of the hearing.

49.   I have had regard to the public interest  considerations  outlined  in
    section 117B  of  the  NIAA  2002.  Sections  117B(4)-(6)  have  little
    relevance in this case. The appellant does not rely on  a  relationship
    with a partner. Her status has been  precarious  throughout  the  short
    period of time she has lived in the UK. She does not  assert  that  she
    has established strong private life ties to the UK. Any limited private
    life must be given  little  weight.  The  appellant  does  not  have  a
    parental relationship with a  relevant  child  requiring  consideration
    under section 117B(6). Although  I  have  had  regard  to  the  English
    language  and  financial  independence  considerations   contained   in
    sections 117B(2)-(3), for the reasons given above, I find that  in  the
    narrow context of a decision to remove  under  the  Dublin  Regulation,
    they are factors that cannot be given significant weight in  favour  of
    removal.

50.   In assessing what weight to place on the maintenance of  an  effective
    system of immigration control I have also taken into account  the  fact
    that the provisions of the Dublin Regulation emphasise that  the  right
    to respect for family life  should  be  a  primary  consideration.  The
    appellant is not a family member or relative as defined in  Article  2.
    Article 16(1) makes provision for allocating  responsibility  in  cases
    where a person is dependent  on  a  sibling.  The  judge  accepted  the
    appellant's account of harrowing past events. As a result he found that
    she was a vulnerable young woman. He concluded that  there  was  little
    evidence before him to show that she suffered from  a  "significant  or
    very  disabling  physical  or  psychiatric  illness".  As  such  it  is
    questionable whether the appellant would come within the  strict  terms
    of Article 16(1) because it could not be said that  she  was  dependent
    upon her brother "on account of" a serious illness or disability.

51.    I  have  also  taken  into  account,  the  CJEU  decision  in   K   v
    Bundesasylamt [2013] WLR 883 (C-245/11). In the context of  a  decision
    made under the Dublin II Regulation the court found that Article  15(2)
    (the equivalent now being the dependency clause under Article 16 of the
    current Regulation) was  engaged  in  circumstances  where  the  asylum
    applicant's daughter in law was dependent  upon  her  as  a  result  of
    serious illness and a new born baby.  The  court  considered  that  the
    obligation to "normally" keep or bring together the asylum seeker  with
    a relative in such circumstances was only subject to derogation  if  an
    exceptional situation had arisen [46]. Paragraph 52 states:

            "In a situation such as that at issue in the  main  proceedings,
           where what is at issue is not the 'bringing together' of  family
           members within the meaning of Article 15(2)  of  Regulation  No.
           343/2003 but 'keeping' them together  in  the  Member  State  in
           which they are present, the requirement of a request originating
           from the 'Member State responsible' would  run  counter  to  the
           obligation to  act  speedily,  because  it  would  unnecessarily
           prolong  the  procedure  for  determining   the   Member   State
           responsible."

      The decision serves to emphasise the need for all Member States to  be
    alert to family life issues when applying the Dublin Regulation.

52.   While I have expressed some doubt  as  to  whether,  on  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  appellant's  circumstances  would
    encompass the provisions outlined in Article 16, the judge  found  that
    additional elements of dependency gave  rise  to  family  life  with  a
    sibling who she had been separated  from  since  early  childhood.  The
    appellant's vulnerability  arising  from  her  past  experiences  is  a
    significant reason why she is  so  dependent  upon  the  practical  and
    emotional support  provided  by  her  brother.  The  Dublin  Regulation
    emphasises the importance to be accorded to family life throughout  the
    recitals, the hierarchy of criteria for determining responsibility  and
    the dependency and humanitarian  clauses.  The  judge  recognised  that
    there were significant elements of dependency in this case.

53.   In assessing the proportionality of  removal  I  have  also  found  it
    useful to remind myself of the overarching principles outlined  by  the
    House of Lords in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11:


           "But the main importance of the case law is in illuminating  the
           core value which article 8  exists  to  protect.  This  is  not,
           perhaps, hard to recognise. Human  beings  are  social  animals.
           They depend on others. Their family, or extended family, is  the
           group on  which  many  people  most  heavily  depend,  socially,
           emotionally and often financially. There comes a point at which,
           for some, prolonged and unavoidable separation from  this  group
           seriously inhibits their ability to  live  full  and  fulfilling
           lives. Matters such as the age, health and vulnerability of  the
           applicant, the closeness and previous history of the family, the
           applicant's dependence on the financial and emotional support of
           the family, the prevailing cultural tradition and conditions  in
           the country  of  origin  and  many  other  factors  may  all  be
           relevant."

54.   The public interest considerations underpinning the  proposed  removal
      must be balanced with the facts and factors  highlighted  above.  This
      includes the provisions which emphasise respect for family life  as  a
      "primary consideration" in the context of decisions  made  within  the
      Dublin regime.

55.   The First-tier Tribunal accepted the appellant's account of  harrowing
      past events and concluded that she was a vulnerable  young  woman  who
      would face isolation if returned to France. The  judge  accepted  that
      there would be a serious interference with her right  to  family  life
      with her brother despite the fact that they had not seen  one  another
      since early childhood. In assessing the strength of their relationship
      he considered the fact that the appellant and her brother are isolated
      from other family members. I take into account that,  at  this  stage,
      the appellant seeks to remain for a limited  purpose.  The  respondent
      did not certify the claim as 'clearly unfounded'. Many of  the  public
      interest factors outlined in section 117B have little relevance to the
      facts of this particular case. I have  already  explained  why  little
      weight can be attributed to the factors outlined in sections  117B(2)-
      (3) in the narrow context of the  Dublin regime.  Having  weighed  all
      the relevant factors I find that the particular  facts  of  this  case
      give rise to sufficiently compelling circumstances within the  meaning
      of the test outlined in SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.  For
      these reasons I find that the decision amounts to  a  disproportionate
      interference with the  appellant's  rights  under  Article  8  of  the
      European Convention.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal


Signed   [pic]   Date 27 April 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan




