
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04733/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 5 February 2013                        |On 13 February 2013         |
|                                          |............................|
|                                          |...........                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR ASAD ZAZAI
                                                                  Respondent

    Representation:
          For the Appellant: Mr E Tufan a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
          For the Respondent: Mr E Nicholson of counsel instructed by
Osmans solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.  I
      will refer to her as the Secretary  of  State.  The  respondent  is  a
      citizen of Afghanistan. I will refer  to  him  as  the  claimant.  The
      Secretary  of  State  has  been  given  permission   to   appeal   the
      determination  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Roopnarine-Davies  who
      allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision of 19 April 2012 to refuse to vary his leave  and  grant  him
      further leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to remove  him  from
      the United Kingdom by way of directions under s 47 of the Immigration,
      Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. The appeal was allowed to the  extent
      that the Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  found  to  be  not  in
      accordance with the law and the matter was remitted to her to  make  a
      lawful decision. The judge also concluded  that  there  was  no  valid
      appeal before her.


   2. The Secretary of State has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal.  It
      seemed to me that there was likely to be  common  ground  between  the
      representatives  for  the  parties.  After  enquiring  as   to   their
      respective positions  it  is  now  common  ground,  accepted  by  both
      representatives, that the judge erred in law. They are  agreed  as  to
      the reasons for the error of law and the outcome. I agree  with  their
      reasoning and conclusions.


   3.    In the light of the line of authorities culminating in Adamally and
      Jaferi (section 47 removal decisions: Tribunal Procedures) [2012] UKUT
      00414 (IAC) when a removal decision purportedly  under  s  47  of  the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 is made concurrently with
      a decision refusing further leave the s 47 decision is  unlawful,  but
      the decision refusing leave is  a  separate  decision,  that  requires
      determination; s 85(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
      2002 brings the two decisions into one appeal, but s 86  of  that  Act
      allows and  requires  the  determination  to  reflect  differences  in
      outcome. The judge should  have  determined  the  appeal  against  the
      decision refusing further leave and should have allowed the claimant's
      appeal against the section 47 removal decision. In failing  to  do  so
      she erred in law.


   4.    The judge also concluded that the Secretary of State's decision was
      not in accordance with the law because she had failed to exercise  her
      duty under Regulations 6 of the Asylum Seekers (Reception  Conditions)
      Regulations 2005  to  try  and  trace  the  appellant's  family.  Both
      representatives now accept and  I  find  that  in  the  light  of  the
      judgement in EU (Afghanistan) & Ors v Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department [2013] EWCA Civ 32 the judge erred in law  and  should  not
      have concluded that any failure by the Secretary of  State  to  do  so
      meant that her decision was not in accordance with the law. The  judge
      should have heard the appeal and made clear findings  of  fact  before
      the consequences of  any  failure  to  exercise  this  duty  could  be
      assessed.


   5.    It is agreed and I find that the judge erred in law.  I  set  aside
      her decision in part and remake it by allowing the  claimant's  appeal
      against the section 47 removal decision. There has not been  a  proper
      hearing  before  a  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  relation  to  the
      claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision refuse  to
      vary his leave and grant him further leave to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom. In the circumstances the appeal against this decision  should
      be remade in the First-Tier Tribunal on all grounds available  to  the
      complainant including Refugee Convention, humanitarian protection  and
      Articles 2, 3 and 8.








      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 6
      February 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

