
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04184/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9th December, 2013                         |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                              MR OSMAN BAHONER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown of Counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson
                    & Canter, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 1st  January,  1976.
    He entered the United Kingdom illegally on 25th January, 2013, and made
    a claim for asylum on the same day.  On 17th April, 2013, the Secretary
    of State decided to remove the appellant as an illegal entrant,  having
    refused the appellant's claim for asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    and concluded that his removal would not  breach  his  protected  human
    rights.

2.   The appellant appealed  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  and  his
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith  in  Manchester  on
    31st May, 2013.

3.   The judge found the appellant not to be  credible  and  concluded  that
    his removal from the United Kingdom would not cause the United  Kingdom
    to  breach  the  1951  Convention.   He   dismissed   the   appellant's
    humanitarian protection appeal since it was based on the  same  factual
    matrix and he dismissed the appellant's human rights appeals.

4.   The appellant challenged the judge's decision and, following a  hearing
    on 2nd October, 2013, in Manchester, the  Presenting  Officer  accepted
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred  by  failing  to  properly
    apply the "Surendran guidelines" endorsed in  MM v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2000] 00 TH  02423.   The  Presenting  Officer
    also accepted that the judge had erred by making  adverse  findings  of
    credibility based on the  Secretary  of  State's  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter,  without  first  demonstrating  that  he  had  considered   the
    appellant's explanation for  apparent  discrepancies  set  out  in  the
    appellant's statement.

5.   At the hearing on 2nd October, 2013, I set aside the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith.


Oral Evidence

7.   The appellant was called and I established  that  he  and  the  Kurdish
    Sorani interpreter both understood each other.  I  told  them  both  to
    notify me if they had any difficulty in understanding each other at any
    time.  The appellant confirmed  his  full  name,  date  of  birth,  and
    nationality.

Evidence-in-chief

8.   In answer to questions  put  to  him  by  his  Counsel,  the  appellant
    identified his signature at the foot of page 6 of his bundle.   He  was
    asked if the document at pages 1 to 6 of his bundle was his  statement.
    He replied, "What statement?  I don't remember."   Counsel  then  asked
    him if he recalled a statement being read to him.  He  appeared  to  be
    confused.

9.   I asked Mr Brown if he was proposing to have the  appellant  adopt,  as
    part of his evidence, the statements which appeared in the  appellant's
    original bundle at pages 1 to 6.  Mr Brown indicated that that had been
    his intention.

10.  I pointed out to Mr Brown that given that the appellant did not  appear
    to remember ever having made a statement, I  could  not  allow  him  to
    adopt the statement as his evidence because he did  not  appear  to  be
    aware of its contents.  I explained to Mr Brown that I would only allow
    the appellant to adopt his statement if he could confirm to me that  he
    was aware of its contents and that the contents were true, accurate and
    not in need of any alterations or amendments.   Were  I  to  allow  the
    appellant to adopt the statement, he might contradict something written
    in the statement if he had not approved that might cause me to  believe
    that he was not telling the truth.  I did  not  believe  that  I  could
    allow him to adopt the statement  when  he  appeared  not  to  remember
    having made it, or ever having had it read back to him.

11.  I appreciated it placed Mr Brown in some difficulty but, to  allow  the
    appellant to adopt his  statement  in  such  circumstances  could  very
    easily lead to unfairness.

12.  In answer to further questions put to him  by  Counsel,  the  appellant
    confirmed that he was an Iranian Kurd and that  before  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom he had only ever lived in Tehran.

13.  He did not go to school because of an injury to his leg.  When  he  was
    a child, he was injected in hospital with a  needle  which  caused  his
    right leg to be numb.

14.  The appellant  confirmed  that  his  claim  to  asylum  related  to  an
    incident when he ran away from Iran.  He said that he had been involved
    in political activities.  These were activities against the government,
    designed to overthrow the government.

15.  Four times the appellant agreed  to  deliver  packages  in  return  for
    money, but he did not know what  the  packages  were.   On  the  fourth
    occasion, an incident occurred.  The appellant's  younger  brother  was
    with him and his younger brother  was  arrested  whilst  the  appellant
    managed to run away.

16.  By way of explanation, the appellant told me that he  and  his  brother
    had taken a load of printed publications given to him  by  Omar  Samadi
    and taken them to Sakez where he handed them over to some "boys".

17.  When he ran away, it was because the police  attacked  the  boys.   The
    police did not see the appellant, because it was  evening  and  he  was
    some distance away from them.  The appellant was on a motorcycle and he
    accelerated away.  He returned to his home in  Sara,  a  small  village
    where Sakez.

18.  The  appellant  explained  that  he  would  take  the  box  of  printed
    materials on his three wheel motorbike and hand it over to other men as
    instructed.  He had done this job three of four times before.   He  had
    no idea what the literature was about, because he is illiterate.

19.  The first time he became involved in delivering this literature was  on
    20th February, 2013.  His brother, Yasim, told the appellant  to  trust
    him.  The appellant agreed to do this work in return  for  money.   The
    appellant was paid in Iranian currency,  sometimes  60,000  tomans  and
    sometimes  70,000  tomans.   Occasionally,  it  was  even  more.    The
    appellant said that he had taken "the boxes" from  Sarchawa,  from  the
    home of Omar Samadi, and had to take them  to  a  road  called  Enkelab
    Islami Road in Sakez.  There, he had to hand over the boxes to boys who
    were expecting him and approached him.   The  appellant  did  not  know
    their names and had been told to go to a  particular  street  where  he
    would be met.

20.  The appellant transported these "boxes" on his  motorbike.   It  was  a
    three wheeled Honda motorbike.   It  had  been  converted  to  a  three
    wheeled vehicle for use in agriculture.  The boxes were placed  on  the
    back.

21.  The last time the appellant had carried  out  this  work  was  on  24th
    February, 2013, and then he ran away.  He ran away because  the  police
    attacked the place where he  had  delivered  the  leaflets.   This  was
    Enklab Islami Street, Sarchawa.  The leaflets themselves  were  in  big
    boxes.  He could not lift them.  The men had collected some  boxes  and
    there were two boxes left on the bike and they were  supposed  to  come
    back and collect these two  boxes  but  they  did  not.   Instead,  the
    appellant saw a  police  car  and  saw  the  boys  running  away.   The
    appellant dropped the two boxes onto the street and he  ran  away  too.
    The appellant confirmed that there were two big boxes.   He  then  said
    that there were boxes inside the two big boxes and  that  the  leaflets
    had been put into a "bag".  The appellant collected the literature  and
    it was all wrapped up and then the wrapped  up  literature  was  placed
    into the boxes.  The boys the appellant referred to had  been  the  men
    who had been waiting for the delivery.  The appellant said he  did  not
    know any of them and that they had worked  for  Omar  Samadi.   On  the
    occasion of the last visit, he had seen two boys.

22.  The police arrived after the boys had taken some of the items from  the
    appellant and had told him to wait until they returned to  collect  the
    remaining boxes.  They were due to come back to the appellant to remove
    two more boxes, but did not return.  The appellant saw the  police  car
    arrive and noticed that the boys  were  running  away.   The  appellant
    dropped the two remaining boxes and ran away too by driving off on  his
    three wheeled motorcycle.   He  thought  that  something  bad  must  be
    happening for the police to be there.   The  appellant  went  home  and
    asked his wife if anyone had come to the house.  She told him that they
    had not.  She asked him where his brother Yasim was and she  said  that
    she had not seen him.  He lived in a house  next  door  to  the  family
    house and so he went to the family house and asked his  mother  if  his
    brother Yasim had returned.  She said that he had not.  By this time it
    was getting light, but still Yasim  had  not  returned.   When  it  was
    completely daylight, the appellant left his mother's home and  went  to
    his uncle's house in Buchan.  On arrival, he discovered that Yasim  was
    not with his uncle either.

23.  Yasim did not return to his mother's house and it was  uncharacteristic
    of him ever to stay away anywhere overnight.  When he had not  returned
    by daylight, the appellant thought that he might have been arrested.

24.  The appellant remained in Buchan for three  days  and  then  his  uncle
    took him to Rezaieh.  His uncle had  found  out  that  Yasim  had  been
    arrested.  His uncle told the appellant that Yasim  had  been  arrested
    for "conspiracy for political activity to overthrow the government" and
    asked if the appellant had been involved too.  He told his  uncle  that
    he had.  His uncle was very angry.

25.  Yasim had been involved in the delivery of material,  but  he  had  not
    delivered it to Enkelab Islami Road but  instead  to  another  area  of
    Sakez.

26.  The appellant's uncle told the appellant that  what  he  had  delivered
    was not commercial material but political in nature.  His uncle knew  a
    lot of people and by asking around he discovered the arrests.

27.  When the appellant went to Buchan, to his uncle's,  he  took  his  wife
    and children with him.  They were all moved to Rezaieh  by  the  uncle.
    His uncle told him that the people  who  had  been  arrested  would  be
    tortured and under duress would  give  the  appellant's  details.   His
    uncle told him that he had to leave the country.  His uncle gave  money
    to "Mafia people" and the appellant came  to  the  United  Kingdom  via
    Turkey.  It took 27 days.  The appellant travelled  by  small  car  and
    then lorry to Turkey, crossing the border by avoiding a checkpoint.

28.  The appellant confirmed that he had been in touch with his uncle  after
    he arrived in the United Kingdom.  His uncle had told him not  to  call
    him again because that would cause a risk to his uncle.  The  appellant
    did not know what had happened to Yasim.  His uncle  said  he  had  not
    been sentenced.  His uncle did not tell him what had  happened  to  the
    other people who had been arrested.

29.  The appellant was referred to the  Secretary  of  State's  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter dated 12th  April,  2013.   He  was  referred  first  to
    paragraph 14.  There, the Secretary of State had said:-

         "Consideration has been given to your claim that you are wanted  by
         the authorities in  Iran  because  you  were  delivering  political
         leaflets.  For the following reasons, this is  not  accepted.   You
         state that in February 2013 you  were  asked  by  your  brother  to
         deliver some commercial advertisement leaflets,  and  he  told  you
         that you would be well paid for it.  You never saw the leaflets  as
         they were packaged up when you collected them, and you did not have
         any idea that they were political leaflets.  You were asked if  you
         had made any enquiries as to why you were being paid more than  you
         would normally earn in one week to deliver these leaflets, and  you
         stated that you were told that there was good money in  advertising
         (AI Q46).  Your assertion that you believed that the leaflets  were
         just advertisements is inconsistent  with  the  evidence  that  you
         provided that you were concerned and scared about the situation (AI
         Q53 and 54).   This  inconsistency  is  considered  to  damage  the
         credibility of your account."

30.  The appellant said that he did not say that he was  scared  because  of
    the work he was doing.  What he meant was that he was scared because he
    was working at night.  His brother gave him the work and he loved  him.
    He trusted his brother.  It was because he had to do this work at night
    that he was scared.

31.  The appellant was then referred to paragraph  15  of  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.  This said:-

         "You  claim  that  you  only  discovered  that  the  leaflets  were
         political ones after you were  delivering  them  and  you  saw  the
         people who were supposed to collect  them  running  away  from  the
         security forces (AI Q60).  You state that you had put the bags down
         so that the people could collect them, when you  saw  the  security
         forces, and  saw  the  people  running  away  (AI  Q63).   This  is
         inconsistent with the evidence you have provided  that  the  people
         were still some distance away from you because you had not  arrived
         at the collection place yet (AI Q66).  Both of these statements are
         also inconsistent with your claim that somebody had already been to
         collect one of the bags, and had told you to wait  where  you  were
         and they  would  return  for  the  other  bag  (AI  Q69-72).   This
         inconsistency is considered  to  damage  the  credibility  of  your
         account.  Further, you were  unable  to  state  how  many  security
         officers there were, nor how far away they were from you  when  you
         saw them.  Your  inability  to  provide  this  information  further
         undermines the credibility of your account."

32.  The appellant explained that he met the boys some 50 metres  away  from
    their building.  They would never take him to their destination.   They
    told him not to come and that they would come to him.  He saw the  car.
    It was travelling fast and then suddenly stopped.  He knew it  was  the
    police.  It was a marked police car with its red and blue  roof  lights
    flashing.  The appellant could not remember if it had its siren  on  or
    not.

33.  The appellant was then referred to what  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    said at paragraph 16 of the letter.  She said:-

         "16. After running away from the security forces, you went to  stay
             with your uncle.  He told  you  that  your  brother  had  been
             arrested and had given your name under  torture,  because  the
             leaflets  were  political  ones.   When  asked  what  kind  of
             leaflets you stated 'demonstrations' (AI Q96)  and  you  could
             not give any further information.  You state that  your  uncle
             was able to find out all of this information by asking around,
             but you cannot provide any detail of who was able  to  provide
             this information.  You do not know  if  the  police  had  been
             looking for you in connection with  this.   It  is  considered
             that you have not demonstrated that the  authorities  in  Iran
             have any interest in you."

34.  The appellant said that if you make a small mistake  in  Iran  and  you
    are Kurdish you could be hung in the street.

Cross-examination

35.  The appellant confirmed that he had two  children.   He  denied  having
    said that he left a child behind in Iran.  One of his children was  ill
    on the journey to the United Kingdom.  The appellant agreed that he was
    interviewed on two occasions and he said that he  had  told  the  truth
    this morning and whatever he had said was the truth.

Questions Put by Me in Order to Clarify the Appellant's Evidence

36.  I told the appellant that  I  wished  to  clarify  some  parts  of  his
    evidence with him.  He explained that he worked as a  farmer  in  Iran.
    His family owned land and he  delivered  the  harvest  of  walnuts  and
    applies to the market for his family and for other local farmers.

37.  He used to earn approximately 10,000 toman per  day  but  occasionally,
    because people felt sorry for him because of his leg and because he had
    a wife and children, they would give him 15,000 toman a  day.   He  has
    one child who is 1 year of age and another child who is 7 or 8.

38.  The appellant agreed that he had agreed to collect boxes and take  them
    to Sakez.  The place where he collected them, Sarchawa, was fifteen  or
    twenty minutes walk from his home.  He went to Omar Samadi's  house  to
    collect the boxes.  Sakez is a distance  of  30  minutes  away  on  his
    motorbike.  The roads were asphalt  in  surface  and  were  good.   The
    materials were all wrapped up and placed in boxes and some of them were
    placed in bags as well.   The  appellant's  brother,  Yasim,  was  also
    undertaking this delivery work, but he was delivering  to  a  different
    district.  His brother had never been involved in politics and, as  far
    as the appellant was aware, he did not know what the material that they
    were delivering was, either.

39.  The appellant said he was  not  suspicious  about  the  delivery  work,
    because Omar had said he needed the appellant and his brother to do the
    work because his own car had broken down.

40.  The appellant's uncle lives in Buchan and  this  is  about  25  minutes
    away from his home by motorbike.

Re-examination

41.  In answer to questions put to him by Mr Brown, the appellant  explained
    that he used his Honda motorcycle to deliver the harvest of walnuts and
    apples.  His brother had an identical motorbike which he had used.

42.   The  appellant  explained  that  no-one  would  work   at   night-time
    delivering political literature, so he was not suspicious when  he  was
    offered the large sum of money.  He had been concerned only because  it
    meant working at night and while he did not know exactly  what  he  was
    delivering, he had no reason to think that it would be  material  which
    would get him into difficulties or trouble..

43.  It was after he had arrived in the United Kingdom that he spoke to  his
    uncle and he was told that the authorities were looking for him at  his
    mother's home.  They had not been to his uncle's house.



Submissions

44.  The Presenting Officer relied on the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  and
    pointed out that the witness had been inconsistent.  An interpreter had
    made a statement confirming that the witness statement  had  been  read
    back to the appellant  but  that  statement  was  only  served  on  5th
    December and yet the appellant's statement  had  been  dated  15th  May
    last.   The  appellant's  evidence   is   confusing   and   in   places
    contradictory.  Mr Harrison asked that I dismiss the appeal.

45.  Mr Brown suggested that the appellant had not  been  inconsistent.   He
    reminded me that the appellant had never been to school,  that  he  was
    from a farming background and had been employed as a delivery man.   In
    the circumstances, it is very likely that he would have been approached
    to deliver leaflets; no-one would have suspected him because  he  would
    have been going about his normal business.

46.  Even though the appellant was paid more money than he normally  earned,
    the appellant says that he recognised that there was a danger  but  the
    danger was because the work was to be carried out at night-time.

47.  The activity had only taken place over a matter of days.   He  had  not
    realised that he would have been involved in any real danger.   It  was
    not until he saw the arrival of a police car and  then  people  running
    away that he became concerned.  Even then he went home and then went to
    his mother's home, but it was not until the following morning  that  he
    realised something was wrong when his brother had not appeared.  It was
    only later, after the appellant had gone to stay with his  uncle,  that
    his uncle had discovered what had actually happened and  the  cause  of
    the  arrest  of  his  brother.   The  appellant  may  well  have   been
    inconsistent but, suggested Mr Brown, the appellant has told a truthful
    account very simply.  His brother has been arrested  and  while  it  is
    true that the appellant may well have asked more  questions  about  the
    material he was delivering, he had no reason to do so.   He  could  not
    read in any event.   The  appellant  was  given  an  entirely  credible
    account and his appeal should be allowed.

48.  Counsel asked me to bear in mind that the  appellant  made  an  illegal
    departure  from  Iran.   As  a  result,  if  he  is  returned  to  Iran
    undocumented he will be at real risk.

49.  Mr Harrison confirmed that the appellant would not be removed from  the
    United Kingdom without documentation.

50.  I reserved my determination.

The Law

51.  In asylum appeals the burden of proof is on the appellant to show  that
    returning him to Iran will expose him to a real risk of persecution for
    one of the five grounds recognised by the 1951 Refugee Convention or to
    a breach of his protected human rights.   The  question  of  whether  a
    person has a well-founded fear of persecution for a  Convention  reason
    has to be looked at in the round in  the  light  of  all  the  relevant
    circumstances and judged against the situation as at the  time  of  the
    appeal.  In human rights appeals, if it is established that there  will
    be an interference with the  appellant's  human  rights  and  that  the
    relevant Article permits, then it is for the  respondent  to  establish
    that the interference is justified.

52.  The standard of proof in asylum appeals as regards both the  likelihood
    of persecution and the establishment of past and future risks is a real
    risk.   In  Kacaj  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department
    (01/TH/0634*) it was held by the  former  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
    that the standard of proof in human rights appeals is the same as  that
    in asylum appeals.

Background Objective Evidence

53.  I reminded myself of the situation in Iran by  reading  the  background
    evidence.

54.  The first document in the appellant's  bundle  was  a  report  in  Iran
    Daily Brief of the Chief Prosecutor warning  that  activists  who  fled
    Iran after the 2009 presidential elections will face  charges  if  they
    return to Iran.  He was reported to have said,

         "let's assume that those who were engaged in attacks on the  nation
         and system in the 88 sedition (referring to  the  June  2009  post-
         presidential election protest) if anyone committed a crime and then
         officially left the country with a passport and even  unofficially,
         we will not ban them from entering the country, but once they  come
         here, they will be prosecuted and charged."

55.  I was provided with an extract from the Home Office Country  of  Origin
    Information Report of 26th September, 2013.  This  suggested  that  the
    prison population was at 217,000, although the capacity of  the  prison
    system was stated to  be  113,000.   The  US  State  Department  Report
    referred to prison conditions being harsh  and  life  threatening.   It
    also  spoke  of  prisoners  being  subjected  to  rape  by  guards  and
    interrogators, who  use  rape  to  crush  detainees'  spirits,  inflict
    humiliation and discourage dissent and  force  confessions  of  crimes.
    The report of a Special Rapporteur showed that prison  conditions  fell
    below minimum standards proclaimed by the United  Nations,  that  there
    was severe  overcrowding,  inadequate  access  to  water,  insufficient
    prisoner segregation practices, poor quality and unhygienic facilities,
    hazardous  ventilation  conditions,  insufficient  access  to   medical
    services and poor nutritional  provisions.   The  US  State  Department
    Report said  that  record  keeping  on  prisoners  was  inadequate  and
    statistics  on  the  country's  prison  population  were  not  publicly
    available.

56.  The report also spoke of the death penalty being involved  for  certain
    crimes including adultery, incest, rape,  fornication  for  the  fourth
    time by an unmarried person,  drinking  alcohol  for  the  third  time,
    sodomy, sexual conduct between men without penetration for  the  fourth
    time, lesbianism for the fourth time, fornication by a  non-Muslim  man
    with a Muslim woman and false accusation of adultery or  sodomy  for  a
    fourth time.  It can also be applied  for  crimes  such  as  smuggling,
    trafficking  drugs,  murder,  espionage  and  crimes  against  national
    security.

57.  A Human  Rights  Watch  Report  spoke  of  the  practice  of  torturing
    prisoners to extract confessions being  relatively  common  and  forced
    confessions being accepted as evidence.  Amnesty International reported
    that torture was routine and widely  used.   The  US  State  Department
    Report said that the  government  defended  its  use  of  flogging  and
    amputation as "punishment" not torture.  The International Campaign for
    Human Rights in Iran spoke of reported  methods  of  torture  including
    rape, severe beatings, sleep deprivation, threats  of  harm  to  family
    members, pouring iced cold water on  prisoners  with  heart  conditions
    after they had been subjected to intense  heat,  prolonged  periods  of
    solitary confinement and deprivation of healthcare,  basic  necessities
    and toilet use.

58.  The report made it clear that bribery is rife.  A  Danish  fact-finding
    report stated that there are easy ways  to  leave  Iran  illegally  and
    pointed to the land border with Turkey.  Security measures are said  to
    be efficient and airlines are strict on control of documents but  added
    that anything is possible in Iran.   The  majority  of  the  population
    living in the poverty stricken regions of south-east Iran were said  to
    report to lucrative  activities  such  as  smuggling  goods  and  human
    beings.  Kurds living on both sides of  the  border  between  Iran  and
    Turkey help people to pass across the border  and  the  fact  that  the
    Kurds have been passing through the border, coupled with the difficulty
    of controlling borders in the mountainous region of Kurdistan make  the
    smuggling of goods and people easier for smugglers.  A May 2011 Amnesty
    International Report referred to a 19  year  old  student  having  been
    arrested on arrival in Tehran after returning from France where he  was
    an asylum seeker.  The circumstances of his departure from France  were
    unclear and his current whereabouts were unknown.  It said that he  may
    have been subjected to enforced disappearance.

59.  The Amnesty International Report also referred to asylum seekers  being
    interrogated on return and asked whether or not they had been political
    activists either in Iran or abroad.  If  they  have  tried  to  conduct
    propaganda against Iran then they are culpable  and  detained  until  a
    judge decides to sentence.  Returnees are therefore held for a few days
    until it is clear to the police that they have  not  been  involved  in
    political activity.  If a person was either politically active in  Iran
    before leaving or has been active abroad then they will  be  tried  and
    receive a punishment appropriate to their activities.

60.  I was provided with a copy of a Freedom from Torture  report  of  March
    2013 published by the Medical Foundation.  I did not find this  at  all
    helpful.  One accepts that there are genuine refugees fleeing from Iran
    who have been tortured.  However, that does not mean  that  all  asylum
    seekers fleeing from Iran tell  the  truth  when  they  describe  their
    claims.  Each claim needs to be considered carefully on its own merits.

61.  I read the UK Border Agency Operational Guidance  Note  for  Iran.   It
    made depressing reading.

62.  The report  highlighted  the  fact  that  lack  of  access  to  justice
    continued to underpin a majority of human rights  abuses  in  Iran.   I
    paid particular attention to  paragraphs  31  5.5  to  31  7.3  because
    Counsel had particularly drawn my attention to those paragraphs.

63.  At pages 7 to 10 of the appellant's bundle was a  copy  of  the  report
    from  the  office  of  the  UNHCR  dated  16th  May,  2013,  describing
    discrimination against the Kurdish minority.  It highlighted  the  fact
    that the Iranian government does nothing to prevent discrimination  and
    human rights abuses against Kurds and those human rights violations are
    daily based in Iranian Kurdistan.  Hundreds of  Kurdish  political  and
    civil activists were said to be prisoners in Iran's prisons,  sentenced
    to death.  Dozens of Kurdish political and civil prisoners were said to
    have been sentenced in connection with their alleged membership of  and
    activities for Kurdish proscribed organisations.

64.  I read the Danish Immigration Service report of  26th  February,  2013.
    This merely confirmed material in the earlier documents  of  continuing
    human rights abuses against Kurds or persons believed to be of  Kurdish
    origin.  The US State Department Report  of  19th  April,  2019  merely
    confirmed reports of the government committing  acts  of  arbitrary  or
    unlawful killings by torture, denial of medical treatment and  beatings
    continued and many of the country's ethnic  minority  communities  were
    disproportionately victims of such abuse.  Prison  conditions  did  not
    appear to have improved at all.  They were said to be harsh  and  often
    life-threatening.  Although prohibited by the  constitution,  arbitrary
    arrest and detention still continued and the security forces  were  not
    considered to be fully effective in combating crime and corruption  and
    impunity were  problems.   Regular  and  paramilitary  security  forces
    committed numerous human rights abuses and  there  was  no  transparent
    mechanism to investigate or punish security force abuses and no reports
    of government actions to discipline abusers.

65.  Lastly, I read the Iran Human Rights Documentation  Centre  report  "On
    the margins arrest, imprisonment and execution of Kurdish activists  in
    Iran today".  This, too, made depressing reading and merely  served  to
    reinforce material that I had already considered.

66.  I have only quoted from part of the background material supplied to  me
    although I emphasise that I have carefully considered it  all,  and  it
    was against this background that I considered the appellant's evidence.

Consideration of the Appellant's Evidence and Findings of Fact

67.  In making my findings of fact, I have borne very much in mind that  the
    appellant is uneducated and illiterate.  I have made what I  regard  to
    be full allowance as a result.  However, the appellant is certainly not
    unintelligent.  Having considered the background evidence  produced  to
    me, I then considered the appellant's evidence and as a result  I  make
    the following findings of fact:-

    (i)  I accept that the appellant is an Iranian Kurd.


    (ii) I accept also that the appellant is illiterate and did not  attend
         school in Iran, because of a medical injury he sustained as a child
         when he was injected with a needle which caused him to lose feeling
         in his right leg.


    (iii)    I accept that the appellant was  employed  in  agriculture  in
         Iran transporting apples and walnuts on behalf of  his  family  and
         other local farmers to nearby markets.  I  accept  that  he  has  a
         brother in Iran and that his family own agricultural land.


    (iv) In so far  as  the  remainder  of  the  appellant's  testimony  is
         concerned, having considered it carefully, I concluded that  I  did
         not believe any of it.  My reasons are given below.

68.  The appellant asserts that he and his brother were approached by a  man
    called Omar Samadi  to  transfer  boxes  at  night-time,  because  Omar
    Samadi's own car had broken down.   The  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    believe the appellant's account, because the appellant said that he had
    no idea that the papers he was delivering were political  leaflets  and
    yet he was paid more than he would normally earn in one week and  this,
    therefore, suggests that the appellant knew that what he was doing  was
    risky and that he was aware that the material was political in  nature.
    The Secretary of State maintains that the  appellant's  assertion  that
    the leaflets were advertising  is  inconsistent  with  the  appellant's
    claim to be concerned and scared about the situation.

69.  The question the appellant was actually asked at  question  53  of  his
    interview was:

           "Did you not think that there was anything  unusual  about  being
           paid so much money for fifteen minutes work?"


    To which the appellant replied:


         "I was concerned but I wasn't sure".


    The appellant was then asked at question 54:


         "When you say you were concerned, what do you mean?"


    to which the appellant replied:


         "I was scared.  I didn't know what it was."


    It was then put to him at question 55:


         "If you were scared, why did you take the risk of delivering  these
    things?"

    And the appellant replied:


         "I wasn't sure.  I didn't know what they were."

70.  I do not believe the appellant when he  says  that  his  expression  of
    concern was because he was transporting goods at  night-time.   If  the
    fact that he was being offered up to seven times more in pay for 15  or
    30 minutes work than he normally earned for a whole week did  not  make
    him concerned, the fact that he was actually required to do  this  work
    at night-time should have given him even  more  reason  to  be  worried
    about what he was getting into.  I believe that at  his  interview  the
    appellant did say that he was concerned about being paid so much  money
    for fifteen minutes work and was scared because he did not know what he
    was being asked to transport.

71.  I do not believe that those who wanted this material moved  would  have
    particularly chosen the appellant and his brother.  It was suggested by
    Counsel that the appellant and his brother were  the  very  people  who
    would have been asked to transport this material,  because  they  would
    not have given rise to any suspicion; they were two people riding their
    motorcycles who were known  to  do  delivery  work  for  local  farmers
    however, the mere fact that they were riding their motorbikes at night-
    time, when they were normally employed to deliver goods  to  a  market,
    would, I believe,  have caused suspicion in anyone who saw  them.   The
    appellant said that he started undertaking this work on  20th  February
    and made three or four deliveries, but on the last  occasion,  when  he
    got to the place where he was supposed to deliver his goods, in  Emklab
    Islami Street, two boys collected some parcels and told  him  to  await
    their return to collect the remaining boxes, but did not  return.   The
    appellant maintains that he then saw a police car, which  being  driven
    fast which then stopped.  The police car had its red  and  blue  lights
    flashing and he saw the boys running  away.   I  believe  that  if  the
    appellant was nearby and rode off on his motorbike, he would have  been
    followed by the police.  The appellant's  evidence  about  whether  the
    leaflets were in boxes or whether they were in bags  was  contradictory
    and confusing.  I asked him to clarify whether the items were  in  bags
    or in boxes and he told me that they were wrapped  up  and  wrapped  up
    into the boxes.  His inability to clarify what he meant  caused  me  to
    believe that he was not telling the truth.

72.  The appellant maintains that he went home and then went to  his  family
    home which was next door.  The following morning, when his brother  had
    not returned, he became concerned and he drove to Buchan with his  wife
    and children and went to his uncle's home.  However, according  to  the
    appellant, his brother was not delivering items to the  same  place  as
    the appellant.  The appellant had  no  cause  to  be  alarmed  for  his
    brother and yet he thought his brother might have  been  arrested.   He
    had no reason to believe his brother would have been arrested,  because
    he did not know that the police had necessarily gone to the other  area
    of the town where his brother was making a delivery.

73.  The appellant claims that, after having been in Buchan for three  days,
    his uncle found out that Yasim had been arrested  for  "conspiracy  for
    political activity to overthrow the government".

74.   I  simply  did  not  find  this  to  be  remotely  credible.   If  the
    appellant's brother had indeed been arrested and had  been  thought  to
    have been involved in political activities intending to  overthrow  the
    government,  I  believe  that  the  authorities  in  Iran  would   have
    immediately gone  to  Yasim's  home  and  to  the  home  of  his  known
    relatives, including his uncle.  The background material shows that the
    Iranian authorities do not tolerate any political  dissent.   When  the
    appellant spoke to his uncle, he told his uncle  that  the  authorities
    had been looking for him at his mother's home and  yet  they  had  not,
    apparently, been to the appellant's uncle's home.  I  did  not  believe
    him.  This finding alone would, in my  view,  justify  my  finding  the
    appellant not credible and dismissing his appeal.

75.  A further reason  I  do  not  believe  the  appellant  is  because  the
    appellant told me that he saw a marked police car with its red and blue
    lights flashing.  However,  when  interviewed,  he  said  that  he  saw
    "security agents".  He made  no  mention  of  any  car  or,  indeed  of
    "policemen".  The appellant also appears to have contradicted  himself,
    because he told me that the boys had collected some  of  the  materials
    from him and had told him to wait, but then did not return  to  collect
    the rest of the materials.  However, at his asylum interview,  he  said
    that when he saw the security men (they were some distance away) and he
    added, "I hadn't quite arrived".  He said, "I was at  the  top  of  the
    street, they were in the middle of the street".  He explained that  the
    security forces were "in the street and the others  saw  them  and  ran
    away".

76.  At his interview, the appellant was asked when  he  realised  that  the
    leaflets were not actually adverts and, in answer to  question  60,  he
    said:-

         "When I saw the security agents  in  the  street  and  I  saw  them
         running away and I ran away as well."


     The  appellant  explained  that  what  he  meant  by  "I  hadn't  quite
    arrived", was that he was at the top of the street a distance away, but
    in the same street.  However, according to what  he  told  me,  he  had
    already delivered some of the documents and was waiting for the boys to
    return to collect the remaining documents.

77.  I do not believe the appellant's account, and for the  reasons  I  have
    given, do not believe that he was ever involved in  the  transportation
    of literature which was subsequently discovered to have  been  material
    of a political nature and which gave rise to a suspicion  that  he  was
    involved in political activities.

78.  I do not believe that on his return to Iran the appellant  will  be  of
    any interest to the Iranian authorities.  He will simply be regarded as
    being another failed asylum seeker who left Iran and sought  asylum  in
    Great Britain.  I do not believe that  he  is  wanted  by  the  Iranian
    authorities, or that he  is  thought  to  have  been  involved  in  any
    activity likely to be regarded as political or anti-government.

79.  I dismiss the appellant's asylum claim.

80.  Since the appellant's humanitarian protection appeal and  human  rights
    appeals under Articles 2 and 3  of  the  European  Convention  for  the
    Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms are  based  on  the
    same factual matrix as the asylum appeal, I dismiss them also.

81.  It was not argued before me  that  the  appellant's  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would cause the appellant's rights under  Article  8  of
    the  European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
    Fundamental Freedoms would be breached.  Nonetheless, I have considered
    the appellant's Article 8 rights.

82.  Article 8 of the  European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms provides for  respect  for  a  person's
    private and family life, their home and correspondence.   An  appellant
    has to show that the subject matter of Article 8 subsists and that  the
    decision of the respondent will interfere with it.  If he does so, then
    it is for the respondent to show that the respondent's decision  is  in
    accordance with the law, that it is for one of the legitimate  purposes
    set out in Article 8(2) (in this case for the economic  well  being  of
    the country, for the prevention  of  disorder  or  crime  and  for  the
    protection of the rights  and  freedoms  of  others)  and  that  it  is
    necessary in  a  democratic  society,  which  means  that  it  must  be
    proportionate.

83.  At paragraph 17 of Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27, Lord Bingham of Cornhill said this:-

         "In considering whether a challenge to  the  Secretary  of  State's
             decision to remove a person must clearly fail,  the  reviewing
             court must, as it seems to me, consider how an appeal will  be
             likely  to  fare  before  an  Adjudicator  as   the   Tribunal
             responsible for deciding an appeal if there  were  an  appeal.
             This  means  that  the  reviewing  court   must   ask   itself
             essentially the questions which would have to be asked  by  an
             Adjudicator.  In a case where removal is resisted in  reliance
             on Article 8, these questions are likely to be:-


             (1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a  public
                  authority with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to
                  respect for his private or (as the  case  may  be)  family
                  life?


             (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences  of  such
                  gravity as potentially to engage the operation of  Article
                  8?


             (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


             (4)  If so, is such interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
                  society in the  interests  of  national  security,  public
                  safety or the economic well-being of the country, for  the
                  prevention of disorder or crime,  for  the  protection  of
                  health or morals, or for the protection of the rights  and
                  freedoms of others?


             (5)   If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate  to   the
                  legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"

84.  I accept that the appellant does of course enjoy family life  with  his
    wife and with his children.  I must have regard to the  best  interests
    of the appellant's children in the way required by paragraph 29 of  the
    judgements in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.  There are no considerations
    inherently more significant that the best interests  of  the  children.
    The appellant's children's best interests are  served  by  their  being
    together and both being with their parents.  However, the  respondent's
    decision does not amount to an  interference  with  that  family  life,
    because the family will be removed from the United Kingdom as a unit.

85.  The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  illegally  on  25th  March,
    2013.  Given the short period of time the appellant  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom, I do not accept that he  has  developed  a  significant
    private life in the United Kingdom.  I accept, however,  that  he  must
    have some limited private life in the United  Kingdom,  but  I  am  not
    prepared to accept that such interference  does  have  consequences  of
    such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of  Article  8.   I
    accept that the threshold is not especially high, bearing in mind  what
    Sedley LJ said at paragraph 28 of AG (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 801.

86.   In  case  I  am  wrong,  I  have  gone  on  to  consider  whether  the
    interference is in accordance with  the  law  and  is  necessary  in  a
    democratic  society  for  the  well  being  of  the  country,  for  the
    prevention of disorder or crime, or for the protection  of  the  rights
    and freedoms of others.  I have concluded that it is.  It has certainly
    not been argued before me that the interference is  not  in  accordance
    with the law or not necessary in a democratic society for the  economic
    well being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, and
    for the protections of the rights and freedoms of others.

87.  I do not believe that removing the appellant and his wife and  children
    from the United Kingdom will cause any breach of the appellant's family
    life and, given that I have heard no evidence at all which  could  lead
    me to believe that the appellant has developed any significant  private
    life in the United Kingdom, I feel bound to conclude that  the  removal
    of the appellant is entirely proportionate.

88.  The making of the decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  did
    involve the making of an error on a point of  law.   I  set  aside  his
    decision.  My decision is that  the  appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights appeals should all be dismissed.



Summary
         The appellant's asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human  rights
         appeals are all dismissed.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
