


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: AA/04879 /2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House            |         Decision and Reasons       |
|                                |Promulgated                         |
|On 7 April 2016                 |         On 29 April 2016           |
|                                |                                    |


                                   Before


                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


                                     J K
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:   Ms N Wilkins, Counsel (instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co)
For the Respondent:  Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
           Judge Freeman on 24 February 2016 against the decision of First-
           tier Tribunal Judge Frankish made  in  a  decision  and  reasons
           promulgated on 8 January 2016 dismissing the Appellant's asylum,
           humanitarian  protection  and  human   rights   appeals.     The
           Appellant's son claimed as her dependant.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of  Namibia,  born  on  1  September
           1982.  She first entered the United Kingdom as a working holiday
           maker on 21 November 2003, which visa was varied to student  and
           extended until 28 February 2007.  She was removed to Namibia  on
           6 February 2008, after she had overstayed and worked  illegally.
           Her son was born on 15 October 2008.  The Appellant claims  that
           she was issued with a United Kingdom  visit  visa  on  26  April
           2013, after she arrived from South Africa with her son to  visit
           the  Nigerian  man  she  claimed  was  her  son's  father.   The
           relationship did not prosper.  The Appellant claimed asylum on 9
           August 2013, which was refused on 3 March 2014.


      3.    The Appellant's claim was summarised on her behalf  as  follows.
           The Appellant was at risk of persecution, serious harm,  inhuman
           or degrading treatment in Namibia as a member  of  a  particular
           social group (single mother with no familial support network who
           has had a child outside her tribe).    The  Appellant  qualified
           for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules under  Article
           8 ECHR.  In any event her son was  British  or  entitled  to  be
           treated as British.


      4.    Judge Frankish set out the Appellant's case at [7]  to  [16]  of
           his decision to which the tribunal refers, and which need not be
           repeated here.  In short the Appellant claimed that  her  mother
           and  uncle  strongly  disapproved  of   her   because   of   her
           relationship with a Nigerian man who had fathered her son.   The
           man had invited her to visit him in the United  Kingdom  but  he
           had been violent to her.  Her son attended school in the  United
           Kingdom and it was not in his best interests to live in Namibia.


      5.    Judge Frankish found that the Appellant was not at real risk  on
           return to Namibia.  He  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
           reliable witness.   The Appellant had not  come  to  the  United
           Kingdom to seek asylum but to  settle  and  start  a  new  life.
           Judge Frankish  found  that  the  Appellant's  son  was  neither
           British nor entitled to British Citizenship through his  alleged
           father.  The child's best interests  were  to  remain  with  his
           mother.  Thus the appeal was dismissed.


       6.   When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Freeman considered that it was arguable that Judge Frankish  had
           misunderstood the Appellant's evidence when he found at [28]  of
           his decision that the Appellant had lived with  her  mother  and
           uncle between 2008 and 2011 without  any  serious  problem.   If
           that were shown to be the  result  of  a  misunderstanding,  the
           appeal would need to be reheard.


      7.    The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  dated  8  March  2016
           indicating that the appeal  was  opposed.   Standard  directions
           were made  by  the  tribunal  and  the  appeal  was  listed  for
           adjudication of whether or not there was  a  material  error  of
           law.






      Submissions


      8.    Ms Wilkins for the Appellant relied on the grounds of appeal and
           on the grant of permission to appeal by the Upper Tribunal.  The
           judge had misunderstood the Appellant's case.  The Appellant had
           not claimed that she had lived permanently with her  mother  and
           uncle from 2008 to 2011.  There was nothing in the  evidence  to
           support that finding.  Q115  to  125  of  the  asylum  interview
           record  had  been  misunderstood.   Q115  was  about  where  the
           Nigerian man claimed to be the Appellant's  child's  father  had
           stayed when he visited in 2010.  The Appellant had not said that
           she was living permanently with her mother at  that  time.   The
           uncle was not living there, but  at  his  farm.   Any  inference
           which the judge had drawn about where the Appellant  was  living
           was mistaken.


      9.    The judge was also mistaken  to  find  that  the  Appellant  had
           changed her story, with reference to  her  time  in  Swakopmund.
           The Appellant's family had been displeased  with  her  from  the
           time of her return.  There had been several such mistakes by the
           judge.


      10.    The  judge  was  also  mistaken  in  his  findings  as  to  the
           Appellant's son's nationality.  If the son's father were British
           then the son was a British Citizen.  No registration process was
           needed.  The judge had left out of account strong indications of
           the son's paternity, such as the fact that the father  sponsored
           the  Appellant's  visit  to  the   United   Kingdom   in   2013.
           Explanations of the two stamps on the birth certificate had been
           given but had not been taken into account.  There  was  no  such
           thing as  "quasi  nationality"  as  the  judge  seemed  to  have
           thought.


      11.   There had been procedural unfairness.   The  judge  should  have
           allowed  an   adjournment   in   order   for   the   Appellant's
           representatives to deal with the fraud allegation  made  on  the
           day of the hearing which was late evidence from the  Respondent.
           There had been a CMR yet the issue had not been raised then,  as
           it should have been.  The Respondent had changed her position.


      12.   The Appellant's son's  best  interests  had  not  been  properly
           considered.  His behavioural  problems  showed  that  he  needed
           stability. The judge had misinterpreted E-A (Article  8  -  best
           interests of  child)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00315  (IAC).   The
           child's wider relationships were  important  and  had  not  been
           considered.   The correct test under EX.1(a) was whether it  was
           reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.


      12.    The  judge  had  used  inappropriate,  sexist   language   when
           discussing the Appellant's private life in the  United  Kingdom.
           It was insensitive and unfounded  to  treat  evidence  of  three
           miscarriages as evidence of promiscuity.  The judge had  allowed
           his personal views to colour his  decision.   That  amounted  to
           bias, as seen in the use of other pejorative  language  such  as
           "helping herself" and "sneaking back", and in the references  to
           the behaviour of the Appellant's son.  The decision and  reasons
           should be set aside, and the appeal reheard before another First-
           tier Tribunal judge.


      13.   Mr Tufan for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's  rule  24
           notice.  He submitted that the decision and  reasons  ultimately
           disclosed no error of law.  The judge had examined the  evidence
           in detail, as his careful summary of the evidence showed.   Both
           elements of the Appellant's case were considered. The  Appellant
           had been disbelieved. The Appellant's complaints  at  most  were
           just a disagreement with the judge's proper findings.  The judge
           had been entitled  to  draw  the  inferences  he  had  from  the
           Appellant's evidence, as seen from [21] and [22] of her  witness
           statement, which was  the  context  from  which  the  judge  had
           worked.   But even the  judge  had  misunderstood  part  of  the
           evidence, any error of law was not material.  There was no  need
           for the Appellant to live near the family she claimed  to  fear,
           she had the option of relocation which  was  not  unduly  harsh.
           The decision and reasons should stand.


      14.   Ms  Wilkins  in  reply  submitted  that  the  answer  which  the
           Appellant gave at her screening interview did  not  exclude  the
           need for asylum.




      No material error of law


      15.   The tribunal reserved its  decision,  which  now  follows.   The
           current country background evidence concerning Namibia  was  not
           in dispute before Judge Frankish. The Appellant's appeal  turned
           on her credibility and, as  that  was  found  entirely  wanting,
           there was no need for any detailed  discussion  of  the  country
           evidence by the judge.


      16.   Permission to appeal had been  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge Parkes on 29 January 2016.  Judge  Parkes  commented  that
           Judge Frankish had used inappropriate language at  [39]  of  his
           decision but  that  had  not  altered  his  conclusions.   Judge
           Frankish's  choice  of  words  may  well  be  thought   somewhat
           unfortunate and perhaps better left unsaid.   Nevertheless,  the
           tribunal is unable to find that any of the words  complained  of
           were in substance untrue or were indicative of bias against  the
           Appellant amounting  to  procedural  unfairness  or  causing  or
           contributing to any misunderstanding of  the  Appellant's  case.
           There was no complaint made about the conduct  of  the  hearing.
           The judge's findings support what he said: there had indeed been
           a series of relationships by the Appellant with  different  men:
           see the letter from the medical centre dated 23  December  2015,
           produced by her.    Similarly,  the  Appellant's  son  had  been
           excluded from his school for 5 days because  of  his  behaviour:
           see the school's  letter  dated  15  December  2015  where  full
           details are stated.


      17.   The main reason that Judge Freeman granted permission to  appeal
           was that he considered that it was arguable that Judge  Frankish
           had misunderstood a central part of  the  Appellant's  evidence,
           namely exactly where she had been living after she  returned  to
           Namibia from the United Kingdom in 2008 until 2011. There was no
           clear, specific or positive assertion by the  Appellant  in  her
           witness statements about that.  The judge's neatly typed  record
           of proceedings  noted  that  the  Appellant  said  under  cross-
           examination that her Nigerian boy friend had stayed "With me and
           my mum".  Asked why her mother had been willing to tolerate  his
           presence  if  the  relationship  were  the  subject  of   family
           disapproval, the Appellant said that the main  problem  was  not
           her mother but her uncle, her mother's brother.  It  is  obvious
           from the evidence as a whole that the Appellant had nowhere else
           to live save with her mother at the material time.


      18.   It was also submitted that the judge had misunderstood where the
           uncle had been living at the material time.  At [28]  the  judge
           stated  that  the  Nigerian  boyfriend  had  "stayed  with   the
           Appellant in the family household  along  with  the  mother  and
           uncle."  The Appellant had not said that her  uncle  lived  with
           her and her mother.  In the judge's record  of  proceedings  the
           Appellant is noted as stating that her uncle lived in "Walabonga
           and 2 houses in Windhoek".  The reference to the  uncle  in  the
           context of the discussion of the evidence in [28] is plainly  to
           the general local presence, power and proximity  of  the  uncle,
           not merely to his actual residence at the  Appellant's  mother's
           house.  The point is the ability  of  and  opportunity  for  the
           uncle to have caused trouble.  The uncle in the judge's  finding
           was well aware of what was happening.


      19.   In the tribunal's view, the Appellant's failure to describe  her
           situation in greater detail meant that Judge Frankish  was  left
           to piece her movements together and his findings  were  in  part
           inferential.   In the tribunal's view, the inferences  which  he
           drew were logical and  were  certainly  open  to  him  from  her
           witness statements, her asylum interview answers at Q.115 to 125
           and her oral evidence.  The Appellant cannot now complain if she
           maintains that he was mistaken as she  failed  to  provide  more
           precise evidence in the first place.  The burden of proof was on
           her from beginning  to  end.   The  tribunal  finds  that  Judge
           Frankish  was  not  mistaken  in  his   understanding   of   the
           Appellant's case as to the sources of her alleged fears.  It was
           open to him to find that the Appellant failed to  mention  those
           fears at her screening interview, had any such fears existed.


      20.   Even it were accepted that there might have  been  a  degree  of
           misunderstanding about exactly where the uncle was  resident  at
           the material time, the key point  was  that  the  uncle  was  in
           Namibia and was of some standing, and so easily  able  to  cause
           difficulty for the Appellant had he chosen to do so.


      21.   Moreover, as Mr Tufan pointed out, even there had been an  error
           in the judge's comprehension of the evidence, any such error was
           not material, as the option of relocation was available  to  the
           Appellant given the vast size  of  Namibia.   Relocation  was  a
           reasonable option for her and would not cause  undue  harshness.
           The judge had no need to reach any findings on that issue as  he
           had completely disbelieved her.


      22.   There is in the tribunal's view nothing of substance to  support
           the assertion that there was an error in  the  judge's  findings
           about the Appellant's son's nationality.  The  burden  of  proof
           lay on the Appellant and she had failed to  discharge  it.   Any
           looseness of language by the  judge  about  "quasi  nationality"
           failed to change that.


      23.   Nor was there procedural unfairness.  As  Judge  Parkes  pointed
           out when he refused  permission  to  appeal  in  the  First-tier
           Tribunal, the nationality of the child was not a new  issue  and
           the documentary fraud allegation raised by the Home  Office  was
           based on publicly available material: see [34] of  the  decision
           and reasons.  It was hardly surprising that there were potential
           problems with official documents  in  the  context  of  Namibia.
           There was no change of position by the Respondent.


      24.   As Judge Parkes also  pointed  out,  the  judge  considered  the
           Appellant's son's best interests at some length.  There  was  no
           independent evidence which was not considered by  the  judge  as
           part of that analysis.  His conclusions were  open  to  him  and
           indeed it is not easy to see how he could lawfully have  reached
           any other conclusion.


      25.   The brief dismissal of the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR claim  was
           all that was required in light of the other findings  which  the
           judge had reached.  In  the  tribunal's  judgment,  the  judge's
           decision was a comprehensive reflection on  the  various  issues
           raised in the  appeal,  and  his  findings  were  thorough.   He
           demonstrated  anxious  scrutiny  throughout  the  determination.
           There was no error of law.  There is no  basis  for  interfering
           with the judge's decision to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal,
           which dismissal must stand.


      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
original    decision, which stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell

