
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04602/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10th November 2014                 |On 13th November 2014                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                             MRS LOICE MUTANDWA
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tettey, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born on the  25th  May
       1972. She appeals against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Baker who, in a determination promulgated on the ... , dismissed  her
       appeal against the respondent' s decision to refuse  her  application
       for asylum and to remove her from the United Kingdom.

   Background

    2. The background to the appeal may be summarised as follows.

    3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom as  long  ago  as  the  21st
       January 1995, having been granted leave to enter  and  remain  for  a
       period of six months as a family visitor. She has thereafter remained
       in the UK unlawfully.

    4.  On  the  8th  October  2003,  the  appellant  claimed  asylum.  That
       application was refused and her appeal was dismissed by Mr J H  Bryan
       in  a  determination  promulgated  on  the  14th  October  2004.  The
       appellant at that time  claimed  that  she  had  been  vocal  in  her
       criticism of the regime before leaving Zimbabwe, that her parents had
       joined the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC)  in  either  2000  or
       2001, and that both her parents and her sister had been beaten up  as
       a result of their association with that  organisation.  She  did  not
       however claim that she had ever been the victim of persecution  prior
       to her departure from Zimbabwe. The appellant also  claimed  at  that
       time to be a lesbian and argued that she would be unable to  live  an
       openly gay life in Zimbabwe.

    5. Mr Bryan found that the appellant had  not  suffered  persecution  in
       Zimbabwe and had come to the United Kingdom in order to complete  her
       education and to better her economic circumstances. He concluded that
       the appellant had only participated in political activities in the UK
       at an extremely low level. She did not  therefore  have  a  political
       profile and was not at risk of persecution on return by reason of her
       political opinion. Whilst  (apparently)  accepting  that  she  was  a
       lesbian, Mr Bryan found that the delay in mentioning this fact as  an
       alternative basis for claiming asylum, coupled with her  own  account
       of having lived an openly  gay  life  in  Zimbabwe,  meant  that  the
       appellant did not genuinely fear being persecuted by  reason  of  her
       sexual orientation. He concluded that whilst societal  discrimination
       against gays was rife in Zimbabwe, lesbianism was not illegal and the
       appellant's own conduct whilst she was residing there showed that she
       was not at  risk  of  persecution.  In  considering  the  appellant's
       position under Article 8 of the  1950  European  Convention  for  the
       Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, Mr  Bryan  noted
       that altough the appellant had a brother in the United  Kingdom,  her
       relationship with him did not appear to extend beyond the  mere  fact
       of being siblings. He therefore  concluded  that  the  appellant  had
       failed to prove the existence of  private  and  family  life  in  the
       United Kingdom and, accordingly, that the evidence did not  establish
       an arguable case under Article 8.

    6. The appellant renewed her application for asylum on the 2nd  February
       2009 and, on the 5th March 2010, also sought discretionary  leave  to
       remain on the basis of her long residence in the United Kingdom.




   The appellant's case

    7. The case that the appellant  presented  before  Judge  Baker  may  be
       summarised as follows.

    8. The appellant's father, who was a retired police Chief Inspector, had
       been killed,  along  with  her  two  brothers,  since  Mr  Bryan  had
       dismissed her previous appeal. She would thus  no  longer  enjoy  the
       protection that he provided her when she had last lived in  Zimbabwe.
       The  Zimbabwean  authorities  would  impute  her  with  her  family's
       association with  the  MDC.  Although  not  currently  in  a  lesbian
       relationship, this is only because she lives with her sister and  her
       sister would disapprove of such conduct. Although she  would  not  be
       subject to any such restraints in Zimbabwe, she would nevertheless be
       forced to hide her sexuality due to  the  risk  of  persecution.  The
       situation in Zimbabwe for openly gay people  had  worsened  since  Mr
       Bryan assessed her claim. Moreover, her long  absence  from  Zimbabwe
       would  present  her  with  very  considerable  difficulties  in   re-
       integrating into her country of origin.

   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    9. Judge Baker's findings are contained within paragraphs 17  to  20  of
       his determination -

       17.    It seems to me, that despite Ms Patel's  attempt  to  raise  a
          chimera-like smokescreen to the contrary, very little has  changed
          since Judge Bryan's unappealed determination, which can no aid the
          Appellant. The political situation in 'Zimbabwe  is  happily  more
          tolerant and settled. The Appellant  has  not  increased  her  own
          political profie and no evidence has been  provided  to  establish
          the reason for the unfortunate death of her father being linked to
          his MDC support. CM remains good law and I  cannot  see,  for  the
          life  of  me,  how  the  established  facts  of  the   Appellant's
          circumstances would put her now at risk on a return to Zimbabwe on
          the grounds of her imputed political opinion. The argument to  the
          contrary has no merit whatsoever, in my view.

       18.    As for the question of her being at risk  due  to  her  sexual
          orientation, LZ also remains  good  law  and  despite  Ms  Patel's
          urging, I am  unable  to  find  any  disinterested  and  objective
          persuasive  evidence  that  attitudes   and   circumstances   have
          adversely changed since that case for the position of lesbians  in
          Zimbabwe. The Appellant suffered no problems before she left home,
          despite her openness and family disapproval which still  pertains.
          She has been discrete of late I the UK, she  claims,  on  economic
          grounds in respect of her sister. It  could be said  that  if  she
          can do it here, the same would apply there, should there be a need
          to, but the caselaw suggest that there is none.  Whilst  I  accept
          the freedom of Bulawayo urged may present certain difficulties she
          has coped without difficulty in Harare in the past  and  doubtless
          could do so again. All these  comments  are  hypothesised  on  her
          actually being a lesbian, which was queried at  a  late  stage  on
          behalf of the Respondent. Since I find  it  to  be  irrelevant  in
          fact, I nned to make no further findings thereupon.

       19.    Accordingly, in respect of both heads of the asylum  claim  as
          renewed, I have no difficulty in finding  that  they  have  little
          merit and should be dismissed. However, with regard to  the  human
          rights element, both parties agree that in relation to Articles  2
          and 3 any claims do stand and fall with the asylum  claim  and  so
          both fall too.

       20.    With regard to Article 8, however, there no argument raised re
          family life, exceptional and compassionate circumstances etc.  but
          only as to whether the long residence period of 14  years  or  the
          July 2013 changes to 20 years, should apply. I  find  the  claimed
          applicability of the Edgehill situation is untenable,  as,  unlike
          the facts therein, this is a case of the applicability of the  law
          at the date of the decision, i.e. at June 2014. As such, 20  years
          applies and  the  Apop  cannot  attain  any  advantage  therefrom,
          despite  her  long  standing  avoidance  of  engagement  with  the
          immigration authorities and law. I have also in my considerations,
          paid due regard to Section 9 of the Immigration Act 2014  and  via
          it, to Section 117 of the 2002  Act  in  relation  to  the  public
          interest. As such, in the round, I can find no  justification  for
          the application of Article 8 relief for the Appellant, whose claim
          thereon fails too.

   The grounds of appeal

   10. The grounds of appeal against Judge Baker's  findings  are  sometimes
       difficult  to  follow.  They  use   of   improbably-long   sentences,
       interspersed with a seemingly  endless  series  of  semi-colons  (see
       especially paragraph 9). However, but for  the  failure  to  indicate
       whether permission has been granted to argue the grounds relating  to
       the judge's treatment of Article 8, the appellant's grounds appear to
       be accurately summarised at paragraph 2 of the grant of permission to
       appeal -

          Having had regard to the grounds for permission to appeal and  the
          determination, I am satisfied that in reaching  his  decision  the
          judge arguably made an error of law for the following reasons: -

          a. A central part of the Appellant's  claim  is  that  she  is  a
             lesbian and therefore at risk on return to Zimbabwe.

          b. The Respondent put the Appellant's claimed sexuality in  issue
             (paragraph 14), however the  judge  at  paragraph  18  of  the
             determination made no clear finding regarding the  Appellant's
             claimed sexuality.

          c. It  is  arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
             reasoning as to  why  the  Appellant  could  "doubtless"  live
             without difficulty in Harare (paragraph 18), a place where the
             Appellant has not lived since at least 1996 (paragraph 9).

          d. It is arguable that  the  judge  failed  to  engage  with  the
             background  country  information  provided  regarding  current
             risks to the LGBT community in Zimbabwe (paragraph 18).

   In addition to the above, the grounds argue that the judge was wrong  to
       state that there was no evidence to link the death of the appellant's
       father with his support for the MDC. Such evidence, it  is  said,  is
       contained within the appellant's witness statement, dated the 7th May
       2013, and also in  his  death  certificate.  I  will  consider  these
       grounds before I consider the challenge that is made to  the  judge's
       Article 8 assessment.




   Analysis

   11. It is true that the judge did not  make  a  specific  finding  as  to
       whether the appellant  was  gay.  However,  this  was  immaterial  to
       outcome of the appeal. This is because, as with Mr Bryan before  him,
       Judge Baker considered that the appellant's account of her  sexuality
       and desired lifestyle, taken at its highest, would  not  put  her  at
       risk of persecution on return to Zimbabwe. The only  issue  that  now
       arises is whether the judge was entitled  to  reach  that  conclusion
       upon the evidence that was before him.

   12. The judge's finding that the appellant could  "doubtless"  return  to
       and live in Harare was based not only upon  the  fact  that  she  had
       lived there many years  ago,  but  also  upon  the  findings  of  the
       Tribunal in LZ (homosexuals) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT  487  (IAC).  In
       that case,  it  was  held  that  whilst  lesbians  may  face  greater
       difficulties than gay men, there  is  no  general  risk  to  them  in
       Zimbabwe and that being openly gay is not in itself a  decisive  risk
       factor. The somewhat bold proposition that is now being  advanced  on
       behalf of the appellant is that Judge Baker made an error of  law  by
       concluding that the background country information did not warrant  a
       departure from the relevant Country Guidance case-law.

   13. The judge did not provide  an  analysis  of  the  background  country
       information that had been placed before him. That does not in  itself
       constitute a material error of law. To succeed  in  her  appeal,  the
       appellant would have to show that such information demonstrated  that
       the situation for lesbians in Zimbabwe had deteriorated  to  such  an
       extent that the findings of the Tribunal in LZ  could  no  longer  be
       said to hold good, Mr Tettey  took  me  to  various  reports  in  the
       appellant's county information bundle, the majority of which were, as
       he aptly described them, "anecdotal" incidents of  adverse  treatment
       by both state and  non-state  actors  of  gay  men  and  lesbians  in
       Zimbabwe. However, these reports do not  in  my  judgement  begin  to
       establish that incidents of this kind are  more  prevalent  now  than
       they were when the Tribunal made its findings in LZ. Neither do  they
       establish that there is  now  a  general  risk  of  persecutory  ill-
       treatment by reason of membership of this  particular  social  group.
       Moreover, as Mrs Petersen correctly observed,  the  majority  of  the
       incidents involved high-profile individuals who were campaigning  for
       the rights  of  LGBT  members.  There  was  no  suggestion  that  the
       appellant intended to involve herself in such campaigning.

   14. The judge was correct in his assertion that  there  was  no  evidence
       that the death of the appellant's late father was  connected  to  his
       membership of the MDC. To the extent that the death certificate could
       be considered a reliable document (it was produced by  the  appellant
       many years after the event) it established only that  he  had  met  a
       violent end. Whilst  the  appellant  had  indeed  asserted  that  her
       father's death was associated with his MDC membership,  she  had  not
       adduced any evidence to support that assertion [see paragraph  11  of
       her witness statement, dated the 7th May 2005]. As her father's death
       was said to have occurred in 2005, when  the  appellant  was  in  the
       United Kingdom, she could not have had any direct  knowledge  of  the
       persons responsible for it.

   15. With regard to the claimed risk to the appellant  by  reason  of  her
       actual or imputed political opinion, the judge correctly applied  the
       findings of the Tribunal in  CM  (EM  country  guidance;  disclosure)
       Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC), in which it was held that there are
       many areas of the country, including areas within the capital Harare,
       where a person could live without  being  subjected  to  the  ZANU-PF
       'loyalty test'.

   16.  I  therefore  turn,  finally,  to  the  judge's  treatment  of   the
       appellant's claim under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for
       the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. The  grounds
       complain, with some justification, that whilst the  judge  paid  lip-
       service at paragraph 20 to the  obligation  to  have  regard  to  the
       public interest factors listed in Section 117B  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  he   nevertheless   failed   to
       demonstrate that he had applied them to the individual facts of  this
       appeal. The grounds point out that the appellant  is  fluent  in  the
       English language and is unlikely to be  a  financial  burden  on  the
       state in light of her qualifications as  a  nurse.  Furthermore,  the
       Section enjoins the decision-maker to consider these factors as being
       in the public interest. The grounds also argue that the appellant has
       been in the United Kingdom for some 18 years, during which  time  she
       has not committed any  crimes  and  has  fully  integrated  into  the
       British way of life.

   17. However, a person's human rights are not enhanced by the  absence  of
       criminality and financial dependence upon the state; such absence  is
       merely one less potential reason for the Secretary of State  to  seek
       the removal of a person who is  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.
       Furthermore, the Section enjoins the decision-maker to attach  little
       weight to private life that has been established when  that  person's
       presence in the United Kingdom is unlawful. That principle applies to
       the overwhelming majority of the time that the appellant has spent in
       the United Kingdom.

   18. The judge did not consider the extent to  which  the  length  of  the
       appellant's absence from Zimbabwe might present significant obstacles
       to her re-integration in that country. This  is  a  matter  which  is
       potentially decisive under  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  Immigration
       Rules. Although that paragraph was not in force at the  date  of  the
       appellant's application, difficulties of reintegration in the country
       of return are also relevant (if not  decisive)  when  undertaking  an
       holistic assessment of a person's claim under Article 8. The  failure
       to have regard to such potential difficulties is not  advanced  as  a
       ground of appeal. I nevertheless  consider  that  it  is  an  obvious
       point, which it would be unconscionable to overlook. However, I  have
       concluded that this failure is ultimately immaterial to  the  outcome
       of the appeal. This is because, had he  considered  the  matter,  the
       judge would have been bound to note that the appellant had spent  the
       entirety of her formative years in Zimbabwe,  that  she  speaks  both
       Shona and English, and that she claims to be a  qualified  nurse.  In
       those circumstances, there  is  no  obvious  reason  why  she  should
       struggle to  find  work  or  otherwise  reintegrate  into  Zimbabwean
       society, notwithstanding her prolonged absence from and claimed  lack
       of surviving family members in that country. When these  matters  are
       placed in the  balance,  together  with  the  other  factors  that  I
       considered in the previous paragraph, there is no reason  to  suppose
       that the judge's decision would have been any different, or that  his
       decision was not reasonably open to him on the facts of this  appeal.
       If I had re-made the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on Article 8
       grounds, I would thus have come to precisely the same conclusion.

   Notice of Decision

   19. The appeal is dismissed.

   Anonymity is not directed.


   Signed                                   Date 10th November 2014


   David Kelly
   Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




