
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04572/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On the 2nd November 2016           |On the 8th November 2016           |

                                   Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                  Between:
                                    M.S.
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal

Representation:
For the Claimant: Miss Heikkila (Counsel)
For the Secretary of State:     Mr  Duffy  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Metzer promulgated on the 15th  August  2016,  in
       which he allowed the Claimant's appeal on Human Rights grounds  under
       Article 3.

    2. The full reasons for the decision of Judge Metzer are set out  within
       his judgement, but in summary, the  Judge  found  that  the  Claimant
       suffered from learning difficulties and also suffered  from  epilepsy
       at [17] and would have fits if he were not adequately managed,  which
       was necessary on a daily basis by support  workers  checking  on  him
       morning and evening to ensure he took his medication and assisted him
       in other regards specifically in  relation  to  his  college  and  to
       ensure that  he  did  not  become  involved  with  groups  who  would
       destabilise him, "for example the taking of drugs and the failure  to
       ensure that he took his medication as and when is necessary.".

    3. The Judge went on at [18] to find that:

           "In all the circumstances, in recognising that this  is  not  an
           easy case in  relation  to  the  threshold  as  to  whether  the
           Appellant's 'moral integrity' would be adversely affected by his
           return to Afghanistan, given that he would  be  returning  as  a
           very young man to Afghanistan with no family ties and  where  he
           has been in the United Kingdom since June 2009, over 7 years and
           given the daily difficulties in relation to the medication,  the
           risk of epileptic fits if such medication  was  not  taken,  his
           learning difficulties, and the  benefits  gained  in  the  years
           since being in the United Kingdom which has meant  he  is  in  a
           much better position to obtain employment if his  medication  is
           continued to be successfully managed, I find that the  Appellant
           has established that there will be a breach of Article 3 of  the
           ECHR on the basis of a breach of his moral integrity,  were  the
           Appellant to be returned to Afghanistan".

    4. The Secretary of State has sought to appeal against that decision for
       the grounds set out within the Grounds of Appeal.  This  again  is  a
       matter of record and is therefore not repeated in its entirety  here,
       but in summary, it is argued within the Grounds of  Appeal  that  the
       case falls a long way short of the Article  3  threshold  in  medical
       cases and that the test of 'moral integrity' is a consideration under
       Article 8 rather than Article 3.  It is argued that the  Claimant  is
       not suffering from the kind of mental illness that would engaged  the
       physical and moral integrity paradigm and that it is argued  that  in
       the case of Bensaid v The United Kingdom (App  Number  44599/98)  the
       ECtHR decided that "Mental health must be regarded as a crucial  part
       of private life  associated  with  the  aspect  of  moral  integrity.
       Article 8 protects the right to identity  and  personal  development,
       and the right to establish and develop relationships with other human
       beings and the outside world... the preservation of mental  stability
       is  in  that  context  an  indispensable  precondition  to  effective
       enjoyment of the right to respect for a private life.".  It is argued
       that the Claimant suffers from  epilepsy  and  learning  difficulties
       rather than the kind of psychotic  illness  that  could  lead  to  an
       inability to develop relationships and  prevent  him  from  having  a
       private life.  It is said that the Judge misdirected himself  in  law
       and failed to give adequate reasons for the findings made.

    5. Permission to appeal has been granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Ransley on the 21st September  2016,  when  she  found  that  it  was
       arguable that the Judge erred in law due to a failure to identify and
       apply the Article 3 threshold and it was further  arguable  that  the
       Judge erred at [18] by stating that "the threshold for Article  3  is
       one relating to 'moral integrity'; the Judge proceeded to  allow  the
       appeal under Article 3 on that basis.  The Judge stated at [19]  that
       he made no findings on ECHR  Article  8".   Judge  Ransley  therefore
       considered that the decision did contain arguably material errors  of
       law and therefore granted permission to appeal.  There  has  been  no
       Rule 24 Reply filed by the Claimant.

    6. It was on that basis that the  case  came  before  me  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal.  In the Upper Tribunal, I had the benefit of  hearing  oral
       submissions by the legal representatives on behalf of both parties.

    7. Mr Duffy on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon the  Grounds
       of Appeal and argued that the moral and physical integrity tests  set
       out in the case of  Bensaid  related  to  cases  where  there  was  a
       nullification of self, in that case due to psychosis, such  that  the
       Claimant would not be able to have a private life.   He  argued  that
       health cases in respect of Article 3,  and  cases  such  as  D  v  UK
       (Application 30240/96) (1997) 24 EHRR 423 related to  deathbed  cases
       where the Claimant was dying and where they would suffer so much  due
       to the lack of treatment during the terminal stage of their  illness,
       that it would amount to a breach of Article 3.   He  argued  that  in
       those cases the suffering whilst dying  through  lack  of  treatment,
       engaged Article 3.  He argued that although the Claimant in this case
       may have epilepsy, and he  argued  "may  bang  his  head"  and  could
       possibly die as a result, did not mean that Article 3 was engaged. He
       referred me to the case of GS and EO (Article 3 - health cases) India
       [2012] UKUT 00397 (IAC), which involved cases of renal failure, where
       if the Claimants were removed, there would be a  dramatic  shortening
       of their life, in which it was still said not to amount to  a  breach
       of Article 3, in the absence of suffering  sufficient  to  amount  to
       inhumane or degrading treatment.  He argued that Article  3  did  not
       involve the Article 8 balancing act and that there  was  a  threshold
       that had to be met in Article 3 cases.  He argued that  the  Claimant
       could not succeed under Article 3 or Article  8  and  that  the  real
       claim should have been in respect  of  the  asylum  claim  and  under
       Paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  but  that  the  Judge
       appeared to have been led into error in dealing with the case  purely
       on an Article 3 basis, and misled into having  made  no  findings  in
       respect of the Article 8 claim.  He argued that there was a  material
       error of law and that  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Metzer should be set aside.

    8. Miss Heikkila on behalf of the Claimant argued, inter alia, that  the
       Judge made findings which were open to him in respect of  Article  3.
       She argued that it was not simply whether or not the  Claimant  would
       bang his head but whether or not there would be effective  treatment,
       were he to be returned to Afghanistan.  Miss Heikkila referred me  to
       the Court of Appeal case of RS (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of  State  for
       the Home  Department  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  839  and  in  particular  to
       paragraphs 28 to 30 of that decision and argued  that  the  suffering
       which arose from naturally occurred illness, physical or mental,  may
       be covered by Article 3.  She argued that  the  Judge  was  right  to
       consider the Claimant's epilepsy under Article 3 and  the  Judge  had
       determined whether or not the circumstances of this  individual  were
       sufficiently exceptional to amount to a breach  of  Article  3.   She
       then referred me to the Upper Tribunal case of GS and EO (Article 3 -
       health cases) India [2012] UKUT 00398, and in particular to paragraph
       85 of the judgement.  She argued that the  State's  obligation  under
       Article 3 could arise where the individual alleged treatment  is  not
       directly or indirectly the responsibility of the receiving State  but
       arises from naturally occurring illness or disease  or  condition  or
       treatment (in particular life sustaining  treatment)  which  was  not
       available in the receiving State.  She argued that what may amount to
       exceptional circumstances depended upon the individual  circumstances
       a person will find themselves in their home State and that the  Judge
       needed to make a holistic appraisal of the circumstances and that  no
       one individual factor was crucial or should stand apart or above  the
       others.  She argued the Judge was within his rights to  consider  the
       case under Article 3 and to allow it on that basis.

    9. Miss Heikkila then argued that in respect of whether or not the Judge
       had arguably applied a 'moral  integrity'  test  to  Article  3,  she
       accepted the decision was poorly drafted and was at  times  difficult
       to read and that the reasoning was not clear, but she argued that the
       Judge had applied the correct principles in making his  decision  and
       that it was open to him to  raise  the  question  of  the  moral  and
       physical integrity of the Claimant in  respect  of  Article  3.   She
       referred me to the Upper Tribunal case of Akhalu (health claim:  ECHR
       Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC), and argued that as was stated  at
       paragraph 44 of the judgement, when considering proportionality,  the
       Judge was required to have regard to  all  the  circumstances  relied
       upon by both parties and that if the Judge had left  out  of  account
       aspects of the Claimant's private life as established here because it
       could not be shown that they had a direct bearing on  her  prognosis,
       the balancing exercise would  be  fundamentally  flawed  and  legally
       deficient and that the consequences of removal for the  health  of  a
       Claimant who would not be able to  access  equivalent  healthcare  in
       their country of nationality as was available  in  this  country  was
       plainly relevant to the question of proportionality in removal cases.
        She argued that has the Judge applied the same test under Article 8,
       he would have come to the same conclusion. She submitted that it  was
       very difficult to understand why Article 8 had  not  been  considered
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer.

   10. Although she conceded that the threshold  for  Article  3  is  not  a
       'moral integrity' test, Miss  Heikkila  did  argue  that  it  was  an
       integral part of a consideration of the test under Article 3 and that
       the Judge had correctly applied the threshold as set out  within  the
       GS and EO case.  She said that the Judge had  arrived  at  the  right
       decision, although it might be unclear as to how he  had  got  there.
       She further referred me to the case of SQ (Pakistan) and  Another,  R
       (on the application of)  v  Upper  Tribunal  Immigration  and  Asylum
       Chamber and Another [2013] EWCA Civ 1251, and argued  that  following
       this case, there was a strong link between Article 3  and  Article  8
       and that it would be a material error to separate  the  Articles  and
       that the  Judge  had  to  apply  the  moral  and  physical  integrity
       threshold.

   11. The parties ask that the anonymity direction  previously  granted  by
       Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Black  be  maintained,  even   though
       seemingly no anonymity direction  was  made  by  Judge  Metzer.  Both
       parties submitted that if there was a material error of law, that the
       case  should  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   for
       rehearing, but at that rehearing,  everything  should  be  considered
       including asylum, humanitarian protection  and  whether  or  not  the
       refusal would amount to a breach of Articles  2,  3  or  8,  and  not
       simply the Article 3 consideration as undertaken by Judge Metzer.

  My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   12. It is relevant to consider in this appeal, the history of the  appeal
       itself.  The original decision by the Secretary of  State  to  refuse
       what was the Claimant's asylum claim was made  by  the  Secretary  of
       State on the 24th June 2014.  The  Claimant  sought  to  appeal  that
       decision to the First-tier Tribunal, and that appeal  was  originally
       heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Feeney on the  12th  May  2015  at
       Taylor House in London, with her decision being dated the  15th  June
       2015.  In that judgement,  Judge  Feeney  dismissed  the  Appellant's
       asylum  appeal,  and  also  dismissed  his  appeal  on   humanitarian
       protection and on Human Rights grounds under Articles 2, 3 and  8  of
       the ECHR.  The Claimant sought to appeal that decision to  the  Upper
       Tribunal and that appeal was heard and  considered  by  Deputy  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Black on the 4th April 2016, with his  decision  being
       dated the 15th April 2016.  Within  Judge  Black's  decision  in  the
       Upper Tribunal, he found that the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Feeney did contain material errors of law, inter alia,  on  the
       basis that First-tier Tribunal Judge Feeney had failed to  take  into
       account the expert evidence of Mr Sellwood, a Chartered Psychologist,
       in respect of the Claimant's learning disabilities, and that had  she
       done so, her findings on the Claimant's credibility might  have  been
       different  and  Judge  Black  found  that   her   failure   to   give
       consideration to Mr Sellwood's expert opinion was a fundamental  flaw
       in her assessment of credibility.

   13. Judge Black also  found  that  there  was  a  failure  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Feeney to consider the expert evidence of a Miss Kamal
       and that the Judge had only seemingly attached weight to Miss Kamal's
       expert report, regarding the plausibility of the  Claimant's  account
       of his treatment in Afghanistan as an afterthought in  the  decision-
       making process as it appeared  under  the  heading  of  "Article  8",
       rather than when Judge Feeney was considering the Claimant's  overall
       credibility.  Judge Black therefore set aside the decision of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Feeney, and remitted the case back to the  First-
       tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo, before  any  other  judge  other
       than First-tier Tribunal Judge Feeney.

   14. It is on that basis  the  case  was  then  listed  before  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Metzer at Taylor House on the 8th August 2016.  Sadly,
       despite the fact that Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Black had  remitted
       the case for a complete hearing de novo, it appears having  read  the
       judgement of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Metzer  and  in  particular,
       paragraph 2 of his judgment, that as he stated:

           "At the hearing, both parties agreed that the appeal on  asylum,
           Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)  and
           Article 8 of the ECHR on the basis of  the  Appellant's  private
           life in the United Kingdom need not be determined before me  and
           the appeal will proceed solely on the basis of the claim that to
           return  the  Appellant  today  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
           available about him irrespective of the background of his  claim
           would amount to a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR, and  arguably
           Article 8 of the ECHR, although  the  parties  agreed  that  the
           issue of 'moral integrity' could best be dealt with as Article 3
           ECHR alone.  All other issues were therefore  suspended  pending
           the  determination  of  the  appeal  on  the  issue  of   'moral
           integrity' Article 3 ECHR appeal which proceeded before me".

   15. In my judgement, regrettably, Judge Metzer has been led into error by
       Counsel acting on behalf of both parties in this case.  The case  had
       been remitted to him by Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Black  for  a
       consideration of all issues including  the  asylum  appeal,  and  the
       Claimant's Article 2 and 3 claim on the basis of risk upon return  to
       Afghanistan, and also in respect of the Claimant under Article 3  and
       Article 8, both in terms of  his  health  claim  and  any  family  or
       private life in the United Kingdom.  However, despite that, the Judge
       was induced by both Counsel simply to consider the case on an Article
       3 footing, and solely seemingly on the basis of him  considering  the
       issue of 'moral integrity' which both Counsel seemed to  imply  could
       be best dealt with as an Article 3 ECHR  consideration,  rather  than
       under Article 8.

   16. As a result, Judge Metzer considered the Appellant's  case  and  made
       findings between [14 and 19]  and  in  so  doing,  applied  to  those
       findings,  a  test  as  to  whether  or  not  the  Claimant's  'moral
       integrity' would be adversely affected by his return  to  Afghanistan
       and found specifically at  [18]  that  "I  found  the  Appellant  has
       established that there would be a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR  on
       the basis of a breach of his moral integrity were the Appellant to be
       returned to Afghanistan.".

   17. However, the paradigm Article 3 case and the test to  be  applied  in
       Article 3 health cases, was set out Baroness Hale in the case of N  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 31,  where  at
       paragraph 69, she stated "In my view, therefore, the  test,  in  this
       sort of case, is whether the Appellant's illness has reached  such  a
       critical stage (i.e. he is dying) that it would be inhuman  treatment
       to deprive him of the care which he is currently receiving  and  send
       him home to an early death, unless there is care available  there  to
       enable him to meet that fate with dignity."

   18. Regrettably, Judge Metzer has not considered the very high  threshold
       for Article 3 in respect of health  cases,  and  has  simply,  in  an
       Article 3 context, applied a test of  'moral  integrity'  and  as  to
       whether or not there has been a breach of Article 3 on the basis of a
       breach of his moral integrity.

   19. Nowhere within his judgement has Judge Metzer, properly considered or
       applied the correct test for consideration of an Article 3 case,  and
       he has wrongly relied upon simply whether or not  there  would  be  a
       breach  of  the  Claimant's  moral  integrity,  in   respect   of   a
       consideration of an Article 3 claim.   The  fact  that  a  Claimant's
       'moral integrity' might be interfered with to the extent  that  as  a
       possibility, returning someone to their home country may give rise to
       such suffering and potentially be such an exceptional case as to lead
       to a breach of Article 3 on health grounds,  does  not  mean  that  a
       breach of the Claimant's moral integrity, is in itself sufficient  to
       lead to a breach of Article 3.  That is not the test.   The  decision
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer therefore does contain  an  error
       of law in this regard, as the learned First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has
       applied the wrong test.

   20. Further, although it is argued by Miss Heikkila that the  Judge  came
       to the right decision, the Judge clearly from his own  comments,  has
       not considered the case under Article 8, and as correctly  stated  by
       Mr Duffy on behalf of the Secretary of State, the ECHR in the case of
       Bensaid v The United Kingdom (App number  44599/98),  made  it  clear
       that "mental health must also  be  regarded  as  a  crucial  part  of
       private life associated with the aspect of moral integrity.   Article
       8 protects a right to identity and personal development, and a  right
       to establish and develop relationships with other  human  beings  and
       the outside world... the preservation of mental stability is in  that
       context an indispensable precondition to effective enjoyment  of  the
       right to respect of private life.".

   21.  In  such   circumstances,   in   effect,   the   'moral   integrity'
       considerations and test  under  Bensaid,  is  a  test  applicable  to
       Article 8, rather than Article 3.  Although, I do  bear  in  mind  in
       that regard that moral integrity considerations  can  be  taken  into
       account in respect of Article 3, that it is not the test.  The  Judge
       has not properly considered moral integrity under  the  correct  test
       under Article 3, and in circumstances where Judge Metzer has not made
       any findings on Article 8, in respect of the Claimant's private  life
       and as to whether  or  not  were  the  Claimant  to  be  returned  to
       Afghanistan with his learning difficulties and his epilepsy  and  the
       need for  daily  support  by  support  workers,  although  the  Judge
       considered that it would be a breach of his 'moral integrity' he  has
       not considered, whether or not any interference with  the  Claimant's
       moral integrity would be sufficient such as to mean that there  would
       be a breach of his right to private life, were he to be removed  from
       the United Kingdom.

   22. I do not consider that in the circumstances, the  findings  of  Judge
       Metzer in respect of Article 3 and the consideration that he gave  to
       whether or not the removal of the Claimant would amount to  a  breach
       of his moral integrity, is in itself sufficient to mean  that  I  can
       say that, had the Judge properly considered the  correct  test  under
       Article 3, or indeed, applied the moral integrity test to Article  8,
       that the decision would have been the same.  In my judgement, in such
       circumstances, the error of  law  of  Judge  Metzer,  in  considering
       Article 3 simply on the basis of whether or  not  there  would  be  a
       breach of the Claimant's moral integrity were  he  to  be  return  to
       Afghanistan, does amount to a material error of law,  such  that  the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer should be set  aside  in
       its entirety.

   23. I direct that the appeal be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal,
       to be reheard before any First-tier Tribunal Judges other than First-
       tier Tribunal Judges Metzer and Feeney.  I further direct, as  agreed
       between the parties, that at such rehearing, a material error  having
       been  found,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  fully  consider  the
       entirety of the Claimant's claim including his  asylum,  humanitarian
       protection and the entirety of his Human Rights claims under Articles
       2, 3 and 8, rather than simply a consideration of  his  appeal  under
       Article 3 as was conducted by Judge Metzer.

  Notice of Decision

  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer  does  contain  material
  errors of law and is set aside in its entirety.  The appeal  is  remitted
  back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  before  any  First-tier
  Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer and First-tier
  Tribunal Judge Feeney.

  At that rehearing, the entirety of the  Claimant's  claim  including  his
  asylum, humanitarian protection, and the entirety  of  his  Human  Rights
  claims under Articles 2, 3 and 8 should be considered.

  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Black did order anonymity in this case, at  a
  time when the Claimant was an adult.  Miss Heikkila asked me to  maintain
  such anonymity direction, and that was  not  objected  to  by  Mr  Duffy.
  Therefore, I do order anonymity pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
  Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or
  Court directs otherwise, the Claimant is granted anonymity.  No report of
  these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member
  of his family.  This direction applies  both  the  Claimant  and  to  the
  Secretary of State.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to
  contempt of court proceedings.

  Signed

  [pic]

  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty   Dated 3rd November 2016
