

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/04939/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Promulgated Sent             |
|On 20 March 2014                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                EDEN AFWERKI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Duncan, instructed by Blavo & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant has permission to appeal to  this  Tribunal  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell dismissing her appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State on 8 May 2013  that  she
    should be removed as an illegal entrant following the  refusal  of  her
    asylum claim.  The appellant's appeal is on asylum grounds: she  claims
    to be a national of Eritrea and at risk  as  a  Pentecostal  Christian.
    The Judge found that she had not established that she was a national of
    Eritrea; he found that  she  was  a  national  of  Ethiopia.   He  also
    regarded her  claim  to  be  a  Pentecostal  Christian  as  lacking  in
    credibility.

 2. All three of those findings  have  been  challenged  before  us  by  Mr
    Duncan.  The position is, however, that  if  the  claimant  is  not  of
    Eritrean nationality, she is not at risk as  a  Pentecostal  Christian.
    Her nationality is therefore the crucial issue.

 3. In making his findings, the judge noted that the appellant had produced
    no documentary evidence of her nationality, that her first language was
    Amharic, which is not the language of Eritrea but of Ethiopia, and that
    the evidence of her knowledge of other languages (including those  used
    in Eritrea) was limited because all her dealings with  the  authorities
    had been in Amharic.  He also indicated that he had, in general,  found
    the appellant to  lack  credibility.   The  written  grounds  on  which
    permission was granted (not drafted by Mr Duncan) read, incorrectly  in
    our judgement, a great deal into the determination.  For  example,  the
    clearly  correct  statement  that  the  appellant   has   provided   no
    documentary evidence of her nationality is read  as  though  the  judge
    were asserting a requirement to provide documentary  evidence.    There
    is no such requirement, and the judge was not asserting  it.   But  the
    position is that there is no documentary evidence in this case.  So far
    as the points about language are  concerned,  the  grounds  assert,  in
    effect, that they do not exclude the  possibility  of  the  appellant's
    being Eritrean.   The  comment  that  "her  knowledge  of  the  primary
    language of Eritrea is limited and not really demonstrated because  she
    has chosen to use Amharic in all of her dealings with the  authorities"
    is asserted as an error because the appellant understood nine questions
    at her interview in Tigrinya (a language of Eritrea), although she gave
    the answers in Amharic.   Finally,  the  invocation  of  a  finding  in
    relation to her credibility is asserted as an error in law on the basis
    that it is possible for a person not to be telling the truth about  one
    thing, but to be telling the truth about another: selected phrases from
    two old authorities are cited in support of that  proposition,  without
    any reference to the numerous subsequent judicial pronouncements on the
    topic.

 4. The truth of the matter is, as Mr Duncan acknowledged before  us,  that
    there is no positive evidence of  the  appellant's  nationality,  other
    than her own assertion.  She said that her parents were  Eritrean,  but
    they and she are well-travelled and there was no evidence either as  to
    the acquisition of Eritrean (as distinct from Ethiopian) nationality at
    the time of her birth or subsequently, nor of anything else that  might
    bear directly on the appellant's own nationality.   Even  if  she  were
    regarded as wholly credible on this issue, she could only  report  what
    she thought she had been told: it is not suggested  that  she  had  any
    knowledge of  her  own  that  could  have  any  bearing  on  her  legal
    nationality.  As the exchange in the interview shows, the  use  of  the
    language of Eritrea did not come naturally to the appellant.  It is not
    suggested that she is wholly ignorant of Tigrinya, but,  as  the  judge
    said, the evidence  of  her  familiarity  with  Eritrean  languages  is
    "restricted".

 5. It was for the appellant to establish her claim.  In the present  case,
    as we have said, showing that her nationality is that of Eritrea was  a
    crucial element of that claim.  The judge made a finding on it,  taking
    into account all the evidence before him, not overvaluing it in the way
    suggested by the grounds, but determining  whether  it  showed  to  the
    appropriate  lower  standard  that  the  appellant  was   of   Eritrean
    nationality.  The judge's conclusion that she had not established  that
    she was Eritrean  appears  to  us  to  be  without  fault.   Mr  Duncan
    submitted that the judge could have found, on the evidence before  him,
    that the  appellant  had  established  her  case:  but  the  fact  that
    alternative conclusions may have been available does not begin to  show
    that the judge was not entitled to reach the conclusion he did.

 6. If the appellant is not Eritrean, the overwhelming likelihood  is  that
    she is Ethiopian.  The evidence of her language perhaps slightly points
    to her  being  Ethiopian;  but  the  appellant  did  not  claim  to  be
    Ethiopian, and did not show that she would  be  at  risk  of  any  ill-
    treatment  as  an   Ethiopian   returned   to   Ethiopia.    In   these
    circumstances, the judge's duties in relation to the  question  whether
    the appellant's nationality is that of Ethiopia are very  limited.   In
    truth, his finding that she is of Ethiopian nationality is not relevant
    to her claim, but is simply the obverse of his conclusion that she  had
    not established that she is Eritrean.  We see no  reason  to  interfere
    with the judge's finding that the appellant is Ethiopian.

 7. So far as concerns the judge's examination of the appellant's claim  to
    be a Pentecostal Christian, it would be, as we remarked at the hearing,
    possible to find fault: but  this  aspect  of  her  claim  is  entirely
    irrelevant unless she is Eritrean.  In  the  circumstances,  therefore,
    any error of law in the  judge's  conclusions  as  to  the  appellant's
    religious views and practice make no difference to the outcome  of  the
    appeal.

 8. For the foregoing reasons, we conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's determination contains no error requiring it to be  set  aside.
    This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is accordingly dismissed.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 22 May 2014
