
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04806/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 March 2016                           |On 4 April 2016                   |
|Oral judgment                             |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON



                                   Between

                        MOHAMED MIHAR MIZAREE IMTIKAB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant, Mr Imtikab, against a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp promulgated on 10  December  2015
    following a hearing at Birmingham Sheldon Court on 18 November 2015  in
    which the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on Refugee Convention,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds, against  the  refusal
    of the Secretary of State to grant further leave to remain. The  appeal
    history is set out at paragraphs 1-5 of the determination.

2.   The judge sets  out  the  appellant's  case  at  paragraphs  11  to  37
    including the appellant's reasons why he cannot return  to  Sri  Lanka.
    The respondent's case is at paragraphs 38 to 50. No issue is raised  in
    relation to the judge's factual analysis of the case before her.

3.   In paragraph 51 of the determination the judge sets  out  the  evidence
    that was considered in the following terms:

         "In determining the appeal I have taken into account the  following
         evidence:


         Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 10 March 2015
         Appellant's bundle to page 85
         Psychiatrist's report dated 15 June 2015
         Two computer printouts of online legal directories in Sri Lanka
         Respondent's bundle
         Oral evidence of the appellant"

4.   The reasons for the decision are clearly set out from paragraphs 52  to
    95 of the determination. Paragraphs 96 is confirmation  Article  8  was
    not being relied upon.

5.   The claim was dismissed on the basis it was not accepted by  the  judge
    that the appellant is a credible witness.  The judge gives a number  of
    reasons in the determination for how she arrived at that  finding  from
    paragraph 64 onwards.

6.   It is clear when reading this document that the judge did consider  the
    matter with the required degree  of  anxious  scrutiny  and  has  given
    adequate reasons to support the findings made that the appellant is not
    credible in relation to his claim to be at risk on return to Sri Lanka,
    including specific reference to discrepancies in the evidence that  was
    provided and the fact the appellant returned to Sri Lanka and was  able
    to enter the country without difficulty, and the overall history.

7.   In  relation  to  the  report  of  Dr  Heller,  a  Consultant  Forensic
    Psychologist, the judge says at paragraph 89:

         "I acknowledge that the author of the report, Dr Julia Heller, is a
         Consultant Forensic Clinical Psychologist at the Parkside  Hospital
         London. However, I have not  been  provided  with  any  information
         relating to the qualifications, CV, or experience of Dr Heller, and
         therefore it is difficult for me to assess the weight to place upon
         the contents of the report."

8.    At  paragraph  88  the  judge  notes  Miss  Harris,  the   appellant's
    representative before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  submitted  that  "the
    psychiatrist's  report  should  be  given  weight  as  she  provided  a
    diagnosis which is not just related to specific events,  and  that  the
    diagnosis is indicative of the kind of things that  the  appellant  had
    experienced".

9.   Having dismissed the appeal permission  was  sought  on  four  grounds.
    These were considered by the First-tier Tribunal in the first  instance
    and permission granted by Designated First-tier Judge  Zucker  for  the
    reasons set out  in  his  grant  of  permission  of  20  January  2016.
    Permission was granted on the limited basis set out in paragraph  4  of
    Judge Zucker's notice which records:

         "There must be some merit in the third ground.  It is arguable that
         the judge has given no weight to the  psychologist  report  in  the
         overall assessment of credibility: Mibanga  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367.
         Further it is arguable that the judge should have given  weight  to
         what appears at paragraph 4 of that report."

10.  The report in question has  been  considered  very  carefully  by  this
    Tribunal and it is noted that at paragraph 4 the author  sets  out  her
    qualifications and experience. Dr Julia Heller is a Chartered  Clinical
    Psychologist, Member of the British Psychological  Society  Faculty  of
    Forensic of Clinical  Psychologists,  has  a  Bachelor  of  Science  in
    Psychology from the University of Bristol, a Masters of Science  Degree
    in Clinical Psychology from  the  University  of  Surrey,  a  Doctorate
    Degree in Psychology and Psychiatry at St George's Hospital  University
    of London, a Master of Science Degree  in  Forensic  Investigation  and
    Psychology from London South Bank University,  has  twenty  years  post
    qualification experience in the assessment and treatment of people with
    psychological/psychiatric  disorders  and  also   mentally   disordered
    offenders in two main NHS Hospitals,  Springfield  University  Hospital
    and Broadmoor Hospital.

11.  Dr Heller states she has extensive experience of writing  psychological
    reports for Crown Courts, over 250 reports, for the Family Courts  over
    200 reports, and for the Immigration  Tribunal  over  100  reports  and
    works in an expert witness capacity.  She states her  current  post  is
    that of a Consultant Clinical Psychologist at Parkside Hospital,  South
    West London  and  "my  last  part-time  post  was  Consultant  Forensic
    Clinical Psychologist in Solent NHS Trust Portsmouth in June 2012".

12.   It  is  therefore  arguable  that  Judge  Boylan-Kemp  in  making  the
    statement that there was no CV or that the judge had not been  provided
    with any information relating to the qualifications, CV, or  experience
    of Dr Heller, is mistaken as paragraph 4 of  the  report  sets  out  in
    detail  exactly  who  Dr  Heller  is  in  relation  to   her   academic
    qualifications and practical experience.

13.  But that is not the only issue. The judge states specifically  that  it
    was difficult to assess the weight to be placed upon  the  contents  of
    the report, not that no weight is being placed upon the report.

14.  I take into account Miss  Anzani's  submission  today  that  the  judge
    should have set out clearly what  weight  was  being  attached  to  the
    report but it is not necessarily for a judge to set everything  out  in
    clear terms provided that at the very least the weight attached to  the
    report can be inferred from a reading of the determination as a  whole.
    A judge is not bound by the conclusions reached by an  expert,  medical
    or otherwise, although if they  wish  to  depart  from  those  findings
    adequate reasons must be given.

15.  There is reference to Mibanga in the grant. A grant  of  permission  on
    that basis alone is one in relation to which judges  have  to  be  very
    careful.

16.  Of more importance in relation to assessing error in  relation  to  the
    assessment of a medical report, either psychiatric or in  other  fields
    of medicine, is the later Court of Appeal decision in S v Secretary  of
    State [2006] EWCA Civ 1153 in which the Court of Appeal  said  that  an
    error of law only arose in this  type  of  situation  where  there  was
    artificial separation amounting to a structural failing and  not  where
    there was a mere error of appreciation of the medical evidence. Mibanga
    was distinguished on the basis that the medical evidence in Mibanga had
    been so powerful and extraordinary  that  it  took  the  case  into  an
    exceptional area.  The Court of Appeal has said that  HE  [2004]  UKIAT
    was relevant to the case of S so far  as  where  the  medical  evidence
    merely confirmed that  a person's  physical  condition  was  consistent
    with his claim the effect of the evidence was only not  to  negate  the
    claim, it did not offer significant separate support for the claim. The
    Court of Appeal said Mibanga was  not to be regarded as laying  down  a
    rule of law as to the order in which  judicial  fact  finders  were  to
    approach evidential  material  before  them.   In  the  decision  under
    challenge an explanation had been provided for why the medical evidence
    did not carry the weight the judge had been invited to give it.

17.  I accept that the  judge  did  take  into  account  the  psychiatrist's
    report dated 15 June 2015.  I do  not  find  it  has  been  established
    before me that this is a case in which a  judge  used  pro  forma  text
    stating that they had  considered  the  medical  evidence  whereas  the
    reality is they have not.  Paragraph 51  is  a  paragraph  setting  out
    evidence specific to the appeal before the judge.

18.  It is noted in paragraph 3 of Dr Heller's report that  the  report  was
    written following an interview and psychometric test on 12 June 2015 at
    the offices of Nag Law Solicitors.  It is therefore a  report  prepared
    on the basis of one interview with the appellant and tests  undertaken,
    the duration of which is not specifically set out in paragraph 3.

19.  This may be a relevant factor, for in the case of S [2002] UKIAT  6624,
    before Mr Justice Collins, it  was  held  that  a  medical  expert  was
    capable of being misled in circumstances where there had been just  one
    consultation. The relevance of that is the weight  given  to  a  report
    commissioned on the basis of one interview where the  ability  for  the
    author to test what they have been told, as may be the  case  if  there
    were a number of appointments and discussions, is very limited.  To  be
    fair to Dr Heller, she specifically refers  in  paragraph  6.1  to  the
    appellant describing frequent flashback memories  relating  to  a  rape
    incident he experienced in detention as well as his  other  experiences
    of torture that he claims to have experienced, on a daily basis.

20.  The comment made by the judge that the report of the  expert  is  based
    upon an acceptance of the credibility of the appellant's account  is  a
    finding that was open to the judge on the basis of  the  evidence  that
    was before her.

21.  I sought specific  confirmation  from  the  appellant's  Counsel  today
    whether the report added anything to the  assessment  of  the  evidence
    such that the conclusion reached by the judge was unsafe.  Nothing  was
    forthcoming to suggest otherwise and I find that the  report  does  not
    add anything to the evidence that was  before  the  judge  such  as  to
    suggest that the adverse credibility findings made  by  the  judge  are
    unsafe, so as to amount to a material legal error of law based upon  an
    artificial separation of the evidence in the approach the judge took to
    this matter.

22.  The judge had arguably good reasons to make  an  adverse  finding  that
    the claim to have been tortured and raped in Sri Lanka  on  return  was
    not credible.  As stated at paragraph 83  of  the  determination,  when
    referring to the overall assessment of the evidence, the judge did  not
    find there is anything in that  evidence  that  demonstrates  that  the
    appellant will be at risk from  the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka.  This
    conclusion was reached having considered both the  adverse  credibility
    finding and the issue of risk on return by reference  to  the  relevant
    country guidance case.

23.  I do not find any error of law material to the decision to dismiss  the
    asylum or human rights claim has been made out  on  the  basis  of  the
    grounds pleaded on which permission was granted,  or  submissions  made
    today.

24.  There is also clear evidence the judge did not  dismiss  the  diagnosis
    of the expert which is behind the findings made from paragraphs  85  of
    the determination.  The  judge  does  not  say  that  the  professional
    diagnosis of the appellant in relation to a major  depressive  disorder
    is wrong.  In fact the judge could not do so because the judge  is  not
    medically qualified.  What the judge says at paragraph 85 is "The final
    issue to consider is the appellant's mental  health  and  whether  that
    would give rise to a successful appeal on its own merits under  Article
    3 of the ECHR."

25.  The judge accepted that the report of Dr Heller is  clearly  supportive
    of the diagnosis of a major depressive disorder  but  that  it  is  not
    determinative of the causation of that disorder, or that the  cause  is
    as the  appellant  claimed.  In  that  respect  the  judge  had  strong
    evidential reasons for accepting that whilst there may be evidence of a
    major depressive disorder identified by the expert, or  post  traumatic
    stress disorder, it was not for the reasons claimed.

26.  That is a reasoned conclusion when one reads  the  determination  as  a
    whole and one fully available to the judge on the basis of the evidence
    she was asked to consider.

27.  At paragraph 86 the judge goes on further to refer to  the  psychiatric
    report and the diagnosis, noting the submissions made by the advocates,
    and at paragraph 90 writes:

         "However if I were to take the report at face value and accept  the
         appellant's diagnosis of severe depression, high suicide risk,  and
         post traumatic stress disorder, then I must consider what available
         mental health care provisions there are in Sri Lanka."

28.  This is an important paragraph because it  follows  the  comments  made
    with regard to Julia Heller's CV and qualifications.  If the  judge  is
    taking the report at face value in terms of the clinical  diagnosis  of
    mental health issues, even if the judge made an error  in  relation  to
    the CV point, it is not material because the judge did not in  any  way
    undermine, or place less weight upon the diagnosis that had been  made,
    as paragraph 90 clearly indicates.

29.  What the judge did thereafter was to look at  the  country  information
    in relation to Sri Lanka and the availability of medical  services.  At
    paragraph 93 the BHC letter  of  31  January  2012  is  quoted  and  at
    paragraph 94  it  is  noted  the  appellant  is  not  currently  taking
    medication, not under any primary or  secondary  care  for  his  mental
    health condition, despite the psychiatrists findings in her report, and
    that the appellant's evidence is that previously  he  had  been  taking
    anti-depressant medication whilst in Sri  Lanka  showing  the  same  is
    available.

30.  The judge thereafter concluded in paragraph 95:

         "Therefore  when  considering  the  evidence  in  the  round  I  am
         satisfied that there would be sufficient mental  health  provisions
         available to the appellant in Sri Lanka and that he would  be  able
         to access the  health  service  if  required  as  he  has  done  so
         previously.  I also acknowledge the fact that he would be returning
         to his mother who would be able to offer him support.  Therefore  I
         find there will be  no  real  risk  to  him  of  death  or  inhuman
         treatment due to his mental health  condition  if  he  were  to  be
         retuned to Sri Lanka.  Overall I find that based upon  all  of  the
         reasoning set out above there  is  no  breach  of  the  appellant's
         Article 3 rights."

31.  As stated earlier, Counsel confirmed (as recorded in  paragraph  96  of
    the determination) that Article 8 was not being relied upon. The  judge
    was entitled to accept that that related to Article 8 both in  relation
    to Article 8 family life and private life as may incorporate medical or
    mental health issues.

Notice of Decision

32.  Although other judges may set  out  their  determination  in  different
    ways, perhaps making more specific references at various parts  of  the
    determination to certain aspects of the evidence, that is not the test.
     The test is whether it has been made out  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    that the judge has arguably made  an  error  of  law  material  to  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal.  It is my finding that such a test  has
    not been satisfied and, therefore, the determination must stand.
HHJHell

33.  No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date 16 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

