
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04061/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 9 October 2014                             |On 24 October 2014           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                                     S K
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel, instructed by Theva,
                    Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, whose date of birth is 26  April
    1984, appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Warner
    regarding the decision of the Respondent to remove  him  to  Sri  Lanka
    after refusing refugee status, humanitarian  protection  and  leave  to
    remain in the UK on human rights grounds. Judge  Warner  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal on refugee grounds but allowed it  under  Article  3
    ECHR.  Unless  otherwise  stated,  all  paragraph  references   in   my
    determination relate to the determination of Judge Warner,  promulgated
    on 10 October 2013.


 2. In the grounds of application it is stated that  the  Judge  found  the
    following: the Appellant's account was credible (that is  that  he  had
    been forcibly recruited to the LTTE in May 2007, that he  went  to  the
    front line and there managed the kitchen at the camp and supplied  food
    to the fighters, that he was part of the patrol team, that his  brother
    and sister were recruited to the LTTE in December 2008, that  following
    surrender in April 2009  he  was  identified  as  an  LTTE  member  and
    detained and severely tortured until his escape was staged and  he  was
    recorded as an escapee). The Appellant's evidence at the  oral  hearing
    was that the authorities had harassed his parents,  because  they  were
    looking for him and his brother, who was detained by the authorities in
    November 2011, had fled to France and was granted refugee status. It is
    submitted that in the context of these findings, the Judge erred:

        a.  In  rejecting  the  Appellant's  uncle's  evidence   that   the
           Appellant's parents still faced problems  with  the  authorities
           because (i) it was inconsistent with  the  findings  in  GJ  and
           others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
           00319 (IAC) which suggested that the authorities  would  not  be
           interested in the Appellant because of a history of  involvement
           with the LTTE; and (ii) it was implausible that  the  CID  would
           continue to invest resources in  visiting  and  questioning  the
           Appellant's  parents.  It  is  submitted  that  this  conclusion
           'reveals a complete failure to have regard  to  the  Appellant's
           history when assessing credibility', and  failed  to  take  into
           account that he was identified as an LTTE member,  detained  and
           identified   for   rehabilitation   but   had   escaped   before
           rehabilitation. His uncle's  account  was  therefore  consistent
           with the Appellant's history;

        b. In failing to assess  risk  on  return  with  reference  to  the
           Appellant's history and the demonstrations which he attended  in
           the UK (the Judge  only  assessed  it  in  the  context  of  the
           demonstrations that he had attended);

        c. In failing to apply GJ, which provided for an assessment of risk
           based on "more elaborate links with the LTTE," in the context of
           the particular circumstances of the Appellant; and

        d. In failing to apply paragraph 339K, which provides that evidence
           of past persecution will be regarded as a serious indication  of
           the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
           suffering serious harm unless there is good reason  to  consider
           such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated. As it was
           accepted that the Appellant had suffered  past  persecution,  in
           the absence of good reason that such harm would not be repeated,
           his appeal should have been allowed.

 3. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy  on  the  basis
    that the grounds referred to the grant of permission by  the  court  of
    Appeal in MP and NT (Sri Lanka) and because of the positive findings of
    fact of Judge Warner.


 4. The Respondent submitted a Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.

Submissions


 5. Mr Lewis amplified the grounds, stating that  when  the  Appellant  was
    tortured, the authorities were of the view that he was operating  at  a
    higher level within the LTTE than he  had  admitted  to  and  had  been
    spying for them. He was  perceived  to  be  a  threat  because  he  was
    perceived to have a significant role within the LTTE  and  it  was  the
    perception that resulted in continued interest. Given this  perception,
    it would be surprising if he were not  of  continuing  interest  to  he
    authorities. The Judge had failed to give clear reasons  for  rejecting
    the account of continuing harassment of the Appellant's parents, failed
    to consider the evidence with anxious scrutiny, failed to give adequate
    reasons for rejecting the evidence that the Appellant was of continuing
    interest and had misapplied GJ. He submitted that it was accepted  that
    the Appellant had escaped and would be  logged  as  an  escapee,  which
    would ensure continuing interest; he would therefore be re-arrested and
    killed. The Appellant had not exaggerated his role in the LTTE.

 6. Mr Kandola, relying  on  the  Rule  24  response,  submitted  that  the
    'inadequate reasons' challenge was not made out. The Judge had directed
    himself properly, had considered GJ [67] and applied it to the facts at
    [68  -  69].  Past  persecution  was  not   determinative   of   future
    persecution, as confirmed in GJ, which provided that the  concentration
    of the Sri Lankan authorities was on activities  which  undermined  Sri
    Lanka as a unitary state. The Appellant's uncle's evidence was rejected
    and adequate reasons were given at [68]. The reason given by the  Judge
    for rejecting the Appellant's uncle's evidence was not simply  that  it
    was inconsistent with GJ; it was because it was implausible  that  time
    and resources  would  be  invested  in  visiting  and  questioning  the
    Appellant's parents three years after the event. GJ,  when  applied  to
    the appellants in that case, was case specific but the first  appellant
    had been  involved  with  the  LTTE  and  had  close  connections  with
    Prabhakaran. His appeal was allowed. As to the second appellant in  GJ,
    he also had a history of involvement with the LTTE, he was found to  be
    credible and released on payment of a  bribe  and  this  Appellant  was
    similar to the second appellant in GJ. There is no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant went through rehabilitation and therefore that he would be of
    further interest to the authorities.


 7. As to the Appellant's evidence that he would be re-arrested, Mr Kandola
    submitted that the risk of arrest is based on current activities in the
    diaspora; the Appellant was not a current threat. He would not be on  a
    watch list. As stated in the Rule 24 response, due to his mental health
    condition, the authorities would recognise that he was not a threat.

 8. In response, Mr Lewis submitted that  the  Appellant,  in  his  witness
    statement, confirmed that the CID officer who had arranged  his  escape
    had told him that he would be likely  to  be  on  a  stop  list  as  an
    escapee. The reasonable inference, therefore, would be  that  he  would
    continue to be of interest. The  Appellant  had  not  been  subject  to
    rehabilitation because he had not got  to  that  stage;  he  was  being
    tortured in detention. He was in the 'perceived to  be'  risk  category
    and this would lead to rehabilitation. Following the confession by  his
    parents, he and his brother had escaped and his parents were subject to
    reporting conditions. His appeal should have been allowed on asylum and
    Article 3 grounds.

Decision and reasons

 9. It cannot be said that the Judge did not apply anxious scrutiny to  the
    evidence supplied by the Appellant. He  set  out  the  immigration  and
    appeal  history,  the  medical  evidence  and  the  evidence   of   the
    Appellant's witnesses at [1 - 49], and referred to the Appellant's  own
    witness statements at [56].  He  accepted  the  core  elements  of  the
    Appellant's claim. Having considered the evidence, he  found  that  the
    Appellant would not be on a "stop" or "watch" list [76],  inclusion  on
    which is triggered  by  a  court  order  or  an  arrest  warrant.  This
    conclusion was open to him on the basis of background evidence and lack
    of evidence from the Appellant as to any court order or arrest warrant.




10. The guidance in GJ confirms that the current focus of  the  authorities
    is on those who seek to undermine Sri Lanka as a unitary authority. The
    Judge directed himself properly at [43] setting out the  head  note  in
    full. In particular, it is noted that the LTTE is a spent force and

          "The government's present objective is to identify Tamil activists
         in the diaspora  who  are  working  for  Tamil  separatism  and  to
         destabilise  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan  state....Its  focus  is  on
         preventing both (a) the resurgence  of  the  LTTE  or  any  similar
         separatist organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war in Sri
         Lanka" (head note 3); and

          "The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is  based  on  sophisticated
         intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
         diaspora. ...In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an  individual's  past
         history will be relevant only to the extent that it is perceived by
         the Sri Lankan authorities as indicating  a  present  risk  to  the
         unitary Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government"  (head  note
         9).

11. The Judge reminded himself of the relevant standard of proof at [17]  -
    [21], and his assessment was made in light of it. With  full  knowledge
    of the Appellant's past activities, detention and  torture,  the  Judge
    gave adequate reasons for his findings as to why  the  Appellant  would
    not be of continuing interest to the authorities; it  was  contrary  to
    country guidance and it was implausible that time and  funds  would  be
    invested  in  continued  visits  [69].  The  Judge  was  aware  of  the
    Appellant's having attended some demonstrations in  London  along  with
    "thousands of other Tamils" and his activities were not such as to lead
    to the conclusion that he was a threat to the Sri  Lankan  authorities.
    The Judge also found that if the Appellant were monitored on return the
    Appellant's "...mental state was  such  that  it  will  rapidly  become
    apparent to the CID or police that he poses no risk to the unitary  Sri
    Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government." These conclusions were open
    to the Judge on the evidence before him. He had significant evidence on
    the mental health of the Appellant and its effect on him on  a  day  to
    day basis; the Appellant's mental health was well documented.


12. It is not  made  out  that  the  Judge  did  not  have  regard  to  the
    Appellant's  past  activities,  family  connections  or   his   witness
    statement evidence in reaching  his  conclusions.  He  scrutinised  the
    evidence carefully, in view of which it is also not made out  that  the
    Judge did not have regard to the Appellant's "more elaborate links"  to
    the LTTE.

13. Mr Lewis submitted that the Appellant would have to be rehabilitated on
    return because he had not yet gone through the rehabilitation  process.
    However, there is no evidence to indicate that  someone  who  has  been
    absent from Sri Lanka for four years (as at the date of hearing  before
    the Judge) will be rehabilitated because of  a  past  history  of  LTTE
    connections. GJ confirms that the  individuals  who  are  selected  for
    detention  and  rehabilitation  are  "...those  within  Sri  Lanka  who
    undertake high profile separatist activity  (such  as  Jaffna  students
    trying to celebrate Maaveerar Naal I November 2011) or who are known or
    perceived (while still in Sri Lanka) to be  seeking  contact  with  the
    leaders or  activists  of  the  resurgence  movement  in  the  diaspora
    hotspots...." (GJ paragraph 318). The Appellant does not belong to such
    groups.

14. Mr Lewis also  submitted  that  the  Appellant  was  perceived  by  the
    authorities to be operating at a higher level than he in fact  was  and
    he would be at risk on return  because  of  this  perception.  However,
    there is nothing to suggest that he was perceived to be an activist  or
    leader of the LTTE, or will be  perceived  to  have  been  involved  in
    diaspora activity (except as stated by the Judge at [67]) which is  the
    present focus of the Sri Lankan authorities.

15. As to failing to consider the provisions of paragraph 339K, whilst this
    is not expressly mentioned by the Judge, it  is  clear  that  he  found
    there to have been past persecution and that there was good reason (the
    end of  the  civil  war  and  the  current  focus  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities) that this would not be repeated.

16. The Judge made findings of fact that were open to him on  the  evidence
    before him. He did not err in law in setting out the  legal  thresholds
    to be met and he applied the law to the facts as found by him. Read  as
    a whole, the determination discloses no material errors of law.

Decision

17. The determination of Judge Warner contains no material  errors  of  law
    and his decision must therefore stand.

18. Anonymity was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  Pursuant to Rule  14
    of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  I  direct
    anonymity. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  no
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him
    or any member of  his  family.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
    Appellant and the Respondent. Failure to  comply  with  this  direction
    could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.









    Signed                                   Date 23/10/2014

    M Robertson
    Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




    TO THE RESPONDENT
     FEE AWARD




    No fee has been paid or is payable and no fee award is made.








    Signed                                   Date 23/10/2014

    M Robertson
    Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








