
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04540/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 27 August 2015                    |On 2 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                 BOBBY SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Adio after a hearing on 7 August  2014  which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a decision dated 17 June 2014 to  refuse
    an application for asylum

Background

 3. The Appellant was  born  on  1  January  1984  and  is  a  national  of
    Afghanistan. He is a Sikh.

 4. On 24 March 2014 the Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that  he
    and his wife had fled from Afghanistan after his wife was kidnapped and
    mistreated by people who wanted her to convert to Islam.

 5. On 17  June  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) The Appellant gave inconsistent accounts as to the circumstances of
         his wife's kidnapping by a neighbour.

      b) The Appellant's claim that he could not leave the house for fear of
         mistreatment is inconsistent with the account he  gave  of  leaving
         the house on a regular basis.

      c) The Appellant  had  not  suffered  treatment  that  amounted  to  a
         sustained pattern or campaign of persecution directed at  him  that
         amounted to persecution.

      d) Internal relocation to other areas of Kabul where his wife's family
         lived was an option.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Adio ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
    decision. The Judge found :

      a) The only background material placed before him was  that  contained
         within the COIS from February 2013 and he took  that  into  account
         and summarised it in so far as it  was  relevant  to  the  case  at
         paragraph 37 and 38 of the decsion.

      b) He found that there were some inconsistencies in  relation  to  the
         account of the kidnapping but  in  essence  he  accepted  that  the
         Appellant's wife had been kidnapped and ill treated and during  the
         detention a lady spoke to her about converting to Islam.

      c) The Judge found that there was some exaggeration about the level of
         ill treatment and he  did  not  find  it  amounted  to  torture  or
         amounted to a systematic or sustained pattern of persecution.

      d) He found that the incident was a 'one off' and didn't amount  to  a
         sustained attack on the Appellant or his family.

      e) He accepted that there was societal  discrimination  against  Sikhs
         but it did not collectively amount to persecution.

      f) The Appellant and his wife could relocate to another part of  Kabul
         as eh does not accept that the Appellant and  his  wife  have  been
         truthful about the whereabouts of other family members.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that:

      a) The Judge failed to properly assess the evidence of the  kidnapping
         and harassment which could lead to the loss of future livelihood in
         that the treatment suffered amounted to persecution.

      b) It would be unduly harsh to expect the Appellant to relocate.

      c) The Judge did not refer to either SL and  Others  (Returning  Sikhs
         and Hindus) Afghanistan CG 2005 UKAIT 00137 or DSG & Others (Afghan
         Sikhs: departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 148  (IAC)  which
         allowed a Judge to  depart  from  SL  on  the  basis  that  due  to
         diminishing numbers the attacks  would  not  be  considered  to  be
         merely random but targeted at this much smaller community.

      d) The Respondent failed to disclose that they granted asylum  to  the
         Appellant's brother who claimed asylum on the same day as him.

 8. On 24 September 2014 First-tier Judge Cheales gave permission to appeal
    on all grounds.

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Ms  Khan  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) She relied on the grounds of appeal.

      b) Kidnapping, detention and ill treatment meets the definition of ill
         treatment and he assesses persecution in a restrictive way that  is
         legally flawed.

      c) The Judge failed to place the treatment suffered by  the  Appellant
         and his wife into the context of the diminishing number of Sikhs as
         set out in DSG.

      d) The Judge failed to take into account what was said in the COIS  at
         21.35 about the absence of state protection.

      e) Kabul was the Appellant's  home  area  and  given  the  diminishing
         numbers he could not relocate.

      f) The brother's grant of asylum was not taken into account.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr McVitie submitted that :

    (a)    The Appellant bears the burden of proof and in the bundle before
         the Judge there was no background material or any evidence from the
         Appellant's brother to suggest that that the time of  the  decision
         he had been granted asylum.

    (b)    The Judge made a finding that was open to him that the treatment
         suffered by the Appellant and his wife was not enough to  meet  the
         definition of persecution.

    (c)    The case of DSG is not a  Country  Guidance  case  and  was  not
         referred to by the  Appellant  in  his  grounds  of  appeal  or  in
         submissions before the Judge.

    (d)    DSG was not authority to say that all Afghan Sikhs are  at  risk
         it simply stated that it was possible for a Judge to go behind  the
         CG case of SL on the basis of the background material placed before
         him. This Judge had none other than the COIS.

    (e)    Kabul is a very big  city  and  on  the  basis  of  the  limited
         material before him the Judge was entitled  to  find  that  it  was
         possible for the Appellant and his family to relocate.

    (f)    This was an attempt to re argue the case with better evidence,

11. In reply Ms Khan on behalf of the Appellant submitted that the  gravity
    of what happened to the Appellant's wife could not  be  diminished.  An
    attempt to change a person's religion was serious.  She  accepted  that
    she had not realised that DSG was not before the Judge and he only  had
    the COIS.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. The first challenge to the Judge's decision to refuse  the  Appellant's
    appeal against  a  refusal  of  asylum  was  that  he  interpreted  the
    definition of persecutory treatment too restrictively. I  am  satisfied
    that the Judge took into account the submissions made  by  counsel  who
    represented the Appellant before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  are
    recorded  at  paragraph  34-35  of  the  decision  that  the  treatment
    complained of would meet the definition of persecution. The  Judge  who
    heard  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  his   wife   about   the
    circumstances of her detention made findings at paragraphs  39-41  that
    were open to him about what exactly he accepted had occurred which  was
    not entirely consistent with the accounts given by  the  Appellant  and
    his wife.

14. The Judge concluded that there was some exaggeration about the level of
    mistreatment; he found that the Appellant's wife had a swollen face but
    that did not amount to torture as claimed; he did not accept  that  the
    Appellant's wife was blindfolded or had a cloth  round  her  mouth  and
    concluded :

         "I find that the ill treatment the Appellant's  wife  had  dos  not
         amount to a systematic or sustained pattern of persecution......

         I therefore find that this is a  one  off  incident  and  does  not
         amount to a sustained attack  on  the  Appellant  and  his  family.
         Whilst I accept that there is  societal  discrimination  which  may
         result from time to time with verbal abuse when the  Appellant  and
         his wife go out, this collectively does not amount  to  persecution
         of the Appellant and his family."

15. In setting out those findings  I  have  considered  whether  the  Judge
    applied too restrictive  a  definition  and  I  am  satisfied  that  he
    directed himself appropriately. While he made no specific reference  to
    caselaw nor indeed was directed to  any  by  counsel  representing  the
    Appellant he would have found much support from  such  caselaw  in  the
    words he used. In MI (Pakistan) and MF (Venezuela) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 826 the Court  of  Appeal  held
    that the  concept  of  persecution  for  the  purposes  of  the  Geneva
    Convention (and  indeed  the  Directive)  requires  that  the  past  or
    apprehended harm to the asylum seeker must attain a  substantial  level
    of seriousness. Family or social disapproval in which the state has  no
    part lies outside its protection. Discrimination against members  of  a
    particular social group in the country of origin is  not  enough,  even
    though such discrimination might be contrary to the standards of  human
    rights prevailing in the state in which asylum is sought.  In  Ali  Cem
    Kaya v SSHD (2003) EWCA Civ 1195 the Tribunal had found that  a  single
    brief  period  of  detention  and  mistreatment  could  not  amount  to
    persecution as it lacked "the pervasive element which is commonly  said
    to be a feature of persecution". In HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 (07 July 2010) Lord Hope  said  "the
    Refugee Convention does not  define  "persecution".  But  it  has  been
    recognised that it is a  strong  word".   He  went  on  to  quote  from
    Appellant  S395/2002  v  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Multicultural
    Affairs (2003) 216 CLR 473, paragraph 40, McHugh  and  Kirby  JJ  said:
    "Persecution covers many forms of harm ranging from  physical  harm  to
    the loss of intangibles, from death and torture to state  sponsored  or
    condoned discrimination in social life and  employment.  Whatever  form
    the harm takes, it will constitute persecution only if,  by  reason  of
    its intensity or duration, the person persecuted cannot  reasonably  be
    expected to tolerate it."  He then added "To constitute persecution for
    the purposes of the Convention the harm  must  be  state  sponsored  or
    state condoned. Family or social disapproval in which the state has  no
    part lies outside its protection. As Professor J C  Hathaway  in    The
    Law of Refugee Status (1991), p 112 has explained, "persecution is most
    appropriately defined as the sustained or  systemic  failure  of  state
    protection in relation to one of the core entitlements which  has  been
    recognised by the international community."

16. I am therefore satisfied that there is nothing in the Judges assessment
    of the one incident described by the Appellant's wife in so far as  the
    Judge found it credible that is inconsistent with the  guidance  as  to
    what constitutes persecution. It is clear that the fact  of  kidnapping
    of itself is not determinative of whether the treatment is persecutory.

17. It was argued that the Judge failed to take into account  the  guidance
    in the case of DSG although Ms Khan quite properly  conceded  that  she
    did not realize that the case had not been placed before the Judge. DSG
    is not the a Country Guidance case and it is not an error  of  law  for
    the Judge to fail to carry out the work that those who represented  the
    Appellant at that time should have done by  providing  helpful  caselaw
    and background material. Neither was provided in  a  inadequate  bundle
    that consisted merely of three statements and copies  of  the  decision
    letters. Moreover DSG provides that the CG case of SL that  in  essence
    provides that being a Sikh of itself does  not  constitute  a  risk  in
    Afghanistan can be departed from  if  persuasive  evidence  before  the
    Judge justified it. In this case the Judge had no such material  as  he
    had only with a COIS from 2013. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge
    was therefore not in error in not considering DSG.

18. In relation  to  failing  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's brother had been granted asylum I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Judge was not in error. I remind myself  as  the  Judge  did  that  the
    Appellant bears the burden of proving is case. It was open to him if he
    chose to call his brother to give evidence that he was  granted  asylum
    and what account he placed before the Respondent that led to the  grant
    as of course it could not be assumed that the grant  was  on  the  same
    factual basis. I have read the record of proceedings and  the  decision
    carefully and nowhere is it mentioned that the brother made  an  asylum
    claim or indeed was granted asylum. I am therefore satisfied that  this
    was not an error of law.

19. It was finally argued that the assertion that  the  Appellant  and  his
    wife could not relocate elsewhere in Kabul was unreasonable. However  I
    am satisfied that this assertion is based on background  material  that
    was not before the Judge. On the basis of the very limited material  in
    the COIS placed before him and the positive findings he made  that  the
    Appellant and his wife had family living in other parts  of  Kabul  who
    could support them on their return it was open to the  Judge  to  reach
    this conclusion.

20. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

21. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

22. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

23. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 1.9.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
