
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04702/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th June 2013                                |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    Miss Gladys Eyagbon + two dependants

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Secretary of State:     Mr S Spence, HOPO
For the Claimant: Ms C Warren of Counsel, instructed by Howells Solicitors







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Henderson made following a hearing at Bradford on 29th October 2012.

Background

 2. The Claimant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  21st  May  1986.   She
    arrived in the UK on a date unknown and  claimed  asylum  on  30th  May
    2008.  Her claim was refused and the subsequent appeal was dismissed on
    24th June 2010 by Immigration Judge Caswell, who did  not  accept  that
    she was a victim of trafficking. The  Claimant's  representatives  made
    further submissions on 5th April 2012, supported by expert reports  and
    were accepted as a fresh claim for asylum which was  again  refused  on
    25th April 2012.  It was this refusal which  was  the  subject  of  the
    appeal before Judge Henderson.

 3. The Claimant's case is that she  was  trafficked  for  the  purpose  of
    prostitution to Italy before she escaped  and  came  to  the  UK.   She
    claimed a fear of return to Nigeria on the basis that she would  be  at
    risk from those who trafficked her to Europe.

 4. Judge Henderson heard oral evidence from the Claimant  and  from  Ms  N
    Dawkins, former leader of the Poppy Project who had written  an  expert
    report on her behalf.  She also had a country expert report  from  Bisi
    Olateru-Olagbegi, a medical report and further letters of support.

 5. Judge Henderson said that she was aware that her starting point in  the
    appeal was  the  findings  made  by  the  previous  Immigration  Judge.
    However, she said that she had the advantage in this appeal of  further
    reports, not before the previous judge, and she relied on the  evidence
    from Ms Dawkins, who was a leading expert on the issue of  trafficking,
    in reaching the conclusion that the Claimant was a  trafficking  victim
    as claimed and would be at risk of re-trafficking or  reprisal  attacks
    on return.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  not  adopting  the
    previous judge's findings and had not considered that the Secretary  of
    State's assessment of the claim  was  made  after  an  interview  by  a
    trained officer and in line  with  the  asylum  process  guidance.  The
    approach endorsed in Y v SSHD [2012] EWHC 1075 (Admin) had been adopted
    in the asylum process guidance and applied in this case.

 7. In the alternative it was submitted  that  even  if  the  Claimant  was
    trafficked this was over four years ago and she does  not  require  the
    protection of the Convention.  She has been out of  the  hands  of  the
    traffickers for a number of years and there would be no breach  of  her
    Article 3 rights.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Cruthers  on  27th  November
    2012 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

 9. The Claimant served a Rule 24 response. With respect  to  the  argument
    that the Secretary of State's assessment of the claim was made after an
    interview by a trained officer, any decision made  under  the  national
    referral mechanism was entirely separate from any decision to  be  made
    under the 1951 Convention.  The decision under  the  NRM  was  not  the
    subject of the appeal to the Tribunal. The case of Y v SSHD relied upon
    by the Secretary of State was concerned purely  with  consideration  of
    cases under the NRM and not relevant to the appeal  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

10. The asylum claim had  been  rejected  on  the  basis  of  the  negative
    credibility findings of Immigration Judge Caswell, but Judge  Henderson
    had given full consideration to  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  and
    provided extremely detailed reasons for finding differently,  a  course
    plainly available to her.  In SSHD v AF [2008] EWCA Civ 117  the  Court
    of  Appeal  considered  its  previous  judgments  in  respect  of   the
    Devaseelan guidelines which were very flexible. The respective Tribunal
    was required to decide each new case on its merits.

11. In relation to the risk on return, the judge had made detailed findings
    in  relation  to  the  specific  risk  which  she   would   face,   the
    insufficiency of State protection and had considered  whether  internal
    relocation was reasonable in her and her children's circumstances.

12. Before the  hearing  Counsel  produced  a  detailed  skeleton  argument
    relating to the distinction to be made  between  the  UK's  obligations
    under the Trafficking Convention and those under the Refugee Convention
    and repeated the points made in the response.

Submissions

13. Mr Spence adopted his  grounds  but  accepted  that  the  supplementary
    decision letter written for the judicial review proceedings  lodged  in
    respect of the national referral mechanism decision was not before  the
    judge, because it was not  the  Respondent's  practice  to  serve  such
    letters at First-tier Tribunal hearings. He could not  argue  that  the
    judge had erred in not considering evidence which was not  before  her.
    He confined his submissions to arguing that the  judge  had  not  given
    adequate reasons for departing from the findings of the first judge and
    relied on his other grounds.

14. Ms Warren submitted that Immigration Judge Henderson had  followed  the
    guidance in Devaseelan properly and  that  the  conclusions  which  she
    reached were open to her to make on the evidence before her.

Findings and Conclusions

15. These grounds are a mere disagreement with the decision and disclose no
    arguable error of law.

16. As Mr Spence accepted, the points made in the grounds in respect of the
    national referral mechanism letter have no merit since the  letter  was
    not before the judge and in any event is  entirely  separate  from  the
    decision which was before her.

17. With regard to the Devaseelan issue the judge made it abundantly  clear
    that Judge Caswell's findings were her starting  point.   She  set  out
    those findings and the evidence upon which they were based.   She  then
    said that she had the advantage of considering further expert  reports,
    in particular from an expert who gave live  oral  evidence,  which  she
    considered in great detail.  There were some  matters  upon  which  she
    agreed with Judge Caswell, for example in relation to the circumstances
    in which the Appellant left Italy, and the account of what had happened
    to her sister, and she agreed with Judge Caswell that the Claimant  had
    attempted to exaggerate the issue of  risk  on  return  by  seeking  to
    establish evidence of harm against her family. However, she  gave  full
    and detailed reasons  for  reaching  the  opposite  conclusion  on  the
    central issue of trafficking on the basis of evidence which was  before
    her and which had not been before the previous judge.

18. With respect to the risk on return, again this is a  mere  disagreement
    with the decision.  The judge had the benefit of an expert report  upon
    which she was entitled to rely.  She accepted that the Claimant owed  a
    debt to her traffickers  and  properly  applied  the  relevant  country
    guidance case. Having accepted that the Claimant was  trafficked  by  a
    group of persons operating together to whom she owed a large amount  of
    money, she was entitled to  find  that  there  would  not  be  adequate
    protection for her in Nigeria. Finally, she  considered  the  issue  of
    internal relocation and having  regard  to  the  Claimant's  particular
    circumstances, concluded that it would not be reasonable.

19.  Judge Henderson's approach was unimpeachable.



Decision

20. There is no error of law in  this  decision  which  shall  stand.   The
    Claimant succeeds in her appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


