
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04978/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28th October 2016                         |On 21st December 2016          |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 Mr I A M L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Scott, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 16th March  1984.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history.  He first applied for a
    student visa  on  3rd  April  2007,  this  application  being  refused.
    Following a renewed application the Appellant initially entered the  UK
    using his student visa which had then been granted on 11th  July  2008.
    The Appellant has entered and departed  the  UK  multiple  times  since
    then, entering for the last  time  on  22nd  November  2013.   On  15th
    January 2014 the Appellant made  an  appointment  for  the  purpose  of
    claiming asylum and on 6th March 2015 a decision  was  made  to  refuse
    that grant.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Broe sitting at Birmingham  on  17th  June  2015.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated  on  1st  July  2015  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  and  the
    Appellant was found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  10th
    August  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  refused  permission
    finding that the grounds amounted to no more than a  disagreement  with
    the judge's findings and that those were findings which  were  properly
    open to the Tribunal on the evidence.

 4. On 25th August 2015 renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 18th September 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Macleman concluded  that  apart  from  the
    treatment of the medical report it was  doubtful  whether  the  grounds
    presented amounted to any more than  disagreement  about  fact-finding.
    However, Judge Macleman considered the judge had to deal with  evidence
    in some order and that judges should not readily artificially  separate
    medical evidence from the rest or reach adverse credibility findings in
    isolation from such evidence.  He noted that the judge placed  "careful
    consideration of the medical report" and "immediately  after  rejecting
    credibility".  He considered that that raised an arguable issue.

 5. On 8th October 2015 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds  of
    Appeal  under  Rule  24.   The  response  notes  that  Judge   Macleman
    considered  that  by  the  judge  considering  the   medical   evidence
    immediately after rejecting the credibility of the  account  that  that
    raised an arguable  error  of  law.   The  response  submits  that  the
    consideration of the claim at its highest was that taking  all  of  the
    Appellant's evidence into account and believing it all  (which  it  did
    not),  then  the  Appellant  would  still  not  be  at  risk  from  the
    authorities when the facts are considered against the country  guidance
    of GJ.  They went on to submit that the medical evidence was considered
    in the round when assessing  whether  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to
    refugee status/Article 3 protection within the UK and that it was clear
    from the layout that the judge had assessed the Appellant's account and
    the documents provided and had then  considered  the  medical  evidence
    before making findings on the Refugee Convention against  the  backdrop
    of the country guidance.  By considering the appeal in  that  way,  the
    submission was made that the judge could not have said to have  made  a
    material error.

 6. Against that background the Upper  Tribunal  found  that  there  was  a
    material error of law and remitted the matter for rehearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  That hearing came before Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Ford sitting at Birmingham on 7th July 2016.   In  a  decision
    and reasons promulgated on 4th August 2016 the Appellant's  appeal  was
    again refused on asylum and human rights grounds and he was again found
    not to be entitled to  humanitarian  protection.   Renewed  Grounds  of
    Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  15th  April   2016.
    Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bennett
    on 25th August 2016.  Yet further Grounds of Appeal were lodged to  the
    Upper Tribunal on 13th September 2016.

 7. On 28th September 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara  granted  permission
    to appeal.  Judge Kamara found that it was arguable  that  the  judge's
    findings at paragraph 55 as to the source of the scarring caused to the
    Appellant's body were unsound.  She also considered that it was further
    arguable that the judge's credibility findings at paragraphs 47 and  51
    of the decision appeared to expect the Appellant to explain the actions
    of the Sri Lankan authorities and that at paragraph 48  the  judge  did
    not take into consideration the Appellant's difficulties with recalling
    the dates in question, and that at  paragraph  49  there  was  no  real
    inconsistency regarding the issue of  the  timing  of  the  Appellant's
    marriage.

 8. It is after that lengthy history, and following the grant of permission
    to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara, that this appeal comes before
    me to determine whether or not there is a material error of law in  the
    decision of Immigration Judge  Ford.   The  Appellant  appears  by  his
    instructed solicitor, Mr Scott.  Mr Scott is familiar with this matter,
    having appeared before Judge Ford in the rehearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  His practice is also  the  author  of  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, Mr Armstrong.  In addition, there has been a further  Rule  24
    response from the Secretary  of  State,  this  being  the  most  recent
    documentation and filed on 14th October 2016.

Submissions/Discussions

 9. Mr Scott takes me to his Grounds of Appeal contending  that  the  judge
    made a wrong assessment of  the  Appellant's  credibility  despite  the
    scarring report of Dr Martin, and that  the  scarring  report  confirms
    that the scars upon the Appellant are consistent with those that  could
    be received following torture.  He acknowledges that  the  judge  noted
    that it is not clear how the scarring has been caused, and that  whilst
    the judge at paragraph 55 of his decision has indicated that he is  not
    satisfied that the injuries were caused by the authorities in Sri Lanka
    during a detention in November 2013, the judge has not put forward  any
    other explanation.  In such circumstances he contends  that  the  judge
    has made a wrong assessment of  credibility,  taking  into  account  Dr
    Martin's report.

10. He also refers me to paragraphs 47  and  49  of  the  judge's  decision
    contending that the findings therein are speculative as to  the  action
    of the authorities.  He then takes me to paragraph 51 where  the  judge
    held that the Appellant had failed to give any credible explanation  as
    to why the authorities should seek to issue summonses  against  him  in
    2014 given that he had left Sri Lanka in 2008 and states  that  it  was
    not for the Appellant to know why the authorities had not taken  action
    against him previously.

11. In response Mr Armstrong points out that  the  Rule  24  sets  out  the
    position very clearly and that the judge's findings were ones that were
    open to him based on the evidence that he had heard.  He  takes  me  to
    paragraphs 55 and 56 of the decision, pointing out that references made
    to Dr Martin's report and that the judge was not bound by it, and  that
    paragraph 57 highlights holes in the evidence of the Appellant and  the
    judge sets out therein his  concerns  about  the  plausibility  of  the
    Appellant's case.  He submits that there was  nothing  wrong  with  the
    findings made by the judge therein and that the findings were ones that
    were open to the judge to make.  He further comments it  was  perfectly
    open to the judge at paragraph 51 to make comment on the  time  it  has
    taken for the authorities to take their appropriate steps.  He  submits
    there are no material errors of law and asked me to dismiss the appeal.

12. In brief response Mr Scott asked me to look at the scarring report  and
    the issues raised at paragraph 55.  He indicates that he believes there
    are material errors of law and he asked me to set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and to remit it for rehearing.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

15. The proper approach  to  credibility  requires  an  assessment  of  the
    evidence and of the general claim.  In asylum claims, relevant  factors
    are firstly the  internal  consistency  of  the  claim;  secondly,  the
    inherent plausibility of the claim; and thirdly, the consistency of the
    claim with external factors of the  sort  typically  found  in  country
    guidance.  I acknowledge it is theoretically correct  that  a  claimant
    need do no more than state his claim but that claim still needs  to  be
    examined for consistency and inherent plausibility.   In  nearly  every
    case external information against which the claim could be checked will
    be available.  This is what the judge has done in  this  instant  case.
    Firstly, the judge has given consideration to  the  up-to-date  country
    guidance to be found in GJ and Others (post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) where the Tribunal, in a very detailed
    decision and a well-respected head note, set out the risk categories on
    return.  The Appellant does not fall within those risk categories.

16. Thereafter this appeal rises and falls on whether or  not  the  judge's
    findings on credibility were ones that were open to  him.   This  is  a
    judge who has given very careful consideration to the evidence and  set
    out detailed findings of fact and conclusions.  He has at paragraph  55
    noted that he has considered the medical reports,  made  a  recognition
    that the Appellant has scarring, and  recognised  that  Dr  Martin  has
    expressed the opinion that the scars are consistent with the manner  of
    causation given by the Appellant.  Despite that, the  judge  has  found
    that his injuries were not caused by the authorities during a detention
    in November 2013.  It is, however, not true to go on to  say  that  the
    judge has failed to give reasons.  He has looked at the issues  in  the
    round and  made  findings  between  paragraph  43  and  57  as  to  the
    Appellant's credibility.  He has also borne in mind the low standard of
    proof in appeals of this nature.

17. When looked at in the round, this is a  judge  who  has  given  careful
    consideration  to  the  evidence  that  was  produced  before  him  and
    considered all of the evidence.  He had made findings of fact  that  he
    was entitled to and given reasons.  The  overall  submissions  made  in
    this matter effectively amount to little more  than  mere  disagreement
    with  the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.    In   such
    circumstances, I find that there is no material error of law  disclosed
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and the  Appellant's  appeal
    is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of  law
and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 21/12/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
