
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA042882014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th February 2016                         |On 13th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    G S A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Brockley-Weller (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Rayner promulgated on 9th September 2015, following a hearing at Taylor
    House on 29th June 2015.  In the determination, the judge dismissed the
    appeal of the Appellant, whereby the Appellant  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.



The Grant of Permission

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 12th November
    2015 on the basis that, although the judge gave sustainable reasons for
    concluding that victims of trafficking did not constitute a PSG in  the
    context of Pakistani society, following Shah and Islam [1999] UKHL  20,
    it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider whether
    the Appellant was a member of a PSG by reason of her  gender.   Second,
    although  the  previous  ill-treatment  to  which  the  Appellant   was
    subjected by her family may not have  amounted  to  persecution,  given
    that the family blame her for the problems that they  are  experiencing
    from Dr AT's family, and their likely dishonour  following  her  arrest
    and imprisonment, it is arguable that the first  Tribunal's  conclusion
    that the Appellant  will  not  face  any  domestic  violence  from  her
    brothers is irrational.  Alternatively, this was a conclusion that  the
    judge was not entitled to reach on the evidence.  Third,  having  found
    that the Appellant was a credible  witness,  it  was  arguable  in  the
    context of the internal relocation analysis, that the judge  failed  to
    take adequate account of  the  Appellant's  evidence  relating  to  her
    capacity to work, a relevant factor in  assessing  what  is  likely  to
    happen to her once an protection offered by a shelter to her  comes  to
    an end.  Fourth, the judge also observed that there were only two lines
    in relation to the Article 8 assessment and it  was  arguable  that  no
    consideration was given to two particular  matters.   First,  that  the
    Appellant was the victim of  trafficking.   Second,  that  her  medical
    condition would have an effect on her private life and on her  physical
    and moral integrity.  This was the  basis  upon  which  permission  was
    granted by the Upper Tribunal.

 3. A Rule 24 response dated 10th December 2015 was to the effect that  the
    judge gave reasons and findings on PSG at paragraph 21  and  the  judge
    also held that if there was a risk to the Appellant from her family  it
    would not lead to ill-treatment (see paragraph 25).

Submissions

 4. At the hearing before me on 15th February 2016, Ms Benfield,  appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant, relied upon  her  skeleton  argument.   She
    made the following submissions.  First, this was a case where the judge
    had found the Appellant to be broadly credible with respect to being  a
    victim of human trafficking from  Pakistan  (see  paragraph  14).   The
    judge held that the Appellant was a "credible  witness"  and  that  her
    account  "has  been  consistent"  (see   paragraph   13).    In   these
    circumstances the judge should have  considered  the  position  of  the
    Appellant as a member of a particular social group,  on  the  basis  of
    being a woman in Pakistan.  This  followed  from  the  House  of  Lords
    judgment in Shah and Islam [1999] UKHL 20 where it was  concluded  that
    women in Pakistan  constituted  a  PSG  because  they  share  a  common
    immutable characteristic of gender.  Second, the judge failed  to  make
    an  assessment  on  the  risk  of  persecution  at  the  hands  of  the
    Appellant's brothers.  The Appellant's  general  credibility  had  been
    established.  Her account of ill-treatment and abuse at  the  hands  of
    her brothers was consistent and coherent.  The Appellant's case was one
    of being a  bonded  labourer,  and  in  escaping,  she  had  brought  a
    tremendous risk of ill-treatment upon the family and the brothers  were
    not  likely  to  forgive  her  and  the  judge  ought  to  have   given
    consideration to this matter.  Third, prior to the Appellant's  arrival
    in the UK, there were clear indicators that the Appellant's family were
    abusive, both in attempting to compel her into a forced  marriage,  and
    then sending her to the UK into domestic servitude.

 5. There was a history of domestic violence and abuse in  the  Appellant's
    case.  The objective evidence and the country guidance case of  SN  and
    HM [2004] UKIAT 00283, clearly indicated that  there  is  no  effective
    state protection for women at risk of gender-based domestic violence in
    Pakistan.  Fourth, as far as internal  relocation  was  concerned,  the
    judge was wrong to have concluded that this would not be "unduly harsh"
    given the Appellant's particular vulnerability as an individual with  a
    diagnosed mental health condition, which was highly  likely  to  impact
    negatively on her ability to obtain work and live  independently  as  a
    lone woman in Pakistan.  Reference was made to the  case  of  SM  (Lone
    women - ostracism) [2016] UKUT 67.

 6. Finally, there was the failure to give sufficient reasons  in  relation
    to Article 8 ECHR.  The judge concluded  (at  paragraph  46)  that  the
    Appellant did not qualify for leave to  remain  under  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE outside the Immigration Rules.  He said that there was
    nothing  exceptional  to  warrant  consideration  outside  the   Rules.
    However, the judge should have considered  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    rights  as  an  assessment  of  proportionality  outside   the   Rules,
    particularly considering her mental health  condition  and  the  likely
    deterioration in  her  mental  state  that  was  supported  by  medical
    evidence in the event of removal.  The Appellant's physical  and  moral
    integrity (set out  at  paragraphs  37  to  39  of  Counsel's  skeleton
    argument before the judge) ought to have been properly considered.

 7. For her part, Ms Brockley-Weller  submitted  that  the  judge  did  not
    identify Shah and Islam, but it was not material because he did  go  on
    to consider other  issues,  such  that  it  would  not  have  made  any
    difference to the result eventually reached.  My attention was drawn to
    paragraph 25 of the determination where the judge stated that, "looking
    at the evidence in the round, the Appellant's family in  Pakistan  have
    abandoned her, but they have not offered her any  threat,  indeed  they
    have consistently shown  that  they  are  concerned  for  her  welfare"
    (paragraph 25).  Furthermore, the judge had gone on  to  say  that  the
    Appellant was not a divorced woman, but the legal test that applied was
    applicable by way of analogy for determining the risk faced by women on
    return to Pakistan, and the judge referred to the case  of  SN  and  HM
    [2004] UKIAT.  The family would have  no  incentive  to  seek  out  the
    Appellant and punish her.  Furthermore,  if  one  looked  at  the  2014
    report, it was clear that the  Appellant  did  not  have  any  suicidal
    tendencies.  In fact, since she had been in the UK  she  had  completed
    her behavioural cognitive therapy and was only suffering from  moderate
    depression, such that it was entirely right to reject  the  claim.   As
    far as Article 8 was concerned, this had not been advanced  orally  and
    the judge was entitled to give it the brevity of consideration that  he
    did.

 8. In reply, Ms Benfield submitted that there was a letter from the Bamber
    Foundation and it is not true that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  any
    suicidal tendency because the latest letter referred to the  fact  that
    the Appellant had "thought throughout of self-harm and  suicide"  as  a
    result of her pessimistic outlook for the  future.   At  paragraph  46,
    where the  judge  considers  Article  8,  there  is  simply  no  proper
    analysis.  There is no substantive consideration of the issues.

Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, this is a case where, following on from the well-known
    case of Shah and Islam [1999] UKHL 20, the judge, having found that the
    Appellant was a victim of human trafficking, ought to  have  considered
    her position in the context of  her  gender.   The  failure  to  do  so
    prevented consideration by the Tribunal of the Appellant as a member of
    a particular social group, in a manner which the  House  of  Lords  had
    previously decided would have reasonable prospects of success.  Second,
    the judge does not consider the serious harm and the possibility of  it
    of domestic violence at the hands of her brothers.  This  is  important
    in the context of bonded labour and the existing  evidence  that  there
    had already been evidence of domestic abuse of  the  Appellant  by  her
    family.  Third, the sufficiency of protection had to be  considered  in
    the context of the acute vulnerability of the Appellant.   This  was  a
    case where the Bamber Foundation had been involved, and the  judge  had
    made reference to this right at the outset of the determination when he
    had  said  that  "Miss  Malpass  from  the  Helen   Bamber   Foundation
    accompanied the Appellant" (see paragraph 6).  Furthermore, the  latest
    evidence from the Bamber Foundation in the  form  of  the  letter  does
    recognise that the Appellant has thought of  "self-harm  and  suicide".
    In these circumstances, to say that the Appellant, given her  age,  and
    her mental health, has IFA available to her, is  irrational.   Finally,
    the Article 8 assessment is inadequate in that there is no  proper  and
    detailed analysis of her situation given what I have set out hereto  in
    before in relation to the precise circumstances of this Appellant.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Rayner given Practice  Statement  7.2(b)  because  the
    nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding  which  is  necessary  in
    order for the decision in the appeal to be remade is such that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in Rule  2,  it  is  appropriate  to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

11. This is also a case where all positive findings made in favour  of  the
    Appellant should be retained because there is long-established Court of
    Appeal authority to the effect that positive findings  should  normally
    be preserved intact.

12. However, in this particular case there is very little  upon  which  the
    Appellant has been faulted in terms of the credibility of her evidence.
     She is a vulnerable witness and ought  not  to  be  required  to  give
    detailed evidence all over again on each and every aspect of her claim.
     Her claim has only been rejected  on  a  small  aspect  of  her  case.
    Accordingly, positive findings  in  her  favour  are  to  be  preserved
    intact.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th June 2016
