

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/04927/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Determination Promulgated     |
|On January 8, 2015                    |On January 13, 2015           |
|                                      |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   MS F D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott, instructed by Latitude Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Guinea. The appellant entered the  United
    Kingdom on August 27, 2009 and claimed asylum the same day. On February
    2, 2010 the respondent refused her application and  on  April  1,  2010
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal White dismissed her asylum  and  human
    rights claims.  On  September  21,  2010  the  appellant  made  further
    submissions on her claim and on July 7, 2013 the respondent refused  to
    consider these submissions as a fresh appeal and no right of appeal was
    offered. The appellant lodged an application for judicial review and on
    February 14, 2014 His Honour Judge Stephen Davies sitting as  an  Upper
    Tribunal Judge ordered, by consent, that the application  for  judicial
    review be withdrawn on the basis the respondent  agreed  to  reconsider
    the written submissions that had been made.


 2. On July 3, 2014 a decision was taken to  refuse  to  grant  her  asylum
    under paragraph 336 HV 395 and on July 9, 2014 a decision was taken  to
    remove  her  from  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under
    paragraphs 8-10 of schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on  July  17,  2014
    and on August  15,  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  McCall
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ")  heard  her  appeal  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on September 1, 2014 he refused her appeal.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on September  12,  2014  and  on
    September  22,  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kelly  gave
    permission to appeal finding there  were  grounds  that  the  FtTJ  had
    arguably erred.

 5. The matter came before me on the  above  date  and  on  that  date  the
    appellant was in attendance and represented.

 6. I reserved my decision to consider the representations.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 7. Dr Mynott adopted the  grounds  of  appeal  and  expanded  on  them  as
    follows:


      a. Ground One    This ground concerned the  evidence  of  the  witness
         referred to as FL.  He was the lawyer/human rights activist who had
         provided  a  witness  statement.   Dr  Mynott  submitted  that   if
         paragraph [28] of the determination was considered then it could be
         seen  the  FtTJ  accepted  the  bona  fides  of  the  witness.   At
         paragraphs [9] to [11] of his statement FL explained his visits  to
         the prisons and how he obtained confirmation about the  appellant's
         father's arrest, source of his anonymous  informants  and  how  the
         appellant's father had died as well as the subsequent raid.  Whilst
         there is an inconsistency in paragraph [11] of the  statement,  the
         FtTJ failed to identify the consistency  of  the  evidence  and  in
         particular  the  fact  the  enquiries   confirmed   the   following
         consistent facts with the appellant's own evidence:


               i. The appellant's father's name.
              ii. Date when her father was arrested.
             iii. Date when her father died in detention.
              iv. Court hearing of August 17,  2009  at  page  172  confirms
                  execution of father and the address of  where  the  father
                  was living.
               v. Page 76 paragraph 10 confirms the camp where father  died.
                  This camp was identified previously and confirmed on  page
                  96 in an article. It mentions Camp  Koundara  as  being  a
                  military camp where people are detained.


         The FtTJ made adverse  findings  in  paragraph  [29]  and  attaches
         weight to the anonymity of FL's witnesses.  However,  FL  explained
         why the witnesses were anonymous and the FtTJ accepted the expert's
         credentials. Dr Mynott submitted the FtTJ's  finding  in  paragraph
         [29] and [34] is without any foundation.


      b. Ground Two    The FtTJ approached witness MK's report with caution.
         At paragraph [37] of the determination the FtTJ accepted  where  MK
         could assist him but in rejecting his evidence Dr Mynott  submitted
         the FtTJ gave insufficient reasons bearing in mind he accepted  the
         expert could give the evidence. He submitted the FtTJ was wrong  in
         paragraph  [39]  because  it  can  be  seen  on  page  172  of  the
         appellant's bundle (penultimate paragraph) the  Court  issued  this
         document in place of a death certificate. The FtTJ was critical  in
         paragraph [38] about the writ and why they would get a court  order
         but Dr Mynott submitted the FtTJ had  already  recorded  they  were
         under house arrest. If the  FtTJ  was  going  to  make  an  adverse
         inference then he should have put this to the appellant and because
         it was not put the  FtTJ  materially  erred.  Similarly,  the  FtTJ
         asserted inconsistencies  but  overlooked  the  fact  the  evidence
         corroborated her initial account. Reference should be made to  page
         170 of the appellant's bundle as this confirms what  the  appellant
         claimed had been seized when she was interviewed (see Q22) The FtTJ
         did not have regard to all  of  the  documents  in  the  round.  At
         paragraph [42] of his  determination  the  FtTJ  commented  on  the
         "wanted notice (See page 179) but  he  accepted  the  expert  could
         assess the format of the documents so it was not  open  to  him  to
         make the findings about the wording of the document without further
         evidence. Whilst some of his findings were open to  him  Dr  Mynott
         submitted the FtTJ failed to apply the test set out in  HK  v  SSHD
         [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 as set out in paragraph [21] of the grounds of
         appeal. Dr Mynott submitted this error was material and  undermined
         his determination.


      c. Ground Three  This is linked to Ground One. Dr Mynott submitted the
         FtTJ had misapplied the approach set out in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT
         00702. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  White  did  not  have  the
         supporting evidence when he considered the evidence. It  was  wrong
         to look at the previous judge's decision and take it apart which is
         what the FtTJ did. He erred because he did not look at the evidence
         afresh.


      d. There was a material error in law.


 8. Mr Harrison adopted the rule 24 response  dated  October  1,  2014  and
    responded to Dr Mynott's lengthy submissions and stated:


      a. The weight to be attached to a report was a matter  for  the  FtTJ.
         The FtTJ gave a detailed determination and considered the  evidence
         against what was already known. He looked at Judge  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal White's decision and asked himself  whether  the  new
         evidence shed light on it. FL's evidence was sourced in vague terms
         and he  concluded  that  he  knew  nothing  about  the  people  who
         purportedly provided the evidence. As the witnesses  could  not  be
         traced and their evidence was of little or no evidential  value  he
         reached conclusions for the reasons he gave that he  placed  little
         weight on either witness's evidence.


      b. The FtTJ pointed out that witness MK had  been  criticised  by  the
         Tribunal and that her evidence should be treated with caution.


      c. The FtTJ looked at the evidence and found the evidence did not make
         it clearer and he assessed the evidence as he had to and  concluded
         that he could not place great weight on it.


    Mr Harrison concluded that all the findings were open to  him  and  the
    submissions amounted to nothing more than a mere disagreement with  the
    FtTJ's findings.


 9. Dr Mynott responded and  submitted  information  was  known  about  the
    witnesses through the report of FL. He invited me to find an  error  in
    law.


    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

10. This was an extremely  detailed  determination  and  the  FtTJ  had  to
    grapple not only with the evidence before him but also have  regard  to
    the previous immigration history including the  previous  determination
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal White.


11. The challenge to the FtTJ's determination is on three  grounds  but  in
    essence it surrounds the FtTJ's approach to the  new  witness  evidence
    and documents and  thereafter  the  FtTJ's  approach  to  the  previous
    determination.

12. The FtTJ summarised the appellant's case in paragraphs [7] to  [10]  of
    his determination. The evidence given to him is similar to the evidence
    that was given  to  the  previous  judge  save  on  this  occasion  the
    appellant had adduced new evidence in the form  of  witness  statements
    from FL and MK along with a number of documents. Dr Mynott  had  argued
    both before the  FtTJ  and  myself  that  this  evidence  required  the
    appellant's claim to be considered afresh  as  this  evidence  was  not
    available to the original judge.


13.  At  paragraph  [18]  of  his  determination  the   FtTJ   noted   both
    representatives  agreed,  in  accordance  with  Devaseelan,  that   the
    starting point  was  the  determination  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal White. He reminded himself of the correct approach to be taken
    and at paragraph [19] he noted Dr  Mynott's  submission  that  the  new
    evidence would enable him to depart from the original  conclusion.  The
    FtTJ helpfully identified Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  White's
    credibility finding.

14. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal White did the following:

      a. He rejected the appellant's claim as he formed the opinion that  if
         the account were credible  then  the  country  reports  would  have
         referred to the appellant's father if he had held the  position  he
         did and that he had been executed.


      b. He found the absence  of  country  information  demonstrating  that
         family members were persecuted relevant to the appellant's appeal.


      c. He  made  a  number  of  significant  adverse  findings  about  the
         appellant's own claim.


15. It is against this background the FtTJ considered the new evidence from
    paragraph [22] onwards.

16. Ground One of the grounds of appeal surrounds the  FtTJ's  approach  to
    the witness evidence of FL. The FtTJ deals with this  evidence  between
    paragraphs [24] and [30]. He made a number of findings  about  the  new
    evidence and he accepted  the  respondent's  submissions  and  rejected
    those of Dr Mynott. In paragraph [24] he referred  to  a  discrepancy-a
    discrepancy Dr Mynott accepts but submits should  be  balanced  against
    those matters that were consistent. The FtTJ made an adverse finding at
    paragraph  [25]  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  knowledge  of  the
    President's date of death. At paragraph [26] the  FtTJ  noted  the  new
    evidence that was produced by  the  witness  and  this  included  death
    certificate, writ of execution, wanted notice, court summons and  birth
    details and recorded the respondent invited him to find those documents
    as unreliable for the reasons recorded.

17. Dr Mynott has submitted that the FtTJ failed to  give  these  documents
    sufficient weight and should have attached more weight to them in light
    of their consistency with the appellant's claim and  because  the  FtTJ
    found the witness was recognised in a number of country  reports  as  a
    "human rights activist and head  of  a  leading  organisation  in  that
    field".

18. The FtTJ clearly had regard to Dr Mynott's arguments as he set them out
    in some detail in paragraph [28]. However, at paragraph [29]  he  noted
    the account provided by an anonymous witness was inconsistent with  the
    appellant's account (not disputed) and concluded

         "...it is not possible to add any weight one way or  the  other  to
         that statement which on the one hand supports the appellant and  on
         the other hand seriously undermines the appellant's credibility and
         shows a lack of knowledge as to what happened...."


    At paragraph [30] of  his  determination  he  made  a  further  adverse
    finding.

19. Ground Two of the grounds of appeal related to the FtTJ's  approach  to
    the other witness. The FtTJ considered this witness  and  his  evidence
    from paragraph [31] onwards.  The  FtTJ  noted  the  witness  had  been
    criticised by the Upper Tribunal and her evidence  was  to  be  treated
    with caution. The FtTJ commented  that  the  terminology  used  in  the
    report in that earlier case was strikingly familiar to the extracts  of
    the report that were before him. The  FtTJ  stated,  with  reasons,  he
    intended to treat that evidence with a degree of caution.  He  examined
    her evidence in more  detail  from  paragraph  [33]  and  made  adverse
    findings and concluded the expert had failed to satisfy  him  that  the
    appellant would be persecuted because she claimed  to  carry  a  family
    name. He then considered her opinion on the documents  and  noted  both
    party's representations. The FtTJ's observations on the  documents  are
    recorded between paragraphs [38] and [45] and ultimately  concluded  at
    paragraph [46] that nothing in the documents undermined  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal White's earlier findings.

20. The FtTJ thereafter considered other evidence but  ultimately  rejected
    the appellant's claim and in  particular  he  was  not  satisfied  that
    family members of supporters of the Conte regime were persecuted.

21. Dr Mynott's submissions were lengthy and detailed but the thrust of the
    first two grounds of appeal was that the FtTJ should have attached more
    weight to the evidence provided by the witnesses.

22. In R and Others  v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982  Lord  Justice  Brooke
    summarised the points of law which would be encountered most frequently
    in practice as follows:

      a. Making  perverse  or  irrational  findings  on  matters  that  were
         material to the outcome.
      b. Failure to give reasons or any adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
         material matters.
      c. Failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts  of  fact  or
         opinion on material matters.
      d. Giving weight to immaterial matters.
      e. Making a material misdirection of law on any material matter.
      f. Committing or permitting a procedural or other irregularity capable
         of making a material difference to the outcome or fairness  of  the
         proceedings.
      g. Making a mistake as to a material fact, which could be  established
         by objective and un-contentious evidence when the appellant  and/or
         his advisors  were  not  responsible  for  the  mistake  and  where
         unfairness resulted from the fact that a mistake was made.


23. I am satisfied the FtTJ had full regard to all of the new evidence  and
    gave reasons why he rejected the evidence  or  attached  little  or  no
    weight to it. None of the points made by Dr Mynott amount to  an  error
    in law. An expert report or statement is evidence and some  reports  or
    statements carry more weight.  In  this  case  the  FtTJ  rejected  the
    evidence of both witnesses and gave his reasons. His conclusions cannot
    be criticised in light of the reasons  given  and  I  am  satisfied  Dr
    Mynott's submissions on the new evidence is a  mere  disagreement  with
    the FtTJ's findings.

24.  The  final  ground  of  appeal  related  to  the  FtTJ's  approach  to
    Devaseelan. I disagree with Dr Mynott's submission. The starting point,
    as both parties agreed, is the original determination.  The  FtTJ  then
    considered the additional evidence and rejected it for the  reasons  he
    gave. He then stated that  there  was  no  evidence  that  altered  the
    original judge's conclusions. Dr Mynott submitted he should have looked
    at all of the evidence afresh.

25. In Devaseelan 2002 UKIAT 00702 the Tribunal said the  first  Tribunal's
    determination stands as an assessment of the claim  the  Appellant  was
    making at the time of that first determination.  It is not  binding  on
    the second Tribunal but,  there  again,  the  second  Tribunal  is  not
    hearing an appeal against it.  The Tribunal set out various principles:



      a. The first decision is always the starting point; facts  since  then
         can always be considered.
      b. Facts before then but not relevant to the first decision can always
         be considered.
      c. The second Tribunal should treat with circumspection relevant facts
         that had not been brought to the first Tribunal's attention.
      d. If issues  and  evidence  on  the  first  and  second  appeals  are
         materially the same, the second Tribunal should treat the issues as
         settled by the first decision rather than allowing the matter to be
         re-litigated.
      e. The Tribunal said that there would be occasional  cases  where  the
         circumstances surrounding the first appeal were such that it  would
         be right for the second Tribunal to look at the matter  as  if  the
         first determination had never been made.


26. I do not find this is one of those cases that required the case  to  be
    considered as if the first determination had never been made. Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal White gave a number of  reasons  for  rejecting
    the appellant's appeal.  The  FtTJ  concluded  that  none  of  the  new
    evidence altered that position and in fact  in  some  instances  raised
    more questions than it answered.

27. I am satisfied there was no material error on any of the grounds.

Decision

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose an error.  The
    original decision shall stand.

29. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order was made in the First-tier and I see  no  reason  to  alter  that
    order now.



Signed:     Dated: January 8, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.



Signed:     Dated: January 8, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
