
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04191/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 27 May 2014                                |On 9 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G O

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeet, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Mair, instructed by Howells Solicitors LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is a case involving an appeal that was allowed by  the  First-tier
    Judge on Article 3 grounds on  the  basis  essentially  of  the  strong
    medical evidence that supported her claim.

2.   Her claim was found to  be  entirely  credible  by  the  judge  and  he
    allowed the appeal on the basis that her return to Nigeria would  reach
    the high threshold of inhuman treatment prohibited by Article 3 of  the
    ECHR.   So  he  accepted  the  ill-treatment  that  she  said  she  had
    experienced and he accepted the medical diagnosis, the confirmation  of
    what she said in the form of scarring  and  the  diagnosis  of  complex
    PTSD.

3.   What he did not do though was to make clear  findings  on  the  Refugee
    Convention and humanitarian protection aspects of  her  claim.   Having
    said that, the appeal succeeded under Article 3 and he went on  to  say
    that he was not satisfied that she had shown that she was a refugee  or
    shown that she was entitled to a grant of humanitarian  protection  but
    did not set out the factual basis for those conclusions.

4.   She had a claim that clearly deserved and required to be considered  in
    respect of international protection and  there  was  a  further  expert
    report in relation specifically I  think  to  mental  health  treatment
    issues but clearly the claim was one of ill-treatment in the  past  and
    if that was accepted as it clearly was then the judge had to go  on  to
    consider whether that showed her to be at risk as a refugee  or  person
    requiring international protection and any  issues  of  relocation  and
    state protection would require to be considered.

5.   Mr McVeet helpfully and I  think  wisely  essentially  agreed  with  Ms
    Mair's submission that the determination is flawed in the way  set  out
    above and it seems to me, therefore that the parties are  content  with
    this and that the matter should go back to the same  judge  essentially
    to complete his determination.  He has made clear  findings  which  are
    unchallenged on the evidence before him and those  will  of  course  be
    preserved as will the Article 3 finding but he will  need  to  complete
    his determination to assess the claim in the  context  of  the  Refugee
    Convention and humanitarian protection.  I can see no reason  why  this
    cannot be done on the papers.  The appellant has already given evidence
    and that evidence has been accepted.  It is a question of placing  that
    evidence in the context of the tests for international  protection,  so
    the matter will be remitted to Judge Upson  for  him  to  complete  his
    determination.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

