
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04386/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                         |          Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 23 July 2015                          |          On 04 September 2015    |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKLETON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SRM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hoshi, instructed by Migrant Legal Project

                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. We make an anonymity order under rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended) in the  light  of
    the sensitive  matters  raised  in  this  appeal  arising  out  of  the
    appellant's international protection claim.  This order  prohibits  the
    disclosure directly or indirectly (including by  the  parties)  of  the
    identity of the appellant.  Any disclosure in breach of this order  may
    amount to a contempt of court.  This order shall remain in force unless
    revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.

Introduction

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Archer) promulgated on 26 November  2014  allowing  the
    SRM's appeal against a decision to remove him to Afghanistan or  France
    by way of directions on the basis that he is a refugee and his  removal
    would breach the Refugee Convention and also Arts 2 and 3 of the  ECHR.



 3. For convenience, although this is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State
    we will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was  born  on  1  January
    1991.  The appellant appears to have left Afghanistan in  2009  fearing
    that he would be killed by the Taliban.  The appellant went  to  France
    where on 16 October 2009 he was granted refugee status and a  temporary
    residence permit. Thereafter, the appellant came to the United  Kingdom
    in November 2009 and claimed asylum on 30 November 2009.

 5. In a decision letter dated 17 June 2014, the Secretary of State refused
    the appellant's claims for asylum and under Arts 2,  3  and  8  of  the
    ECHR.  The Secretary of State did not accept  the  appellant's  account
    that he had been targeted and approached by the  Taliban  and  that  he
    would, therefore, be at risk on return.  The Secretary  of  State  also
    concluded that, in any event, the Afghan authorities  would  provide  a
    sufficiency of protection and  internal  relocation  to  Kabul  was  an
    option for the appellant.  On 17 June 2014, the Secretary of State made
    a decision to remove the appellant by way of directions to "Afghanistan
    or France."

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   his
    determination, Judge Archer accepted the appellant's account  and  that
    he would be at risk of  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  if  he
    returned to Afghanistan.  Judge Archer also concluded that there was no
    basis to deny the appellant's refugee status in the UK  simply  because
    he had already been granted refugee status in France.  Consequently, he
    allowed the appellant's appeal under the Refugee Convention and  Art  2
    and 3 of the ECHR.  However, Judge Archer declined to reach a  decision
    in relation to Art  8  given  his  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on
    international protection grounds.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge was wrong  in  law  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal under the Refugee  Convention  since  the  appellant
    could be removed safely to  France  in  accordance  with  the  proposed
    removal directions.

 8. On 29 December 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Adio)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal on that ground.

 9. In response to the grant of permission, the appellant served a rule  24
    response seeking to uphold Judge Archer's decision to allow the  appeal
    under the Refugee Convention.

10. In addition, on 20 January 2015 the appellant made an  application  out
    of time for permission to appeal on the sole ground that the judge  had
    been wrong not to consider the appellant's Art 8 claim.

11. That application for permission was based upon a reading of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in EG and NG (UT  Rule  17:  Withdrawal;  Rule  24:
    Scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 00143 (IAC).  In particular,  para  [3]  of
    the head note which states that:

         "A party that seeks to persuade the Upper  Tribunal  to  replace  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal with a decision that would make
         a material difference to one of the  parties  needs  permission  to
         appeal."

12. The appellant's application for permission to  appeal  has  never  been
    determined and, shortly  before  the  UT  hearing,  an  application  to
    adjourn the hearing in order that that application could be  determined
    was refused by the First-tier Tribunal.

13. We  need  say  no  more  concerning  the  appellant's  application  for
    permission and the premise that such an application was required by  EG
    and NG because, as will become clear shortly, it is plain  to  us  that
    Judge Archer's decision in respect of  the  appellant's  refugee  claim
    cannot stand and on remitting the  appeal  to  him,  the  Art  8  issue
    remains outstanding for determination.

Discussion

14. There is no challenge to Judge Archer's conclusion that  the  appellant
    has established he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason in Afghanistan.  As a consequence, the appellant is a
    refugee within the meaning of Art 1(A) of the Refugee Convention.

15. The argument before us concerned whether  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    allow the appellant's  appeal  if,  in  accordance  with  the  proposed
    removal  directions,  it  was  proposed  to  remove  the  appellant  to
    "Afghanistan or France" and there was no suggestion that the  appellant
    was at risk in France.

16. It is important to  set  out  the  ground  of  appeal  upon  which  the
    appellant relies in order to succeed.  It is set out in s.84(g) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA  Act  2002")  as
    follows:

         "That  removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom   in
         consequence of the immigration decision  would  breach  the  United
         Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee  Convention  or  would  be
         unlawful  under  s.6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  as   being
         incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights."

17. As is clear from that provision, the appeal is  not  properly  seen  as
    being on the ground merely of establishing the individual's status as a
    refugee under the Refugee Convention but  that  "removal"  would  be  a
    breach of the Refugee Convention.

18. Art 33(1)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  provides,  under  the  heading
    "Prohibition of Expulsion or Return" ('Refoulement')" that:

         "No Contracting State shall expel or return ('refouler') a  refugee
         in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where  his
         life or  freedom  will  be  threatened  on  account  of  his  race,
         religion, nationality, membership of a particular social  group  or
         political opinion."

19. Art 33(2) creates an exception to that, not applicable in this  appeal,
    where an individual has been convicted of a particularly serious  crime
    and constitutes a danger to the community.

20. It is the terms of Art 33(1) which prohibits the return of a person  to
    his country of nationality when he is a refugee, namely  a  person  who
    has a well-founded fear of persecution in that country of  nationality.
    In the usual  case,  therefore,  where  the  only  destination  in  the
    proposed  removal  directions  is  the  individual's  own  country   of
    nationality, having  established  that  he  is  a  refugee,  Art  33(1)
    prohibits  his  removal  as  his  return  will  contravene  Art  33(1).
    Consequently, when those  facts  are  established  on  an  appeal,  the
    individual is entitled to have his appeal allowed under  s.84(1)(g)  as
    his removal in accordance with the removal directions would breach  the
    Refugee Convention.

21. Art 33(1) of  the  Refugee  Convention  cannot,  however,  prevent  the
    appellant's  removal  in  this  appeal  as   the   removal   directions
    contemplate removal to either Afghanistan  or  France.   There  was  no
    suggestion that the appellant is at risk in France and hence,  although
    a refugee as accepted by  Judge  Archer,  the  appellant's  removal  in
    consequence of the directions (albeit  focused  on  France)  would  not
    breach the Refugee Convention.

22. Having raised this point with  Mr  Hoshi  at  the  hearing,  he  relied
    instead upon Art 32 of the  Refugee  Convention  which,  he  submitted,
    prevented the appellant's removal to France.

23. Art 32(1) under the heading "Expulsion" states as follows:

         "the Contracting States shall not expel a refugee lawfully in their
         territory save on grounds of national security  or  public  order."
         (our emphasis)

24. Arts 32(2) and (3) are not directly relevant to this appeal.

25. Mr Hoshi submitted that the appellant became "lawfully" in the UK  when
    Judge  Archer  decided  that  he  was  a  refugee.   Consequently,  the
    appellant could not be removed by virtue of Art 32(1) except on grounds
    of "national  security  or  public  order"  which  it  has  never  been
    suggested apply to the appellant.

26. Mr Hoshi submitted that the only basis upon which the  appellant  could
    be removed to  France  was  pursuant  to  the  Dublin  III  Regulations
    certifying the appellant's claims  under  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 on the basis that France  is  a
    safe third country.

27. Mr Hoshi accepted that he was unable  to  draw  our  attention  to  any
    authority dealing with the application of Art 32(1) and, in particular,
    when it could be said that a refugee was  "lawfully"  in  the  UK.   He
    indicated that he had been taken by surprise when this issue concerning
    Art 32 was raised by the Tribunal at the hearing.  We are not  entirely
    clear why that was the case as Art 32 is specifically relied upon by Mr
    Hoshi in the appellant's rule 24 response at paras 13-15 as  the  basis
    for upholding Judge Archer's determination that the appellant could not
    be removed to France.  In the result, however,  in  order  to  give  Mr
    Hoshi a further opportunity to consider the application of Art  32,  we
    allowed him seven days in which to serve any written submissions on the
    Tribunal and Secretary of State concerning the application of Art 32 to
    the appellant.  A further seven days was allowed to  the  Secretary  of
    State to respond and a further seven days after that for the  appellant
    to reply.

28. In the result, Mr Hoshi submitted a "Note" dated 26 July 2015 in  which
    he stated at para 2:

         "Having had the opportunity to undertake further research  on  this
         point, counsel respectfully agrees with the  Panel's  view:  it  is
         accepted on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  Article  32  Refugee
         Convention does not inhibit his removal to  France."  (emphasis  in
         original)

29. Mr Hoshi cites no authority  for  his  concession  but  it  is  clearly
    correct based upon the decision of the Supreme Court in R(ST (Eritrea))
    v SSHD [2012] UKSC 12; [2012] Imm AR 734.

30. In that  case,  the  claimant,  who  was  a  citizen  of  Eritrea,  had
    successfully established in the appellate system that she was a refugee
    and had a well-founded fear of persecution  in  Eritrea  and  that  her
    removal to Eritrea would be unlawful.   The  Secretary  of  State  then
    proposed her removal to Ethiopia where she had not established a  well-
    founded fear of  persecution.   The  claimant  sought  judicial  review
    seeking a mandatory order that the Secretary of State grant  her  leave
    to remain as a refugee in accordance with the Tribunal's  decision  and
    an order to quash the proposed removal directions to Ethiopia.

31. The  claimant's  case  turned  upon  whether  Art  32  of  the  Refugee
    Convention applied to her as a "refugee" who was "lawfully" in  the  UK
    and could not, as a consequence, be removed other than  on  grounds  of
    national security or public order.

32. The unanimous decision of the Supreme Court (Lord Hope, Lady  Hale  and
    Lords Brown, Mance, Kerr, Clarke and Dyson) was that the claimant could
    not rely on  Art  32(1).   The  Supreme  Court  held  that  whether  an
    individual was "lawfully" in the UK  was  a  matter  of  domestic  law.
    Secondly, the Supreme Court held that a person was  not  "lawfully"  in
    the UK for the  purposes  of  Art  32(1)  where  he  had  been  granted
    temporary admission, even if he was a refugee, but  had  not  yet  been
    granted leave to give effect to that status.  Only then,  could  it  be
    said that an individual was "lawfully" in the UK although  found  by  a
    Tribunal to be a refugee.   The  Supreme  Court  placed  reliance  upon
    s.11(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 which, inter alia, provides that:

         "... a person who has not  otherwise  entered  the  United  Kingdom
         shall be deemed not to  do  so  as  long  as  he  is  detained,  or
         temporarily admitted or released while liable to  detention,  under
         the powers conferred by Schedule 2 to this Act."

33. In ST, the claimant had successfully appealed a decision to remove  her
    to Eritrea on the basis that she had a well-founded fear of persecution
    in Eritrea and would, if returned there, be returned in breach  of  Art
    33(1) of the Refugee Convention.  Despite that conclusion, the claimant
    had not yet been granted leave to enter or remain and was only  subject
    to temporary admission.

34. The appellant in this appeal is in no  stronger  position:  indeed  the
    appellate process, unlike that in ST, has yet to be concluded.   Within
    these proceedings, he has been found by Judge Archer to  be  a  refugee
    but he has not been granted leave to enter or remain and  continues  to
    be on temporary admission to the UK.  Applying ST, this appellant, like
    the claimant in ST, is not "lawfully" in the  United  Kingdom  and  Art
    32(1) does not apply so as to  prevent  his  expulsion  other  than  on
    grounds of national security or public order.

35.  For  these  reasons,  Judge  Archer  erred  in  law  in  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal on the ground set out in s.84(1)(g) of the  NIA  Act
    2002.  His decision to allow the appeal on asylum grounds is set aside.
     That is also the result in relation  to  his  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR in the absence of  evidence  that
    the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of  treatment  contrary  to  those
    provisions in France.

Disposal

36. We consider that the proper disposal of this appeal is to remit  it  to
    Judge Archer.  His findings of fact  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    international protection claim shall stand.  We direct:

      1. Judge Archer should re-make his decision in relation to the Refugee
         Convention and Arts 2 and 3  of  the  ECHR  in  the  light  of  our
         determination and any evidence (if there indeed is  any)  that  the
         appellant is at risk of prohibited treatment in France.

      2. Judge Archer should, in addition, consider afresh  the  appellant's
         claim under Art 8 of the ECHR which was previously undetermined.

37. Consequently, the appeal is remitted to be heard by Judge Archer in the
    First-tier Tribunal in accordance with our directions.



                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


