
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04219/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 1st November 2013                            |On 11th November 2013      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     mK

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Spence, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Khan, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
Hickmotts


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Kelly made following a hearing at Bradford on 31st July 2013.



Background

 2. The claimant is a national of Pakistan  born  on  20th  May  1956.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent made on 23rd April 2010
    to remove him from the UK on Article 8 grounds. He had arrived  in  the
    UK on 13th March 2004 and was granted leave to enter as a visitor for a
    period of six months and overstayed.  He was  arrested  on  30th  March
    2010 when he was living at his son's address in Rotherham.

 3. His son is married and has  four  children  two  of  whom  suffer  from
    cerebral palsy.  The claimant's daughter-in-law is anaemic and  suffers
    from migraine and a vitamin D deficiency and has  a  pronounced  speech
    impediment.  His son is a taxi driver and the sole breadwinner  of  the
    family.

 4. It is the claimant's case that he moved to live with  his  son  shortly
    before September 2004 and has provided indispensible assistance in  the
    daily care of his grandchildren ever since.

 5. The Respondent did not believe that the family had  been  together  all
    that time and believed that he had only  been  living  with  him  since
    shortly before the arrest.

The judge's determination

 6. The judge accepted the evidence that the claimant had been living  with
    his son for the entire period. There was some evidence to the contrary.
    In June 2010, in a letter from a community occupational therapist,  the
    author wrote:

         "F's grandfather has come to live with his son's family  and  since
         moving in has provided the  parents  invaluable  support  with  the
         childcare..."

    Another occupational therapist did not  record  him  as  one  of  those
    living in the family home when she wrote her letter of 16th March  2010
    following a home visit.

 7. The judge said that the claimant's presence was unlawful from  the  end
    of 2004 onwards and had only come to the attention of  the  authorities
    in March 2010.  It was obvious to him that the son and  daughter-in-law
    would be wary of revealing his presence to health officials.  The  fact
    that he first started to be mentioned in medical correspondence shortly
    after the arrest was not coincidental but resulted from the  fact  that
    his presence had already been discovered and there was  no  longer  any
    point in the family hiding the fact that he was living with them.

 8. He said that it was inconceivable that the claimant  would  have  lived
    elsewhere whilst his son and  daughter-in-law  struggled  to  meet  the
    needs of four small children, two of whom were suffering from  cerebral
    palsy.  Moreover it is difficult to imagine where else  he  could  have
    stayed.

 9. He was impressed by the detail that the claimant had  provided  in  his
    witness statement concerning the daily practical care that he  provided
    and accepted that the children had developed a deep emotional bond with
    their grandfather.  The claim was supported by  an  independent  social
    worker who observed the children's reactions when in his  company.   He
    said it was plainly in the children's best interests that the  claimant
    should remain in the UK so as to be able to provide them with both  the
    practical assistance and the emotional support  that  he  had  provided
    continuously over the last nine years.

10. The judge said that it may well be  that  the  cost  of  the  care  and
    assistance that the claimant had provided for free would have to be met
    by the state following his removal or the children's father would  have
    to give up his employment in order  to  assist  in  looking  after  the
    children.  On the other hand the claimant himself would become a burden
    on the State if he were to remain and his removal would serve to  deter
    others from acting as he has done and overall. There would therefore be
    a significant public benefit attached to his removal.

11. Set against that were the best interests of  the  children  which  were
    overwhelmingly served by the claimant remaining here.  On that basis he
    allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

12. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the  judge  failed  to  make  adequate  findings  in  relation  to  the
    credibility issues raised by the Presenting  Officer  before  assessing
    the best interests of the children.   The  medical  evidence  submitted
    with the initial application for asylum, dated between March  2007  and
    March 2010, makes no reference to  him  as  part  of  the  family  unit
    despite numerous home visits and the description of  the  family  home.
    The judge's findings were  perverse.  He  had  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration to the claimant's credibility and failed to balance  this
    adequately when assessing proportionality.

13. Furthermore he had failed to consider the assistance which  the  family
    received from other family members.  The best interests of the children
    are served by being with their parents and their  mother  is  the  main
    carer.  It is only where there  are  exceptional  circumstances,  which
    would  mean  that  removal  would   result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences, that  the  new  Rules  will  not  achieve  an  Article  8
    compliant result.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 23rd
    August 2013 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

15. Mr Spence relied on his  grounds  and  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    speculated when he had said that there was a  logical  explanation  for
    the claimant concealing his presence from the health officials.  If the
    judge had not found that he had been living with the family for nine or
    ten years he would have accorded the best  interests  of  the  children
    less weight.

16. Ms Khan submitted that the grounds amounted to a disagreement with  the
    decision and the evidence overwhelmingly established that the  claimant
    had been living with the family since 2004.  He had provided  a  letter
    from the GP, giving the son's present address, which  stated  that  the
    claimant had been registered with the practice  since  September  2004.
    In his interview he said that he had been supported by his son since he
    had been in the UK.  The independent social  worker  had  observed  his
    relationship with the children and come to a  conclusion  that  it  was
    plainly in the children's best interests that  he  should  remain  with
    them.

17. Mr Spence did not wish to reply.

Findings and Conclusions

18. The grounds amount to a disagreement  with  the  decision  but  nothing
    more.

19. It was plainly  open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the  evidence
    established that the claimant had been living  with  his  son  and  his
    son's family since 2004.  There was not only the oral evidence  of  the
    witnesses which  the  judge  was  entitled  to  accept,  but  also  the
    independent evidence from the GP and the social worker.  The judge  was
    entitled, in that context, to infer that the  logical  explanation  for
    the claimant's presence not being  revealed  to  health  officials  was
    because he was here unlawfully.

20. The evidence did not establish that  there  were  other  relatives  who
    could help this family in the way that the claimant has done.

21.  The  judge  plainly  considered  the  Respondent's  interests  in  the
    claimant's removal in some detail and concluded that there would  be  a
    significant public benefit attaching to  it.   However  the  assessment
    that the best interests of the  British  grandchildren  outweighed  the
    Secretary of State's interest in his removal was a judgment for him  to
    make. The judge in a careful  and  thoughtful  determination  carefully
    weighed up all of the relevant factors and came to a conclusion open to
    him on the evidence.

Decision

22. The judge's decision stands.  The claimant's appeal is allowed.




Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

