
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04305/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9th October 2015                  |On 23rd October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                               MR IDRIS ABDUL
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan,  appeals  with  permission
    against the Respondent's decision of 13th June 2014 refusing  to  grant
    him leave to remain in the United Kingdom and giving directions for his
    removal under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
    2006.

 2. The Appellant's date of birth has been accepted as  being  1st  January
    1996.  He was born in the Paktia province of Afghanistan.   He  entered
    the UK in October 2009 when he was aged 13 and he claimed asylum.  This
    was not granted because much of what he had claimed,  with  respect  to
    his contention that he would be at risk upon return to Afghanistan, was
    disbelieved by the Respondent.  However, in view of his young  age,  he
    was, on 23rd February 2010, granted discretionary leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom  until  22nd  February  2013.   That  grant  was  in
    accordance with the Respondent's published policy on  the  handling  of
    asylum applications from unaccompanied children.  There was  no  appeal
    against the decision, made at the same time, to  refuse  to  grant  him
    asylum.

 3. The Appellant, then assisted by Sultan Lloyd  Solicitors,  applied  for
    further leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.   The  application  was
    sent, it appears, on 21st February 2013.  The Respondent considered  it
    and, indeed, it was that which led to the decision of 13th June 2014.

 4. The Respondent's reasons for her decision of 13th June 2014 appear in a
    "reasons for refusal letter" which bears that date.   In  that  letter,
    the Respondent noted that the Appellant had initially claimed  that  he
    was at risk because his father had been working  as  a  driver  for  an
    American organisation and that, as a result, the family had  become  of
    adverse interest to the local Taliban.  The Appellant  was  maintaining
    that  contention.   However,  said  the  Respondent,  there  had   been
    inconsistencies in the account given by the Appellant and that, in  any
    event, on his own account his family had now relocated to Jalalabad and
    the Respondent thought there would be no risk there.  Thus,  whilst  it
    was accepted that there had been some adverse interest in Paktia  there
    would no longer be such interest given the  family's  relocation.   The
    Respondent  said  that  some  attempts  had  been  made  to  trace  the
    Appellant's family in Afghanistan but  that  these  attempts  had  been
    hampered by what was stated to be the Appellant's  failure  to  provide
    sufficient information.  It was not accepted that he would lack  family
    to return to.

 5. The Respondent noted that the Appellant had been convicted of a  number
    of criminal offences between October 2012 and March  2014.   This  was,
    said the Respondent, relevant to a consideration under Article 8 of the
    ECHR within the Immigration Rules (Appendix FM) and it  was  said  that
    the Appellant did not meet the requirements of Section S -  LTR  1.2  -
    1.7 of the Rules in light of his convictions.  It was said he  had  not
    claimed a right to remain as a partner or a parent.  He  did  not  meet
    the requirements of Rule 276ADE with respect to private life.

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In his  Grounds  of
    Appeal he asserted that he would be at risk upon return to  Afghanistan
    and made a general assertion to the effect that he disagreed  with  the
    conclusions contained within the reasons for refusal letter.

 7. The appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Grimmett) on 4th
    September 2014.  By that time, of course, the  Appellant  had  attained
    adulthood.  He was aged 18.  He was represented at the appeal by Sultan
    Lloyd Solicitors and the Respondent was also represented.  He gave oral
    evidence.  It was contended that  he  would  be  risk  upon  return  to
    Afghanistan and that removal would represent a breach of Article 8,  in
    part at least, on the basis of his claimed relationship with a  British
    woman who was, it was said, pregnant with his child.

 8. As to the claim to the effect that he would be at risk upon return, and
    as to the credibility of what he had to say about that, the  First-tier
    Tribunal said this;

         "11. I am satisfied on the  lower  standard  that  the  Appellant's
             family was visited by the Taliban, as that was accepted by the
             Respondent in the first refusal letter (paragraph 19)  and  Mr
             Lewis [the Presenting Officer] did not seek to  withdraw  that
             concession.  Specifically the Respondent refers  to  questions
             31 and 39 to 45 of the interview in which the  Appellant  said
             that he could not recall when they first came  as  he  was  at
             school but he and  his  brother  were  approached  by  men  on
             motorbikes.  After that they came to the house and  the  third
             time they saw him and  threatened  him,  saying  that  if  his
             father did not stop working for the Americans they would  take
             the Appellant.  That was the last time that they came  to  the
             house while he was in Afghanistan and his father then arranged
             for him to leave the country.  That appears to  have  been  in
             about the early or middle part of 2009.

         12.   In  his  witness  statement  dated  11th  November  2009  the
             Appellant said his family had had problems in  Jalalabad.   In
             his witness statement on 11th March 2013 made  in  support  of
             his application for further leave to remain the Appellant said
             that at the time his case was determined, in February 2010, he
             was in contact with his family, particularly  his  mother  who
             was living with his siblings in Jalalabad  but  for  the  last
             several months he had made several  attempts  to  contact  the
             family with no success.  In his latest  witness  statement  he
             said that he had only spoken to his family in  Afghanistan  on
             two occasions since his arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
             after the second occasion the number stopped working and  then
             he lost his phone that contained the number.   That  does  not
             appear to be consistent  with  the  second  witness  statement
             where he suggests that it is only since about the end of  2012
             that he lost contact with his  family.   In  addition  in  his
             asylum interview, which  took  place  in  November  2009,  the
             Appellant also said that he was at that time in  contact  with
             his family still.

         13.  The Appellant said in interview that he had relatives  of  his
             father's in the United Kingdom but he did not  know  who  they
             were.  In his 2013 witness statement the Appellant  said  that
             he had two maternal uncles whom he saw  on  a  regular  basis,
             mainly  during  his  holidays,  but  in  his  latest   witness
             statement he said he had one  paternal  uncle  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  That uncle provided a witness statement but did  not
             attend the hearing because it  was  said  he  was  working  at
             Heathrow Airport and could not get the time off.   Bearing  in
             mind the importance of this claim and the fact that notice  of
             the hearing was sent out on 28th July 2014 I am not  satisfied
             his uncle could not have attended in all the circumstances.  I
             note that the appeal was adjourned on 28th  July  having  been
             listed for that date on  27th  June  because  the  Appellant's
             paternal uncle said he could not  attend  as  he  planned  Eid
             celebrations with his family in London.  A copy of the witness
             statement was handed in at the hearing.   The  Appellant  said
             that he went to London to get it although it was dated the day
             before the hearing and he said he had gone the previous  week.
             The Appellant said his uncle was busy today.

         14.  I am not satisfied that I have been given  the  true  position
             about the Appellant's family members in the United Kingdom  or
             his contact with the family in Afghanistan.  The Appellant now
             says he has only a paternal uncle and paternal cousin  in  the
             United Kingdom but has not explained why he indicated  he  had
             maternal uncles.  In  the  interview  he  denied  knowing  any
             relatives of his family at all save that he had three maternal
             uncles one of whom had passed away and that he  did  not  know
             how many paternal uncles he had or where they were and that he
             did not know where his paternal grandmother lived and said his
             maternal grandmother lived in Jalalabad.

         15.  The Appellant says he was able to contact his uncle in the  UK
             because after the asylum interview he spoke to his father  who
             gave him the uncle's telephone number.  It is not in  my  view
             credible that the Appellant's father would not have  contacted
             his brother before the Appellant had  arrived  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  The Appellant had a telephone but his father had  no
             way of knowing whether the Appellant would be able to keep the
             phone during the long journey.  It would be  far  more  likely
             that the uncle would be warned of  the  Appellant's  impending
             arrival than that the father would tell  the  Appellant  after
             arrival of his relative in the UK.

         16.  I am satisfied  that  the  inconsistencies  and  the  lack  of
             evidence from the Appellant's relatives in the United Kingdom,
             together with the inconsistent evidence about the  contact  he
             had with his family, show that the Appellant is not being open
             about the current circumstances of his family.

         17.  I am, however, satisfied that they are reasonably likely to be
             in Jalalabad as that is where  they  contacted  him  from  and
             where one of his grandparents was living  when  the  Appellant
             left Afghanistan.  In addition, the Appellant's uncle said the
             last he heard was that his brother was  living  in  Jalalabad.
             There is no evidence to suggest that  the  Appellant's  family
             have had any problems in Jalalabad other than the  Appellant's
             claim that that was what he was told.  He gives no  detail  of
             what the trouble was.

         18.   I  take  into  account  that  the  Appellant  has  also  been
             inconsistent in the first and second witness statements as  to
             his departure from Afghanistan.  He says that was  because  he
             was originally afraid, but that  makes  no  sense  as  he  was
             simply being asked to explain where he went to and  there  was
             no reason why he should say he had been taken to Jalalabad  if
             he was taken at that time to unknown city, as  he  claimed  in
             the second witness statement of 2013.

         19.  I am satisfied therefore that this Appellant still has  family
             and that he knows where they are and there is no  evidence  to
             suggest that if he joins them in Jalalabad he will be  at  any
             risk."

 9. The First-tier Tribunal then considered the situation with  respect  to
    Article 8 both within and outside of the Rules.  It was said that, with
    respect to Section L  -  LTR  of  Appendix  FM,  the  presence  of  the
    applicant in the UK was not conducive to the public  good  because,  in
    light of matters including his convictions, it was undesirable to allow
    him to remain in the United Kingdom.  Those convictions were specified.
     As to the relationship, it was noted that he and  his  girlfriend  had
    said they had been in a relationship since they were at school and that
    there was evidence of  the  pregnancy  though  not  evidence  that  the
    Appellant  was  the  prospective  father.   It  was  noted   that   the
    Appellant's girlfriend had said that if he were removed from the UK she
    would "probably" accompany him to Afghanistan such that there were  not
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.   It
    was also pointed out that, if she  did  not  wish  to  travel  to  that
    country, he could seek entry clearance having been returned.  The First-
    tier Tribunal then said this;

         "28. With regard to paragraph 276ADE the Appellant  does  not  meet
             the requirements of S - LTR.1.5 or 1.6, he has only ever  been
             given limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom and whilst
             he has been in the United Kingdom his private  life  seems  to
             have been only the life he enjoys with his girlfriend.  He has
             not been able  to  complete  education  or  hold  down  a  job
             apparently, according to his social worker  in  2013,  he  has
             been unable to make the best of the opportunities presented to
             him and it remained doubtful that he would be able to  sustain
             a reasonable commitment to an education placement and that  he
             will often attempt improved  behaviour  if  he  perceives  the
             reward for doing this but it lasts only until  the  reward  is
             achieved.

         29.  Although he  was  young  when  he  arrived  and  has  spent  a
             significant proportion of his life in the  United  Kingdom  he
             has no strong private life apart from his girlfriend and  that
             part of his life  can  continue  in  Afghanistan  as  she  has
             expressed the intention to be with him there.  Even  were  the
             private  life  stronger  than  it  is  it   would   still   be
             proportionate to remove the Appellant bearing in mind that  he
             has not shown that he is at risk any longer, that he  has  not
             been honest in the evidence he  has  given  about  his  family
             either in Afghanistan or in the United Kingdom  and  that  his
             behaviour in the United Kingdom for  one  so  young  has  been
             reprehensible."

10. The Appellant, still then  represented  by  Sultan  Lloyds  Solicitors,
    applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Such  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Omotosho in these terms;

         "2.  In the grounds seeking permission it was essentially contended
             that the judge erred in law by:

             a.   Failing  to  put  specific  inconsistent  points  to  the
                  Appellant to enable him the opportunity to address  these.



             b.   Failure to direct herself in  accordance  with  the  duty
                  identified by the court in ML (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA
                  Civ 844 by having regard to and taking into account  every
                  factor which might tell in favour of an applicant.

             c.    Giving  inadequate  justification  for  dismissing   the
                  Appellant's claim as incredible especially his account  of
                  contact with his family was not necessarily  inconsistent.



             d.   Failure to have proper regard to background evidence  and
                  case law in assessing the asylum claim of an unaccompanied
                  minor.

             e.   Failure to address the arguments  advanced  in  relations
                  (sic) to the Respondent's failure in her duty  to  attempt
                  to trace the Appellant's family.

             f.   In respect of Article 8 the judge erred in  finding  that
                  failure to make a valid application for  leave  to  remain
                  was a bar to success under Appendix FM.

             g.   Failure to conduct a full proportionality assessment.

             h.   Failing to make findings regarding the genuineness of the
                  Appellant's relationship.

             i.   Failing to adequately consider the impact  of  relocation
                  to Afghanistan on the  Appellant's  girlfriend  and  their
                  expected child.

         3.   The above grounds disclose  arguable  error  of  law.   It  is
             arguable that the judge had made inconsistent findings without
             full regard to the objective evidence and case law  especially
             in assessing risk on return.

         4.   In addition the failure  to  conduct  a  full  proportionality
             assessment and make findings regarding the genuineness of  the
             Appellant's  relationship  with  his  girlfriend   and   their
             expected child makes the decision unsafe."

11. I have proceeded on the basis that the judge, at the end  of  paragraph
    4, meant to say arguably unsafe because, of course, the judge  was,  at
    that stage, only considering whether permission should or should not be
    granted rather than whether the appeal to the Upper Tribunal should  or
    should not be allowed.

12. In the normal way of things this appeal was listed for a hearing before
    the Upper Tribunal in order to determine whether or not the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal  involved  an  error  of  law  such  that  that
    decision ought to be set aside.  Prior to the matter coming before  me,
    however, there had been two abortive hearings.  The first one, in  June
    2015, was attended by the Appellant in person.  It appears he explained
    that he was no longer  represented  by  Sultan  Lloyd  Solicitors  but,
    rather, by a firm called SKR.  There was another hearing in August 2015
    when no one attended but the Upper Tribunal was not satisfied, on  that
    occasion, that proper service had been effected.   On  both  occasions,
    therefore, matters had been adjourned.

13. The Appellant attended unrepresented before me.  His girlfriend was  in
    attendance and her child had  already  been  born.   Mr  Mills  was  in
    attendance on behalf of the Respondent.

14. The  Appellant,  who  clearly  spoke  and  understood  English  without
    difficulty, and clearly did not require an interpreter albeit that  one
    had been provided, asked me  to  adjourn  the  proceedings  again.   He
    explained to me that his social worker had advised him  to  obtain  new
    solicitors so he had ceased to instruct Sultan Lloyd  Solicitors.   SKR
    Solicitors had told him that they would take  his  case  but,  after  a
    couple of weeks, they had told him that they were no longer undertaking
    immigration work.  Another firm of solicitors, Paragon  Law,  had  told
    him that they would look at his case and would give him an answer as to
    whether they would represent him or not.  He did not know how long they
    would need to make up their minds about that.   Mr  Mills  opposed  the
    adjournment  request,  pointing  out  that  there  had  been   previous
    adjournments and that, on the basis of  what  the  Appellant  had  very
    frankly indicated, there was no guarantee that  Paragon  Law  would  be
    prepared to take his case.

15. I decided not to adjourn.  In so doing I took into account the  general
    power to adjourn conferred by Rule 5(3)(h) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, the "overriding objective" as set  out  in
    Rule 2 and general principles of fairness and natural justice.

16. The Appellant is not a lawyer and his  wish  to  have  the  proceedings
    adjourned so that he could secure  the  services  of  one  is  entirely
    understandable.   However,  in  this  case,  there  had  been  previous
    adjournments (albeit that I do not blame the Appellant at all for them)
    and, had I been prepared to accede to his request, that would have been
    the third.  Thus, there had  been  a  degree  of  delay  already.   The
    Appellant had obtained permission to  appeal  on  the  basis  of  quite
    detailed grounds  drafted  by  a  competent  and  experienced  firm  of
    immigration solicitors so what was being said as to the claimed defects
    in the determination was clear.  There was no certainty at all, on  the
    basis of what the Appellant himself  had  to  say,  that  the  firm  of
    solicitors he had most recently been in contact with would be  prepared
    to take his case and there was nothing from  them  indicating,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, what their position was.  Putting all of that  together
    I concluded it would be appropriate to proceed  and  that,  indeed,  it
    would be fair and just to do so.

17. The Appellant was then given some time so he  could  consider  what  to
    say.  After that he told me that  he  had  told  the  truth  about  his
    relatives in the UK and the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  been  wrong  to
    disbelieve him about that.  He said that he now  has  a  child  and  it
    would not be safe for the child  or  for  him  to  go  to  Afghanistan.
    Further, if people in Afghanistan discovered he had had a child outside
    of marriage it would cause him problems.

18. Mr Mills  submitted  that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  amounted  to  mere
    disagreement with the First-tier Tribunal's findings  and  conclusions.
    Ample reasons for the  conclusions  had  been  given.   The  judge  had
    correctly directed herself  as  to  the  relevant  standard  of  proof.
    Nothing more than that was necessary stemming  from  the  case  of  ML,
    cited above.  The grounds made points relevant to unaccompanied  minors
    but, by the date of the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Appellant was an adult.  He could not rely upon any alleged failure  of
    the Respondent to seek to trace  his  relatives  in  Afghanistan  as  a
    result of what had been said in TN and MA (Afghanistan) (Appellants)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2015 UKSC  40.
    As to Article 8, whilst Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  did  not
    constitute a complete code for the consideration of Article  8  claims,
    the scope for allowing Article 8 applications outside the Rules was now
    quite narrow.  Everything had  been  considered.   The  option  of  the
    Appellant applying for entry clearance from abroad had been  identified
    in the determination.  As to the new circumstances, being the birth  of
    the child, the Appellant might  wish  to  contemplate  making  a  fresh
    application under Article 8 as the father of a British born  child  but
    that was not a matter for the First-tier Tribunal.

19. The Appellant indicated he had nothing further to add.

20. I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal did not make an error  of
    law and that its decision shall stand.  I set out my reasoning, in this
    regard, below.

21. In my judgment  the  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  credibility,  as
    contained in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal,  is  a  full
    and fair one.  Complaint is made that what the  Appellant  had  to  say
    about contact with his family was not necessarily inconsistent so  that
    the First-tier Tribunal was obliged to probe matters further  with  him
    and put any points it had regarding  inconsistency  to  him.   It  was,
    however, open to the First-tier Tribunal to  conclude  that  there  was
    inconsistency in the various indications he had given as to his contact
    with family  members  in  Afghanistan.   In  particular,  his  apparent
    indication that he had been in  contact  with  them,  particularly  his
    mother, save for the last several months, as set out in  his  statement
    of 11th March 2013, seemed  to  sit  unhappily  with  his  more  recent
    statements in which he had said that he had only spoken to  his  family
    on only two occasions since his arrival in the UK in  2009.   I  cannot
    see that the First-tier Tribunal was obliged  to  put  each  and  every
    concern it might have with his evidence to  him.   In  any  event,  its
    general conclusions as to  credibility  were  based  upon  a  range  of
    factors and not limited to that point.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    accept the truth of the initial part of his account with respect to the
    family experiencing some problems in Paktia but that did  not  mean  it
    was obliged to accept the rest of what he had to say or that, as  seems
    to be suggested in the grounds, this created some form  of  presumption
    that he was telling the truth about other matters.  Its explanation  as
    to why it did not believe the other matters was sufficiently  full  and
    sustainable.

22. Given the First-tier Tribunal's findings that the  family  had  had  no
    difficulty in Jalalabad and that he did have family there to return to,
    and that he was no longer a minor by the date it  was  considering  his
    case, it was not necessary for it to make specific  references  neither
    to any background material regarding Afghanistan nor to case  law.   In
    any event, the failure to refer to decided cases is not, of itself,  an
    error of law so long as the correct principles are applied.  Whilst  it
    is the case that the attainment of adulthood does not, of itself,  mean
    that a young person will not be at risk because of youth, a point which
    I think the grounds might have been  seeking  to  make,  there  was  no
    evidence offered for any suggestion that, if  the  Appellant's  account
    was largely incredible as it was found to be, and bearing in  mind  the
    absence of any problems the family had experienced in  Jalalabad,  that
    he would be at risk on return there though  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    alternative finding to the effect that  he  could  safely  relocate  to
    Kabul has not been the subject of any specific challenge.   As  to  the
    point about the case of ML, cited above, that  was  a  case  where  the
    Court of Appeal were concerned with a determination of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which had contained numerous factual errors and  it  was  said
    that, in that case, those errors undermined the determination and  that
    the Upper Tribunal had been wrong to think that factual errors of  that
    sort could not amount to arguable errors of law.  This case, though, is
    far removed from that because it has not been alleged  that  there  are
    any factual errors in the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Further, as Mr Mills points  out,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  correctly
    directed itself as to the relevant burden and  standard  of  proof  and
    then it  made  findings  and  reached  conclusions  according  to  that
    standard.  Nothing more could have been required of it.

23. As to the point about the Secretary of State's duty to attempt to trace
    the family members of unaccompanied minors  (which  the  Appellant  was
    when he arrived), this is something  which  has  been  the  subject  of
    extensive litigation.  However, it does not seem to me that  given  the
    very clear findings that the Appellant did have family to return to any
    allegation that the Secretary of State had failed in her  tracing  duty
    could have been relevant.  Further, and perhaps more importantly, in TN
    and MA cited above, it was pointed out that in determining  whether  to
    accept a claimant's account, the Tribunal  must  act  on  the  evidence
    before it with no presumption of credibility  and  the  fact  that  the
    Respondent had failed, if that be the case, to properly  discharge  her
    tracing obligation does not affect that.  In the particular cases  with
    which the Supreme Court was concerned,  it  was  said  that  given  the
    accounts of the Claimants had been disbelieved their appeals should not
    have been allowed merely  by  reason  of  the  breach  of  the  tracing
    obligation.  It seems to me that against that background the First-tier
    Tribunal did not err in law in adopting the approach it did.

24. I conclude, therefore, that the grounds which  seek  to  challenge  the
    parts of the determination concerning international protection  do  not
    demonstrate that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

25. The remainder of the challenges relate  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    consideration of the arguments under the  Immigration  Rules  and  also
    under Article 8.  The first contention, here, is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred when considering  the  Immigration  Rules,  particularly
    Appendix FM, because it wrongly decided that  the  failure  to  make  a
    valid application for leave to  remain  was  a  bar  to  success  under
    Appendix FM.

26. On my reading of the determination, the First-tier Tribunal did not say
    that.  The grounds  do  not  take  me  to  the  relevant  part  of  the
    determination where it is said that such an error was made.   It  seems
    to me that the real point, though, with  respect  to  Appendix  FM  was
    this.  The Respondent, on my reading of the reasons for refusal letter,
    had  concluded  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the   Suitability
    requirements as contained in Appendix FM.  In particular, it seemed  to
    be saying that the exclusion of the Appellant from the UK was conducive
    to  the  public  good.   The  First-tier  Tribunal,  relying  upon  the
    convictions,  reached  the  same  view  (see  paragraph   22   of   the
    determination).  The First-tier Tribunal's approach in this  regard  is
    not criticised or challenged in the grounds.   Thus,  the  requirements
    under the Rules were not met.  This meant, for example, he  was  unable
    to access EX.1.

27. The rest of the Article 8 challenge appears to relate to  the  adequacy
    of the consideration outside of the Rules.

28.  What  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  of  the   Appellant's   claimed
    relationship was, perhaps, not as clear as it might have been.  It said
    at paragraph 21 that he had claimed to be in a relationship  and  noted
    that there was an absence of evidence to say that the,  at  that  stage
    expected, child was his.  At paragraph 26 it  described  her  as  being
    "his girlfriend" and did so again at paragraph 29.  On  my  reading  it
    did accept that there was a boyfriend  and  a  girlfriend  relationship
    between the two of them albeit that it did not make a clear finding  as
    to whether the then expected child was his or not.  It then  considered
    a range of other matters relevant to Article 8 which it addressed,  for
    the most part outside the Rules although there was a brief reference to
    276ADE, in paragraphs 28 and 29 of its determination.  It seems to have
    taken her word  for  it  that  she  would  probably  accompany  him  to
    Afghanistan if he were to be removed  there,  without  going  into  the
    viability of that but it also made the pertinent point that, if the two
    were to be separated, there would be  the  facility  of  the  Appellant
    applying for entry clearance to rejoin her and having his arguments  as
    to why the two should be reunited in the UK considered in that context.
     The First-tier Tribunal also mentioned, and commented in quite  strong
    terms, upon his conduct  in  the  UK,  seemingly  having  in  mind  his
    convictions and information given about him by his social  worker,  and
    which it described as being "reprehensible".

29. The First-tier Tribunal did not set out its  consideration  outside  of
    the Rules in the five-stage process set out in Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.
    However, it is clear from what it did say that that was,  in  substance
    what it was doing and that it accepted, uncontroversially it  seems  to
    me, that Article 8 was engaged, that any interference  with  Article  8
    rights was lawful and in pursuance of a legitimate aim and that matters
    boiled down to a proportionality  assessment.   It  is  clear  that  it
    resolved that assessment against the Appellant,  essentially,  for  the
    reasons it explained at paragraphs 28 and 29 of its  determination  and
    which I have set out above.

30. I conclude, therefore, that the First-tier Tribunal did not err in  law
    with respect to its consideration of any of the aspects of this appeal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable so there can be no fee award


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
