
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04742/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 15 June 2016                               |On 12 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     N M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by S. Satha &
Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to  refuse  a
    protection claim. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ferguson  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 31 July 2015. In a  decision  dated
    17 December 2015 I concluded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error on a point of law (annexed). The appeal
    was adjourned in order to allow time for the appellant's representative
    to adduce further evidence regarding his mental health.

2.    The  appeal  now  comes  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision. The First-tier Tribunal judge's positive findings relating to
    past events are preserved. The main  issue  for  determination  is  the
    assessment of risk on return.

3.    Both parties made submissions in relation to the current  risk,  which
    I noted and is a matter of record.

Decision and reasons

4.    A summary of the factual background to the case was  set  out  in  the
    error of law decision [1-3]. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted
    that the appellant  was  detained  briefly  and  questioned  about  his
    father's activities for the LTTE in 2007. He also accepted that it  was
    reasonably likely that the appellant was detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities in August 2010 for "screening". The judge's analysis of the
    risk arising from this set of facts was set aside because he failed  to
    consider some issues  that  were  likely  to  be  material  to  a  full
    assessment of risk on return.

5.    In assessing the risk on return I have taken  into  account  the  fact
    that a person has already been subject to persecution or  serious  harm
    is a serious indication of his well-founded fear of persecution or real
    risk of suffering serious  harm,  unless  there  are  good  reasons  to
    consider that such persecution or serious harm will  not  be  repeated:
    see paragraph 339K of the immigration rules. I have also had regard  to
    the most recent country guidance decision in GJ and Others  (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 and the more  up  to  date
    evidence produced in support of the appeal.

Past persecution

6.    The appellant was detained in August 2010, over a year after  the  end
    of the war. A distinction can be made between the mass  internment  and
    screening of Tamils at the end of the war with  the  kind  of  targeted
    arrest and detention suffered by the appellant. On his evidence he  had
    already been identified as a person who was required to report  to  the
    police station on a monthly basis as a result of  familial  connections
    to the LTTE. It appears that he was subject to  reporting  requirements
    for a prolonged period of time.

7.    The evidence considered by the Tribunal in  GJ  and  Others  indicated
    that those who were screened in large scale 'rehabilitation' camps were
    unlikely to be subject to  serious  physical  ill-treatment  [316-319].
    However, the background evidence has for a long time shown  that  there
    is a risk of serious ill-treatment sufficient to amount to a breach  of
    Article 3 if detained in other facilities in Sri Lanka. For example,  a
    Human  Rights  Watch  report  dated  31  January  2014,  cited  in  the
    respondent's  Country  Information  and  Guidance,  Sri  Lanka:   Tamil
    Separatism (28 August 2014) ("the CIG report"), stated that torture and
    other forms of ill-treatment of people in custody has been a widespread
    problem both during and since the armed conflict [2.2.5]. The  tribunal
    in GJ and Others also recognised  that  detention  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    security services will give rise to a real risk of  ill-treatment.  The
    background evidence supports the appellant's account  of  serious  ill-
    treatment in detention, which he says included  beatings  with  sticks,
    pipes and batons as well as attempted sexual abuse. He was  arbitrarily
    arrested and detained without charge for a period of three  months.  He
    was released on payment  of  a  bribe  but  was  required  to  continue
    reporting on a weekly basis. I am satisfied  that  the  level  of  ill-
    treatment described by the appellant is sufficiently severe  to  amount
    to persecution for the purpose of the Refugee Convention.

8.    The risk factors identified by the tribunal in GJ and Others are  well
    known. While the focus of their assessment was on the  level  of  post-
    conflict activities within the Tamil diaspora in the UK it is important
    to note that the underlying reason for it being identified  as  a  risk
    factor was the perception that a person might pose  "a  threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state": see  also  MP  and  NT  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829 [50]. The Tribunal concluded that the
    authorities had an intelligence led approach to  identifying  those  it
    perceives to pose  a  threat  to  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan  state.  An
    individual's past history was only relevant to the extent that it might
    present a current risk to the Sri Lankan state.

9.    The tribunal in GJ and Others conducted a comprehensive assessment  of
    the evidence as it stood at the date of the hearing in mid-2013.  While
    country guidance should be followed unless there are good  reasons  not
    to do so, it is of course incumbent on a judge to consider the evidence
    as it stands at the date of the hearing if a protection claim is to  be
    given the anxious scrutiny required. The decision in GJ and  Others  is
    now three years old.

Background evidence

10.   The respondent's CIG report outlines a number of  pieces  of  evidence
    from different sources. I note that, at the date of drafting, there  is
    a new Country Information and Guidance report dated  August  2016,  but
    that evidence was not before the Upper  Tribunal  when  this  case  was
    decided so I have not taken it into account.

11.   The CIG report outlines evidence that postdates  the  decision  in  GJ
    and Others. A report of the Bar Human Rights Committee of  England  and
    Wales (BHRC) dated March 2014 stated that the government of  Sri  Lanka
    has an extensive intelligence system, which is shared by  the  security
    forces and immigration officials. Intelligence  is  gathered  from  the
    Karuna faction and the EPDP as well as from former members of the  LTTE
    recruited as informers through torture, or threats of torture  or  rape
    of their loved ones. The focus of  intelligence  gathering  is  on  the
    hierarchy of the LTTE as well as their family connections.  The  report
    states that the BHRC interviewed witnesses who confirmed that they were
    forced to name and identify other LTTE  members  under  torture.  Since
    2009 Sri Lankan security policy has become increasingly  sophisticated.
    It is based on intelligence and the comprehensive surveillance of Tamil
    citizens as well as monitoring of the Tamil diaspora [2.2.2]. The  BHRC
    report  is  broadly  consistent  with  information  considered  by  the
    tribunal in GJ and others.

12.         A Swiss Refugee Council report dated  15  November  2012  stated
[2.2.3]:


         "Although the LTTE may have been defeated  and  there  is  not  the
         slightest sign that  this  organisation  has  survived,  the  state
         machine of Sri Lanka is extremely paranoid and is trying to contain
         any resurgence of this group, or the germination of  tendencies  of
         independence  alongside  the  Tamils.  This  concern   has   direct
         repercussions on all of the Tamils in the North  and  East  because
         their ethnicity could indicate  possible  proximity  to  the  LTTE.
         There are even suspicions directed at Tamils with  a  low  profile,
         who do not escape surveillance. The authorities check whether these
         people may be in contact with the diaspora. This is especially  the
         case of those who were recruited, whether or not by force,  by  the
         LTTE. The authorities also extend their suspicions to acquaintances
         and relatives of former members of the LTTE. According  to  several
         reports, people who return  from  abroad  are  often  suspected  of
         maintaining links with the LTTE and are particularly threatened."


13.   A security update by the British  High  Commission  (BHC)  in  Colombo
    dated 16 April 2014 stated [2.2.8]:


         "The increased military presence, arrests and  killings  have  been
         widely reported in local press, with  some  coverage  also  in  the
         international media."


         "There have been reports that some  of  those  arrested  have  been
         subjected to ill-treatment in detention..."


         "In addition to the arrests and claims of ill-treatment, there  are
         reports of widespread cordon and search operations, restrictions on
         movement in some areas and increased surveillance and harassment of
         rehabilitated ex-combatants. Two staff members of the British  High
         Commission (BHC) visited Jaffna on 9 April 2014 and saw that little
         visible sign of an increased military presence in the town itself"


14.   The US State Department Report on  Human  Rights  Practices  for  2013
    (published 27 February 2014 stated:


         "In the east and north, military intelligence  and  other  security
         personnel, sometimes allegedly working  with  paramilitaries,  were
         responsible  for  the  documented  and  undocumented  detention  of
         civilians suspected of LTTE connections. Detention  reportedly  was
         followed by interrogation that sometimes included  mistreatment  or
         torture. There were reports  that  authorities  released  detainees
         with a warning not to reveal  information  about  their  arrest  or
         detention, under the threat of re-arrest or death...


         NGOs and individuals complained that the  Armed  Forces  and  their
         paramilitary allies detain suspected LTTE sympathisers and did  not
         surrender them to police, blurring the  line  between  arrests  and
         abductions." [2.2.16]


         "Tamils throughout the country, but especially  in  the  north  and
         east,  reported  that  security  forces  and  paramilitary   groups
         frequently harassed young and middle-aged Tamil men." [2.2.17]


15.   The CIG report goes on to state that, in early April 2014,  60  people
    accused of trying to revive the LTTE were arrested.  The  BBC  reported
    that the army also shot dead three men it claimed were trying to revive
    the LTTE and that "there has been a notable  increase  in  arrests  and
    security searches in northern Sri Lanka and some detentions in Colombo"
    [2.2.28].

TGTE activities

16.   In  April  2014  it  was  reported  that  the  Sri  Lankan  government
    proscribed at least 15 Tamil diaspora organisations across  the  world.
    The list included the Trans-national Government of Tamil  Eelam  (TGTE)
    [2.2.32]. Human Rights Watch reported that the decision to label  Tamil
    organisations as financers of terrorism is so broad that it appears  to
    be aimed at restricting peaceful activism by the Tamil minority.  Chief
    military spokesman Brig. Ruwan Wanigasuriya was reported to  have  said
    that legal action would be taken against anyone who has links with  the
    listed groups. This would  place  local  activists  and  alleged  group
    members visiting the country at risk of being detained and held without
    charge under the Prevention of Terrorism Act [2.2.33].

17.   The same quote was repeated in the BHC letter  dated  16  April  2014.
    The letter went on to say that the statement that individuals belonging
    to proscribed organisations would face arrest under anti-terrorism laws
    on return to Sri Lanka "has not yet been tested in practice;  to  date,
    there have been no known arrests based on  membership  of  one  of  the
    newly proscribed groups" [2.3.6]

18.   A letter from the BHC dated 25 July 2014  noted  that  officials  from
    the Ministry of External Affairs, the  Department  of  Immigration  and
    Emigration, the State Intelligence Service, several  foreign  embassies
    and an unnamed international NGO stated that they had not received  any
    reports of returnees who are members of proscribed Tamil  groups  being
    arrested. While it  is  perhaps  unsurprising  that  Sri  Lankan  state
    agencies would deny  knowledge  of  arrests  and  ill-treatment  it  is
    notable that the letter states that the  embassies  consulted  had  "no
    awareness of  any  members  of  the  groups  being  returned  however."
    [2.2.12]

19.   Annex B of the CIG report provides background details  about  some  of
    the proscribed organisations. At the hearing it  was  noted  that  some
    organisations  were  subsequently  de-proscribed  by  the  Sri   Lankan
    government but it was not disputed that the TGTE is still a  proscribed
    organisation.  The first part of the TGTE mission statement is cited as
    follows [3.2.5]:


         "The Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE) is a  political
         formation to win the freedom of the Tamil people on  the  basis  of
         their fundamental political principles of Nationhood, Homeland  and
         Right of self-determination.  At  present  the  Tamil  people  have
         absolutely no prospect of articulating their political  aspirations
         or of exercising their fundamental rights in their homeland itself.
         The Sri Lankan  government,  through  legal  impediments,  military
         occupation and murder is strangling the Tamil people's  aspirations
         and their political rights."


20.   On the face of the  mission  statement  the  guiding  purpose  of  the
    organisation is to work towards the  self-determination  of  the  Tamil
    people through "democratic means". The name of  the  organisation  even
    goes so far as to purport to be a form of exiled government in waiting.
    It is difficult to see how these statements could be seen  as  anything
    other than a threat to the unitary state of  Sri  Lanka.  Although  the
    organisation has been proscribed under terrorist legislation by the Sri
    Lankan government there is no  evidence  to  indicate  that  any  other
    country has proscribed the organisation. There is nothing before me  to
    suggest that the TGTE supports or carries out terrorist activities.

21.   The First-tier Tribunal judge considered the evidence put  forward  by
    the appellant regarding his activities for the TGTE in the UK [46].  It
    appears that  he  accepted  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  attended
    meetings and carried out other activities, such as leafleting,  on  the
    basis of a letter from the TGTE (UK) dated 10 June 2015. It was open to
    the judge to be sceptical about  the  motive  behind  such  activities,
    which only began after he was arrested and claimed asylum. However,  he
    was correct to find that the motivation is irrelevant if the activities
    nevertheless create a real risk on return: see Danian v SSHD [2000] Imm
    AR 96. He concluded that the  appellant's  activities  were  not  of  a
    sufficiently high profile to place him at risk but failed  to  consider
    the fact that the TGTE is a proscribed organisation.

Monitoring through family members

22.   The appellant told the First-tier Tribunal  judge  that  he  contacted
    his uncle, who  sent  documents  to  support  his  appeal.   The  judge
    rejected his claim that he had no contact with his family  since  early
    2011 on the ground that it was not plausible that his uncle  would  not
    have made more effort to try to find out where his mother and  siblings
    were [47]. The appellant claimed that he was told that the  authorities
    had been to his family home to search for him on several occasions. His
    uncle informed him that they had been to his shop asking about him. The
    last occasion was 25 May 2015.

23.   I am conscious of the fact that I have not  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant in relation to this issue. At  the  date  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing it seems that he was well enough to give evidence. The
    evidence in his statement is as set out above. All that is recorded  of
    his evidence at the hearing is that he told the judge that he spoke  to
    his uncle often, but his uncle was concerned that the calls were  being
    monitored, so he used new SIM cards each time. The appellant was unable
    to explain why his uncle thought the calls were being monitored.

24.   While the evidence on this issue is fairly limited  I  find  that,  in
    the context of the background evidence,  there  is  nothing  inherently
    implausible about the appellant's account. Given that  it  is  accepted
    that he was detained on two occasions in  2007  and  in  2010  and  was
    required to report on a regular basis it is perhaps  unsurprising  that
    the authorities  might  make  periodic  enquiries.  The  Swiss  Refugee
    Council report cited above suggests that Tamils are under  surveillance
    and that the authorities check whether  people  in  Sri  Lanka  are  in
    contact with the diaspora. The US State Department report cited in  the
    CIG also mentioned that security forces conduct  searches  of  property
    and  engage  in  wiretapping  and  surveillance  with  little  judicial
    oversight. The letter from the BHC also quoted the intelligence service
    (SIS), which stated that "family  members  of  wanted  individuals  are
    never arrested, but they may be  monitored  and  questioned  about  the
    individual"  [2.2.14].  In  light  of  the  accepted  facts,  and   the
    background evidence relating to surveillance, I find that there  is  in
    fact no good reason to doubt the appellant's claim that the authorities
    have made some enquiries as to his whereabouts since he has been in the
    UK.

Medical evidence

25.   At the date of the first hearing before the Upper Tribunal I was  told
    that the appellant was sectioned under the Mental Health Act  1985.  At
    the date of the second hearing, which was adjourned, he attended with a
    carer from the hospital. He attended the resumed hearing with a  friend
    but I was told that he continues to require high levels of care.

26.   The most recent evidence is from Dr David Oyewole of the relevant  NHS
    mental health team. His  letter  is  dated  12  May  2016.  Dr  Oyewole
    confirmed that the appellant has been diagnosed with schizophrenia.  He
    had recently been discharged from  an  inpatient  mental  health  unit,
    having spent several months there.  He  was  transferred  to  a  mental
    health rehabilitation ward because he was  homeless  and  had  "reduced
    ability to organise his own affairs due to the apathetic  and  negative
    features of his mental illness". The appellant continued to be  treated
    on the ward with antipsychotic medication.  The  doctor  was  asked  to
    comment on the likely  impact  on  the  appellant's  mental  health  if
    returned to Sri Lanka. He did not seek to overstate  his  knowledge  of
    the circumstances. He said that he was unclear about  what  the  impact
    would be. However, if suitable inpatient treatment was  available  then
    "clearly there would be a more favourable  outcome."  Dr  Oyewole  said
    that he was aware that  the  appellant  was  unwilling  to  return  and
    "reports terrible memories during his time in Sri Lanka".

27.   Finally, he was asked to comment on the risk of  suicide  if  returned
    to Sri Lanka. In response he stated: "I think it is likely if  he  were
    to be compelled to return to Sri Lanka, without him wanting  to  return
    there, there would be a much higher risk of  deliberate  self-harm  and
    possible suicide  attempts."  It  is  fair  to  say  that  his  comment
    regarding suicide risk is fairly limited and does not explain fully his
    reasons for coming to that conclusion. However, I take into account the
    fact that Dr Oyewole was the appellant's treating physician  and  would
    have access to his  notes  and  other  information  about  his  medical
    history.

28.   Other more recent evidence includes a report  by  Dr  Raj  Persaud,  a
    consultant psychiatrist. Dr Persaud is not his treating  physician  but
    assessed the appellant on a private  basis.  He  records  that  he  had
    access to various documents including  asylum  interview  records,  the
    asylum decision, various NHS medical records, a medical report from  Dr
    Oyewole and a psychiatric report from Dr Saleh Dhumad.

29.    Dr  Persaud  did  not  purport  to  make  any  findings   about   the
    truthfulness of the appellant's account but assessed his mental  health
    in light of what he said happened in Sri Lanka. Dr Persaud stated  that
    extreme traumatic events such as  detention  and  torture  can  produce
    psychiatric disorder. He noted that the appellant was sectioned at  the
    time. He  considered  this  was  particularly  significant  because  it
    indicated that the NHS regarded him to be an acute risk to himself  and
    that he required urgent medical treatment. The fact that he had been an
    inpatient for some months was a measure of the severity of his illness.
    He noted that  the  medical  records  showed  that  the  appellant  was
    admitted  to  hospital  following  a  serious  suicide  attempt,  which
    involved him attempting to cut himself and also taking an overdose.  He
    noted that the appellant had made other suicide attempts  in  the  past
    involving knives.

30.   Dr  Persaud  diagnosed  the  appellant  as  suffering  from  PTSD  and
    depressive illness. On the day of his assessment he concluded that  the
    dominant symptomatology was one of psychosis. The appellant was hearing
    voices among other psychotic symptoms. He said that this was  confirmed
    in the extensive medical notes that the appellant brought with  him  to
    the appointment and observed that this "also means  that  he  would  be
    regarded  as  extremely  unpredictable."  He  observed  that,  on   the
    appellant's account, it seemed that he may  have  been  suffering  from
    psychosis for some years. Dr Persaud commented that his mental  illness
    may not have been diagnosed for many years, worsening his prognosis.

31.   Dr Persaud's conclusions were as follows:


         "The client is currently detained under section  3  of  the  mental
         health act on an inpatient psychiatric unit, and is being diagnosed
         and treated for psychosis -  this  renders  him  unpredictable  and
         clearly a danger to himself. He would be placed in the category  of
         the most severely unwell [psychiatric] patients as a result. He  is
         still  clearly  actively  psychotic  and  suffering  from  auditory
         hallucinations which render him distracted and confused.


         My conclusions are  that  this  client  continues  to  suffer  from
         serious psychiatric disorder, including Psychosis, Major Depression
         and PTSD most probably secondary to the  past  traumas  the  client
         claims. I don't think that they would survive in Sri Lanka  because
         of the mental health problems and their  health  would  deteriorate
         dramatically. I don't think that the client is  liable  to  receive
         the correct medical treatment that the client is likely to  require
         in Sri Lanka and this includes proper PTSD counselling and  therapy
         and antidepressant medication prescription and monitoring.


         All these factors (and more) would lead most independent experts to
         evaluate that in this case the risk of suicide is already  elevated
         and would be more elevated should the client find themselves  being
         deported.


         I have based my opinion on what the client  has  told  me,  without
         access to any corroborating information from key informants, and my
         report has to be interpreted in that light. Having said that I  was
         impressed with the vividness of descriptions of  past  traumas  and
         the intensity of emotional reactions rendering me to believe it  is
         highly unlikely the core parts of these accounts are fabricated  or
         exaggerated, despite the fact that  it  had  taken  a  considerable
         amount of time and specific techniques used, in  order  to  extract
         information from [him] sensitively.


         The impact on the  client's  mental  health  would  be  severe  and
         adverse if the client was moved back to  [his]  country  of  origin
         because the client would be returned  to  the  location  of  trauma
         which is well known to cause a lot of stress  to  people  suffering
         from PTSD and depression. Much of the  symptomatology  of  PTSD  is
         around avoiding the  trauma,  it's  memory  or  location,  or  even
         thinking about it."


32.   Dr Persaud concluded by responding to a number of questions  posed  by
    the  appellant's  solicitor.  He  confirmed  that  the  appellant   was
    diagnosed with schizophrenia, but in his opinion, this was secondary to
    events in Sri Lanka. When asked to comment on the likely impact on  the
    appellant's mental state if he was forcibly removed  to  Sri  Lanka  Dr
    Persaud found that he  was  likely  to  be  "very  adversely  affected"
    particularly if this was in the middle of an inpatient stay  or  before
    he has been properly rehabilitated in the community. He considered that
    removal could precipitate  a  suicide  attempt  given  how  unwell  the
    appellant is. Dr Persaud considered that the appellant  was  likely  to
    require inpatient treatment for the foreseeable future. He  made  clear
    that he has some knowledge of the situation on return because he made a
    documentary for the BBC about psychiatry in Sri Lanka. While there  are
    psychiatric hospitals they are very difficult to access and  are  often
    expensive.

33.   I recognise that Dr Persaud only saw the appellant on one occasion  on
    21 April 2016 but it appears that he was relatively well informed as to
    the appellant's history in Sri Lanka and his medical history in the UK.
    I find that I can give weight to his opinion even if his assessment was
    limited to one consultation.

 Conclusions

34.   It is accepted that the appellant has been detained on  two  occasions
    in the past. For the reasons given above I find that  it  is  at  least
    reasonably likely that he was ill-treated in the way he described.  The
    psychiatric evidence appears to draw a link between  the  ill-treatment
    and his current psychiatric illness. I am satisfied that the  treatment
    the appellant suffered was sufficient to amount to past persecution.  I
    turn to consider whether there are good reasons to consider  that  such
    persecution or serious harm will not be repeated.

35.   Having considered all the evidence in the round I  am  satisfied  that
    there are a number of factors, which cumulatively give rise to  a  real
    risk on return.


      i) Past persecution
         The appellant was detained on two occasions in 2007 and 2010. It is
         at least reasonably likely that the authorities  will  continue  to
         have a record of those detentions. The second detention took  place
         a year after  the  end  of  the  war.  The  circumstances  of  that
         detention were different to the wider internment of  LTTE  suspects
         in 'rehabilitation' camps. The appellant  was  already  subject  to
         reporting conditions and was questioned about the links that he and
         his father had  to  the  LTTE.  The  appellant's  past  history  is
         relevant to the assessment of whether the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
         are likely to perceive him as a threat to the unitary state.


     ii) Breach of reporting conditions
         The appellant was released on payment of a bribe. Nevertheless,  he
         was required to report on a weekly basis. Having left Sri Lanka  he
         is in breach of those conditions.  This  factor  may  heighten  the
         interest that the authorities are likely to have in  the  appellant
         on return.


    iii) Diaspora activities in the UK
         The  fact  that  the  appellant  has  carried  out  some   diaspora
         activities in the UK, however cynically, is also a matter  that  is
         relevant to risk on return. While the tribunal  in  GJ  and  Others
         made clear that such activity needed to be  at  a  relatively  high
         level  to  attract  the  adverse  attention  of  the   Sri   Lankan
         authorities  those  findings  were  made  before  the  Sri   Lankan
         government decided to proscribe a number of  organisations.  It  is
         clear that the stated nationalist aims of the  TGTE  would  pose  a
         threat  to  the  unitary  state  of  Sri  Lanka.  The  organisation
         continues to be on the proscribed list despite the fact that  other
         organisations have been removed.


         While there is some evidence from the BHC to suggest that there are
         no reported arrests of members of proscribed organisations  (as  of
         July 2014) I find that little  weight  can  be  placed  on  denials
         provided by the very state organisations that might carry out  such
         arrests. Although it is possible that international embassies might
         have heard of any notable arrests, it seems clear  that  those  who
         reported to the BHC had "no awareness" of any members of proscribed
         groups being returned.


         In contrast, there is evidence of  a  clear  statement  made  by  a
         senior military official to say that individuals belonging to those
         organisations would face arrest under anti-terrorism laws on return
         to  Sri  Lanka.  Indeed  the  whole  purpose  of  proscribing  such
         organisations would be to criminalise membership. The  tribunal  in
         GJ & Others found that the Sri Lankan authorities had an  extensive
         intelligence network,  which  was  likely  to  identify  people  of
         interest in the diaspora. I find that this  is  likely  to  include
         those who are members of,  and  have  been  active  in,  proscribed
         groups such as the TGTE. In contrast to other  Tamil  organisations
         active in the diaspora, the fact that  the  appellant's  activities
         were at a low level would not  preclude  adverse  interest  if  the
         organisation is on a proscribed list.


         Comments from Human Rights  Watch  indicate  that  the  Sri  Lankan
         government may be using the proscription of diaspora  organisations
         as a means of attempting to tie them to the LTTE [2.2.23]. There is
         no evidence before me to show that the TGTE supports or carries out
         activities that  would  amount  to  terrorism.  Nor  is  there  any
         suggestion that the appellant's activities are such that  he  might
         be excluded as a result of his low level activities for the TGTE.


     iv) Mental health
         Finally, the evidence shows that the  appellant  is  likely  to  be
         suffering from severe mental illness, which requires a  high  level
         of supervised treatment. Currently he is not well  enough  to  look
         after himself and continues to be treated in  a  specialist  mental
         health unit. The nature of his condition means that he is likely to
         present to the authorities on return as someone who is  distracted,
         confused  and  unpredictable.  His  psychotic  symptoms   may,   in
         themselves, attract initial attention from the authorities.


         The  fact  that  the  appellant  is  suffering  from  such  serious
         psychiatric illness as a result of his past  traumatic  experiences
         in detention is also likely to cause him acute  distress  and  give
         rise to a risk of self-harm or suicide if he is questioned  at  the
         airport, whether or  not  he  is  also  subject  to  physical  ill-
         treatment. In Ireland v UK (1978) 2 EHRR 25 the European Court made
         clear that the minimum level of severity of ill-treatment  required
         to breach Article 3 must be assessed in the  light   of   all   the
         circumstances  of  the  individual  including   the   duration   of
         the treatment, its physical or mental effects and, in  some  cases,
         the sex, age and state of health  of  the  victim.  The  particular
         vulnerability  of  this  appellant  is  likely  to  mean  that  the
         threshold for Article  3  and  persecutory  ill-treatment  will  be
         reached more readily.


36.   While none of these factors,  taken  alone,  might  be  sufficient  to
    conclude that the appellant would be  at  real  risk  on  return  I  am
    satisfied that the cumulative effect is that the appellant is likely to
    be viewed as a person who poses a threat to the unitary  state  of  Sri
    Lanka. As such he would be at real risk of persecution for  reasons  of
    his actual or attributed political opinion if returned to Sri Lanka  at
    the present time.

37.   Because I have made detailed findings in relation  to  the  protection
    claim I find that it is not necessary to go into detail in relation  to
    the human rights medical claim save to note that the tribunal in GJ and
    Others accepted, in the case of MP,  that  his  serious  mental  health
    problems, similar to those suffered by this appellant, would give  rise
    to a breach of Article  3.  The  tribunal  noted,  consistent  with  Dr
    Persaud's evidence, that  there  were  limited  psychiatric  facilities
    available. The mere fact of return would have such an adverse effect on
    the appellant's health that it would amount to a breach  of  his  human
    rights. I see no marked difference with the  facts  in  this  case  and
    would, in any event, allow the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  for
    similar reasons.

38.   I conclude that removal in consequence of the  decision  would  amount
    to a breach of the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998 as being incompatible with the appellant's human rights.



DECISION

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal


Signed   [pic]   Date 11 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

                                                                       ANNEX
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04742/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 16 December 2015                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                     N M
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N. Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by Vasuki
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant says that he entered the UK on 20 January  2011  in  the
    false identity of N M. The passport he entered  on  was  endorsed  with
    entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant that purported to
    be valid until 27 August 2012. He applied for further leave  to  remain
    in the same false identity, which was granted until 31  December  2014.
    His leave to remain as a student was curtailed  on  09  May  2013.  The
    appellant remained in the UK without leave  until  he  was  encountered
    working illegally. He claimed asylum on 07 November 2013.

2.    The appellant claims  that  his  father  assisted  the  LTTE  but  was
    arrested in 2002 and then disappeared. The appellant claims that he was
    questioned and released at around the same time. In 2004  he  began  to
    help the LTTE as a driver. He also helped to arrange accommodation  and
    supplies for LTTE members. In 2007 he was arrested  by  the  police  in
    Colombo. He  was  accompanied  to  his  home  where  the  police  found
    photographs of him and his father. He says that he was detained at  the
    police station for 14 days and questioned about his father's activities
    for the LTTE as well as  his  own  activities.  He  was  held  in  poor
    conditions. Eventually he was released on payment of a  bribe  and  was
    required to report to the police station on a monthly basis.

3.    The appellant says that he continued to report until August  2010.  He
    was arrested and detained when he went to report at the police station.
    On this occasion he says that he was detained for  a  period  of  three
    months during which time he was beaten with sticks, pipes  and  batons.
    He says that they tried to sexually abuse him. He was fingerprinted. He
    told the authorities that he provided SIM cards and found lodgings  for
    LTTE members. He also told them the names of some LTTE members. He says
    that he was released through irregular means on payment of a bribe. The
    reporting requirements were increased to once  a  week.  Thereafter  he
    paid an agent to assist him to leave the country and travel to the  UK.
    The  appellant  says  that  since  early  2014  he  has  supported  the
    Transnational  Government  of  Tamil  Eelam  (TGTE)  and  carried   out
    voluntary work for the group.

4.    The respondent refused the asylum claim in a decision dated  03  March
    2015. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on  31  July  2015.  He  made  various
    findings of fact in a detailed and carefully written decision. Although
    he had some concerns about the appellant's overall credibility he  gave
    him the benefit of the doubt with regard to his account of past events.
    He appeared to accept that it was reasonably likely that the  appellant
    was detained and questioned about his father's activities in 2007 [32].
    He also accepted that the appellant was detained and  questioned  again
    in August 2010 [44]. In doing so he took into account  the  appellant's
    own evidence  that  "after  the  war  they  started  arresting  people,
    supporters and members who had contacts with LTTE". He found that  this
    was consistent with the background evidence considered by the  tribunal
    in GJ & Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319
    that "tens of thousands of Tamils  were  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities to identify which of  the  300,000  Tamils  had  sufficient
    involvement with the LTTE to require what was termed by the  government
    to be 'rehabilitation'". The judge  concluded:  "In  common  with  many
    other people, the appellant was detained by the authorities in 2010 and
    then released" [33].

5.    The judge found that the appellant was  detained  for  "screening"  in
    2010 and then released. He concluded that the appellant  did  not  come
    within any of the risk categories identified in GJ & Others.  He  would
    not be perceived as a threat to the integrity of a unitary  Sri  Lankan
    state, he did not have a significant role in relation to  post-conflict
    separatism and was not on  a  "stop  list"  [44].  He  found  that  the
    appellant might be asked questions about his involvement in  the  LTTE.
    The Sri Lankan authorities' had "sophisticated intelligence" that would
    identify that he had some involvement with the LTTE many years ago  and
    that he would be seen as someone who was  in  the  UK  as  an  economic
    migrant [45].

6.    It is only after making  that  finding  that  the  judge  went  on  to
    consider the activities that the appellant said he  has  undertaken  in
    support of the TGTE in the UK. He appeared to accept the fact that  the
    appellant had carried out such activities. The appellant supported  his
    claim with a letter from the organisation. The judge concluded that  is
    was likely that the appellant undertook these activities in  a  cynical
    way in order to bolster his claim for asylum but correctly stated  that
    this would be irrelevant  if  the  sur  place  activities  nevertheless
    created a real risk on return: see Danian v SSHD [2000] Imm AR  96.  He
    went on to find that the activities the appellant carried out in the UK
    for the TGTE did  not  elevate  his  risk  profile  [46].  For  similar
    reasons, the judge went on to reject the appellant's claim that he  had
    lost contact with his family,  and  that  the  authorities  were  still
    looking  for  him,  because  his  evidence  was  likely  to  have  been
    fabricated in order to bolster the claim [47]. He  concluded  that  the
    appellant's level of activism in the  diaspora  was  "nowhere  near"  a
    level where he would be of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities [50].

7.    The appellant seeks to appeal the decision on the following grounds:

      (i)   The First-tier  Tribunal  mischaracterised  the  nature  of  the
           appellant's arrest in  2010  as  one  of  "screening"  when  the
           circumstances of his arrest were quite different  to  the  large
           numbers that were screened in the north at the end of  the  war.
           The  appellant  was  arrested  and  detained  in  Colombo  while
           reporting to  the  police  station  and  was  released  with  an
           increased level of reporting, which  he  subsequently  breached.
           This was material to a proper assessment of risk on return.

      (ii)  In assessing the appellant's  profile  the  First-tier  Tribunal
           failed to give any consideration to the fact that the TGTE is  a
           proscribed  organisation,  which  was  material  to   a   proper
           assessment of risk on return.

      (iii) The First-tier  Tribunal  only  partially  quoted  the  guidance
           given by the Court of Appeal in MP & NT v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ
           829 [49] and in  doing  so  failed  to  take  into  account  the
           suggestion that in some cases a real risk  might  arise  in  the
           absence of diaspora activity:

                 "But I do not read para.356(7)(a) [of GJ  &  Others]...  as
                 prescribing that diaspora activism is  the  only  basis  on
                 which a returning Tamil might be regarded as posing such  a
                 threat and thus of being at risk on return. Even apart from
                 cases falling under heads  (b)-(d)  in  para.356(7),  there
                 may, though untypically, be other cases (of which NT may be
                 an example) where the evidence shows particular grounds for
                 concluding that the government might regard  the  applicant
                 as posing a current threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as
                 a single state even in the absence of evidence that  he  or
                 she has been involved in diaspora activism."

Decision and reasons

8.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral arguments I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

9.    It is  trite  law  that,  given  potentially  serious  nature  of  the
    consequences of return, an asylum  application  requires  most  anxious
    scrutiny. While the  experienced  judge  wrote  a  careful,  clear  and
    detailed decision I conclude that there were  several  issues  that  he
    failed to address that were material to a proper assessment of risk  on
    return.

10.   Firstly, the circumstances surrounding the appellant's arrest in  2010
    were somewhat different to the mass internment of  Tamils  in  Vavuniya
    district at the  end  of  the  war  albeit  that  the  purpose  of  the
    questioning was similar in terms  of  ascertaining  the  level  of  his
    family's involvement with the LTTE.  Although  the  Tribunal  in  GJ  &
    Others found that there was little evidence of ill-treatment in the IDP
    camps in the north, in contrast, the appellant gave an account of  ill-
    treatment in detention, which was accepted by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    [41]. The judge  made  no  finding  as  to  whether  the  ill-treatment
    amounted to persecution and did not make any  assessment  of  how  past
    persecution that took place post-conflict might impact on  the  current
    risk on return: see paragraph 339K of the immigration rules.

11.   Secondly, the Tribunal in GJ & Others noted that  there  was  evidence
    to show that some of  the  Tamils  released  from  rehabilitation  were
    subject  to  reporting  restrictions  [300],  but  the  fact  that  the
    appellant breached those conditions was a  material  fact  that  should
    have been considered in assessing the appellant's profile on return.

12.   Thirdly, the judge accepted that the appellant carried out  activities
    for the TGTE in the UK. While it was plainly open to him to  find  that
    the late application for asylum and  the  timing  of  those  activities
    raised questions about the appellant's motives,  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the particular nature of the organisation in assessing whether
    those activities were likely to place the appellant  at  real  risk  on
    return. GJ & Others was decided in 2013 but by the date of the  hearing
    in this case there was evidence before the Tribunal to  show  that  the
    Sri Lankan government proscribed a number  of  Tamil  organisations  in
    April 2014. Even on the face of the name, the Transnational  Government
    of Tamil Eelam, the group puts itself forward as a Tamil government  in
    exile that quite clearly rejects the legitimacy of the unitary state of
    Sri Lanka. The fact that  it  is  now  proscribed  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    government as a terrorist group is  a  matter  that  is  likely  to  be
    relevant to the appellant's profile. These developments post-dated  the
    decision in GJ & Others but were material to the proper  assessment  of
    risk on return. The First-tier  Tribunal's  failure  to  make  findings
    regarding the import of these developments is capable of  amounting  to
    an error of law.

13.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law  and  the
    decision is set aside.  The  appellant's  representative  informed  the
    Tribunal that he had recently been sectioned under  the  Mental  Health
    Act 1983 and that it would be necessary to adduce further  evidence  of
    the current situation before the decision could be remade. As such  the
    matter will be relisted for a resumed hearing with directions.

DIRECTIONS

14.   The appellant's representatives are to notify the  Tribunal  at  least
    14 days before the resumed hearing whether there is any application for
    the appellant or any other witness to  give  evidence  and  whether  an
    interpreter is required.

15.   Subject to any written representations to be made  at  least  14  days
    before the resumed hearing the Tribunal considers that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings of fact relating to past events  can  be  preserved
    but those relating to risk on return are  set  aside  for  the  reasons
    given above.

16.   Any up to date evidence relied on by both parties should be served  at
    least 14 days before the resumed hearing.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision, which will be relisted for a resumed hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 17 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

