
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04442/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 7 October 2013                             |On 11 October 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     RJ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:       Mr T Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, appeals  against  a  determination
   by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyd, dated 24 January 2013, dismissing  his
   appeal on all available grounds.

2) In course of submissions the respondent conceded that  the  determination
   contains contradictory findings, fails to deal with certain  explanations
   tendered by the appellant, overlooks aspects of the evidence,  and  takes
   novel points which ought fairly to have been put to  the  appellant;  and
   that taking these matters together, the credibility findings  require  to
   be set aside.

3) Without exploring every point  of  the  lengthy  grounds,  the  following
   matters were accepted.  The judge contradicted himself between paragraphs
   27 and 33 over the sense of the appellant's  evidence  that  his  parents
   either did or did not know that he was joining the LTTE.   Evidence  that
   the LTTE forcibly deployed child soldiers in combat was not evidence that
   this must be the case for every child in the service of  the  LTTE.   The
   judge rejected the possibility that the appellant's parents were able  to
   approach the LTTE about his situation.   While  the  LTTE  was  a  brutal
   organisation, it was conceivable that a family with  an  LTTE  background
   might be able to speak to the appellant's Commander.  It was difficult to
   see why the judge concluded that the appellant could not have known  that
   there  would  be  LTTE  snipers  in  a  certain  area.   The  appellant's
   explanation of that matter was one  of  the  features  of  his  statement
   overlooked in the determination.  The appellant  had  not  been  on  fair
   notice that the judge might draw an adverse inference from the absence of
   medical evidence regarding his father's injuries, a point not  previously
   taken, and not one on which an appellant might obviously be  expected  to
   produce evidence.

4) It  having  been  resolved  between  the  parties  that  the  credibility
   findings were not to stand, I directed attention to GJ and  Others  (Post
   Civil War: Returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319  (IAC),  promulgated
   after the refusal  letter  and  First-tier  Tribunal  determination.   GJ
   replaces all previous country guidance on Sri Lanka, and  is  crucial  to
   the eventual disposal of this appeal.

5) Mr Ruddy submitted that on entirely favourable credibility  findings  the
   appellant's case might succeed within the terms of GJ.    Mr  Mullen  for
   the respondent was not prepared to have the case decided on the basis  of
   taking the appellant's  case  "at  its  highest",  and  said  that  fresh
   credibility findings were required.

6) In terms of section 12(1) of the 2007 Act  and  of  paragraph  7  of  the
   Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-
   tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, this decision requires to  be  made
   entirely afresh.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal can stand.   The
   determination is set aside, other than as a record of  what  was  put  in
   evidence.

7) The nature and extent of judicial fact finding necessary  to  remake  the
   decision are such that it is appropriate for the case to be  remitted  to
   the First-tier Tribunal.

8) The member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to  reconsider  the  case
   are not to include Judge Boyd.

9) An anonymity order was made in the First-tier  Tribunal,  although  there
   appears to be  no  particular  reason  for  one.   This  matter  was  not
   addressed in the Upper Tribunal, but should be considered when  the  case
   comes back before the First-tier Tribunal.

                               [pic]
                                8 October 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
