
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04411/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 14 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                     m m
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Radford, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Mauritius, date of birth 6 November  1989,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 16 June 2014  to  make
    removal directions following the  refusal  of  an  asylum/human  rights
    claim.  A form IS151A had been served on 22 August 2011.

2.   The appeal against that decision [D] came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Davda who on  16  June  2015  dismissed  the  appeal  on  Refugee
    Convention,  Humanitarian  Protection   and   human   rights   grounds.
    Permission to appeal that decision was given by FtTJ Pooler on 10  July
    2015.   The Respondent provided a Rule 24 response on 21 July 2015.

3.   The submissions made to the judge covered a wide range  of  issues  and
    amounted to some 29 typed pages.  The judge therefore could  have  been
    left in no doubt what the Appellant's representative was arguing on the
    various grounds.  The grounds to the First-tier Tribunal  set  out  the
    basis of the Appellant's claim and the grounds on which it was said  he
    was at risk on return and/or the effects of removal both  in  terms  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 outside of  the
    Rules.  Further submissions were made concerning the Appellant's mental
    health and the impact of removal upon him.

4.   The judge had the opportunity to  hear  the  Appellant's  evidence  and
    that of his brother.  The Appellant  and  his  brother  claimed  to  be
    homosexuals and at  risk  on  return  to  Mauritius  because  of  their
    sexuality.

5.   The Appellant gave a longish history, repeated  to  others,  concerning
    the abuse and ill-treatment he received from society  in  general,  his
    father and cousin when he was  a  child.   In  addition  the  Appellant
    claimed that he was the object of derision from  people  generally  and
    cited a number of examples of difficulties that he  had  faced.   Those
    included his general  private  life,  his  early  adult  life  and  the
    difficulties he had faced at work through his  sexuality.   In  essence
    the Appellant asserted that he could not live openly as he could in the
    United Kingdom but were he to  do  so  he  could  not  manage  that  in
    Mauritius because of societal prejudice against him and an  absence  of
    domestic protection.

6.   The Appellant in setting  out  his  asylum  claim  said  that  societal
    discrimination was so great that he could not live  a  reasonable  life
    and would be in effect forced into hiding but more importantly he could
    not live a reasonable life there as a homosexual.  In addition  it  was
    said that Mauritius being a relatively small island was not big  enough
    for him internally to relocate.

7.    It  was  said  that  the  judge  made  adverse  credibility   findings
    concerning the Appellant's evidence.  For example [D61] the judge said,


         "... I take  into  account  all  the  circumstances  in  which  the
         Appellant has  provided  his  various  accounts.   While  his  core
         account of being a homosexual  has  been  accepted,  however  taken
         together I have found the account at times selective, enhanced  and
         inconsistent.  I note: ..."

8.   It could be that [D62] was intended to follow  [D61]  as  to  what  the
    judge "notes" but if so it is not easy to see what was noted by way  of
    examples  of  selective  presentation  of  evidence   embroidering   or
    enhancing evidence or giving inconsistent evidence.  Paragraph  [D  62]
    does not in any  obvious  sense  clarify  the  criticism  made  of  the
    Appellant's evidence nor, it is fair to say do successive paragraphs [D
    63, 64, 65, 66 and 67].  Whilst at  [D  62]  the  Judge  described  the
    Appellant's evidence was at odds with his brother's evidence: It may be
    an unclear aspect but its materiality needed to be set  in  context  of
    the evidence provided as a whole.

9.   At [D 65] of the decision the judge was entitled to  reach  a  view  on
    the late claim for protection insofar as it was pertinent to Section  8
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004.
    The relevance of [D 66] to the decision and the  Appellant  failing  to
    mention he had a sister was really of little  assistance  in  assessing
    credibility.

10.  It would seem, and  it  was  not  contradicted,  that  aspects  of  the
    judge's concerns were not raised by  the  Respondent's  representatives
    nor had they been raised in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  nor  were
    they raised by the judge with  the  Appellant  and/or  the  Appellant's
    brother, nor were they raised with  parties  at  the  point  of  making
    closing submissions.  The grounds generally attack these criticisms  in
    the judge's decision: I was still in the dark as to what response might
    be made by the Appellant to such points.   Thus  it  was  difficult  to
    accurately assess the weight such criticisms have in terms of the point
    being taken as a procedural error of law. However having considered the
    matter it seemed to me that the judge's decision made it  difficult  to
    tell what was accepted of the Appellant's account of life in  Mauritius
    and growing up there for him and his brother.

11.  When the judge found that an account given was  not  entirely  truthful
    it also fell to the Judge to explain whether  that  aspect  or  aspects
    which are untruthful undermined the centre piece  of  the  claim.   The
    judge stated:- [D65]
         "... I find there are matters which, even after  making  allowances
         for trauma, distress, call into question the Appellant's account in
         that the events and people he has sought  to  describe  during  his
         life before coming to the UK is  entirely  truthful.   It  is  also
         clear the appellant the appellant when he sought to come to the  UK
         for his studies 'ever intended to leave the UK'."

12.  The relevance of such doubts or what these matters  were  in  terms  of
    the assessment of risk on return was even more difficult to  assess  in
    the light of the decision read as a whole.

13.  I find that the judge's decision perhaps  should  have  considered  not
    only whether or not, when sodomy was an illegal act  or  the  Appellant
    was at risk of criminal  proceedings  but  also  more  particularly  on
    societal discrimination and the claims of risk from family  and  people
    in general, the  real  risk  of  being  ill-treated,  whether  internal
    relocation was a reasonable option let alone the extent to which  there
    was recourse to domestic protection.

14.  I find the Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand and the matter  of
    assessment of risk on return needs to be further addressed.  There  can
    be no confidence that the  judge's  assessment  of  risk  reflects  the
    evidence as to the actual difficulties the Appellant  faced  let  alone
    how that sat in the context of the background evidence.

15.  It is further arguable that the assessment of events on return  tainted
    the judge's conclusions in relation to that  paragraphs  D  62-76  that
    might have been made, had the judge done so, in assessing the issue  of
    return.

16.  The grounds illustrate that there could  be  a  different  result  that
    might have arisen on the issue of safety of return and the ability of a
    gay  man  to  live  his  life  without  concealment  through  fear   of
    persecution and societal ill-treatment.

17.  Similarly the judge's  exercise  of  considering  proportionality  with
    reference to Sections 117A to D of the  2002  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act failed to weigh up  a  number  of  factors.  First,  the
    Appellant  spoke  English.   Second,  the  Appellant  was   financially
    independent.  Third, the Appellant had worked in the UK when allowed to
    do so.  Fourth, the Appellant whilst having offers  to  work  had  been
    unable to do so because of his immigration status.  Fifth the Appellant
    was integrated into British society.  Sixth, the Appellant  was  not  a
    burden on the taxpayer and had through his substantial  voluntary  work
    been a benefit  to  this  society.   Seventh,  the  Appellant  had  not
    developed his relationship after he was in the  UK  illegally.   Eighth
    the Appellant had never been in the United Kingdom  illegally  and  his
    status was not precarious save insofar  as  the  Respondent  took  some
    three years to determine the Appellant's claim.  Thus  the  passage  of
    time and length of uncertainty as to his final status was not a  direct
    fault of the Appellant's.  Similarly the judge had failed  to  consider
    or at least set out in his consideration the voluntary  work  that  the
    Appellant had been carrying out both in terms of work to  promote  LGBT
    rights to help the blind and he  was  in  need  of  help  with  signing
    language as well as working for a leading HIV community based  charity.



18.  It should not be thought that these matters  and  such  others  as  are
    raised demonstrate the appeal was likely to succeed but it seemed to me
    when there was a lack of clear reasons  for  doubting  the  Appellant's
    credibility, his sexuality should not be held against him in  terms  of
    assessing the worth of his actions whilst in the United Kingdom or  the
    implications for his mental/physical health on return.

19.  I generally doubt whether the Appellant gets close  to  establishing  a
    claim not to be removed on medical grounds.  In the light of the  above
    I am satisfied the Original Tribunal made a number of  errors  of  law.
    The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand and the matter will  have
    to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions
    (1)  Re-list for hearing three hours. Not before F-t T J Davda
    (2)  No interpreter required.
    (3)  Any further evidence relating to the Article  8  claim  should  be
         served not less than seven working days before any further hearing.


    (4)  No findings of fact to stand save that the Appellant  is  accepted
         as being homosexual.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 2 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey.


P.S. I regret promulgation has been delayed because the case file  was  mis-
    located.
