
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04122/2015

                                                               AA/04128/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2018                           |On 18 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     HTV
                                     JT
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    M K Reid, Counsel, instructed by Wick & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellants, a mother and minor son  of  Vietnamese  nationality,
       appeal the decision of judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Nicholls
       (FtJ), promulgated on 7 September  2017,  dismissing  their  appeals
       against the respondent's decision, dated 25 February 2015, to  issue
       directions for their removal having  refused  their  protection  and
       human rights claims.

Background


    2. The 1st appellant was born in Vietnam on [ ] 1995. The 2nd appellant
       was born in the UK on [ ] 2014. The 1st  appellant  entered  the  UK
       illegally and claimed asylum on 23 March 2012. At that time she  was
       16 years old. The following is a summary of the protection claim. In
       her 1st statement, dated 4 May 2012, the 1st appellant described how
       her father, her only parent, would often gamble and come home drunk.
       He would sometimes get angry and violent. She had to carry  out  the
       household chores. In 2011 people would begin to come  to  the  house
       because her father owed them money. The people would  shout  threats
       about payment of debt. On one occasion she was grabbed by two men on
       her way back from school who tied her hands and put her in a vehicle
       with her eyes covered. She was allowed to speak  to  her  father  by
       phone. When later released she  saw  that  her  father's  legs  were
       bleeding and he had scratches. She stopped going to school and  they
       left Vietnam 2 months later. They went by plane to what she believed
       was China where they stayed for around 3 weeks. They then flew to  a
       western country where they stayed in a big  building  for  around  a
       month.  They  were  then  taken  in  a  minivan  to  Germany.  After
       journeying to another country where they remained for a  short  time
       she was placed in a  lorry,  without  her  father,  that  eventually
       brought her to the UK. She was afraid to return to  Vietnam  because
       of the people who were looking for her father. She  had  nowhere  to
       stay, no qualifications or experience. She feared she  would  become
       destitute or would be compelled to work in the sex industry.


    3. In a 2nd witness statement dated 24 July 2015, written when the  1st
       appellant was 19 years old, she confirmed  her  previous  statement.
       She said that she and her father travelled from Vietnam to China and
       then to Germany, although at the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  she
       indicated that this was a mistake and that  she  went  by  air  from
       China to the Czech Republic and then to Germany before  going  in  a
       minivan to France from where she was placed in a lorry  to  the  UK.
       She believed that the people who kidnapped her were connected with a
       criminal gang who trafficked people out of Vietnam. This was because
       shortly after her release a man came to their house with  passports,
       money and documents. She believed she was trafficked out of  Vietnam
       order to pay off her father's debts. She feared the  criminal  gangs
       who operated in all parts of Vietnam. As a single woman with a small
       baby she would be particularly vulnerable.


    4. In a 3rd witness statement, dated 22 March 2017, the 1st appellant's
       account  changed  significantly.  It  was  only  as  a   result   of
       counselling and medication  that  she  felt  able  to  give  a  full
       description of what happened. Her father had  left  Vietnam  through
       arrangements made with people to whom he owed money.  After  leaving
       China they were taken to the Czech Republic where she was forced  to
       make clothes. They were never paid any money for the work.
    5. She and many  others  were  guarded  closely  and  required  to  sew
       clothes. If mistakes were made they were beaten and  not  given  any
       food. On one occasion she was knocked  unconscious  and  raped.  She
       remained in this place for several months before being  placed  with
       other girls in a van. Their mouths were covered with duct  tape  and
       they were ordered to lie on the floor, and when it became light they
       were blindfolded. When they arrived at their destination she saw her
       father was there as well, also with duct tape across his  mouth  and
       his hands tied. He was taken to another place. She was forced to sew
       items and was beaten if she was slow  or  made  a  mistake.  Several
       weeks later she and several others were  blindfolded,  their  mouths
       covered with duct tape and placed in a  van.  They  were  driven  to
       France and found themselves in a place that had tents  and  gardens.
       They were told that they would be sent back to Vietnam if  found  by
       the authorities. Her father was brought to the same  place  about  a
       week later although he stayed in a different section. One night  her
       father placed her in a lorry but went himself in a different  lorry.
       This is the last occasion she saw him. There were many people in her
       lorry and she did not know whether any of them were guards. When she
       was eventually taken out of the lorry it was  daytime  and  she  was
       told to wait. The 1st appellant was on the floor crying when she was
       approached by a woman who gave her a coat and some biscuits and took
       her to a building where she  left  with  some  other  people.  These
       people called the police and,  via  a  Vietnamese  interpreter,  she
       became aware that she was in the UK. She claimed she was not able to
       disclose the bad things that happened to her. She was placed in  the
       care of social services and eventually went  for  counselling  where
       she was told that she had to talk about all the bad things  for  her
       own mental health. It was the combination of  the  council  and  the
       medication that made her able to disclose what happened to her.

Decision of the First-tier Judge

    6. The appellants relied on 2 bundles of documents.  The  first  bundle
       contained the 1st appellant's 2nd statement and  an  expert  country
       report from Dr Tran  Thi  Lan  Anh,  in  addition  to  a  number  of
       background reports including  the  US  State  Department  report  on
       trafficking relating to Vietnam, a Human Rights Watch World  report,
       and a number of articles relating to  trafficking.  The  appellants'
       additional  bundle  contained  the  1st  appellant's   most   recent
       statement,  an  additional   skeleton   argument   and   a   38-page
       psychological report prepared by Dr Roman Halari.


    7. The judge indicated that the 1st appellant should be regarded  as  a
       vulnerable witness and treated accordingly.  The  judge  heard  oral
       evidence from  the  1st  appellant.  The  judge  recorded  the  oral
       evidence, which included the 1st  appellant's  explanation  for  not
       previously disclosing what happened to her during her journey to the
       UK, the circumstances in which she travelled in the lorry to the UK,
       and the circumstances in which she was taken out of the lorry in the
       UK. The judge summarised the content  of  Dr  Tran's  report,  which
       dealt principally with the position of  victims  of  trafficking  in
       Vietnam and the social stigma that would be faced  by  an  unmarried
       single  mother.  At  [8(t)]  the  judge   summarised   Dr   Halari's
       psychological report. The judge noted the doctor's opinion that  the
       1st appellant  had  experienced  significant  trauma  based  on  her
       account, and that she had been diagnosed with PTSD with a depressive
       disorder in the moderate-to-severe range. In Dr  Halari's  view  the
       1st  appellant's  clinical  presentation  was  consistent  with  the
       accounts she had given and with circumstances of  other  victims  of
       abuse and trafficking. The medical expert did not consider that  the
       symptoms were invented and the 1st appellant's account was  said  to
       be  credible.  It  is  pertinent  to  note  that  in   the   judge's
       consideration of Dr Halari's report he did not  specifically  engage
       with the expert's evidence relating to the late disclosure.


    8.  In his findings and conclusions the judge accepted the diagnosis of
       PTSD and depression but found that a largely overland  journey  from
       Vietnam  to  the  UK  would  contain  within  it  circumstances   of
       individual trauma [15]. The judge found that if  the  1st  appellant
       was under the control of people traffickers to the extent  that  she
       claimed it was not implausible that there  could  have  been  sexual
       violence on occasions [supra]. The judge placed significant reliance
       on two elements  of  the  1st  appellant's  account  in  finding  it
       incredible. At [16]  the  judge  noted  a  discrepancy  in  the  1st
       appellant's oral evidence in comparison with her 3rd statement as to
       whether she was gagged and tied when being transported  from  France
       to the UK. In the same paragraph, the  judge  found  it  implausible
       that the 1st appellant would be left at a roadside without any  form
       of restraint and alone given the  significant  restraints  that  had
       previously been imposed on her when being transported. Then at  [17]
       the  judge  considered  the  late  disclosure  of  the  events  that
       allegedly occurred from the time she left Vietnam until her  arrival
       in the UK. The judge noted that there was no report from a therapist
       or counsellor to support her explanation. The judge then stated,

            If the Appellant  is  right  about  the  circumstances  of  her
           journey  to  the  UK,  having  come  in  contact  with  the   UK
           authorities, she would have been keen to show all of the reasons
           why she should be allowed to stay in the UK. It seems  that  she
           was placed in foster care, an arrangement the Appellant said she
           found very safe and supportive. She did not, however,  tell  the
           foster carers of these aspects of her history, she says  because
           she felt unable to talk about them. I cannot  accept  that.  The
           only reason the Appellant was in  the  UK  was  because  of  the
           action of people traffickers who, she says, had  forced  her  to
           work for no wages, for very long hours and in very poor  working
           conditions.  While  she  may  have  had  psychological  problems
           revealing all of the circumstances, it is much more  likely,  in
           my judgement, that she  would  have  been  keen  to  make  those
           closest to her  aware  of  the  problems  and  why  she  was  so
           particularly afraid to return to Vietnam.

    9. The judge, at [18], found that the lack of credibility  relating  to
       the 1st appellant's account of her journey from Vietnam  to  the  UK
       infected her central claim,  including  her  account  of  events  in
       Vietnam. Whilst noting that  debt  bondage  in  Vietnam  leading  to
       trafficking or  forced  labour  or  prostitution  was  by  no  means
       improbable, the judge found that the  general  lack  of  credibility
       meant that those factors did not carry great weight in  the  appeal.
       The judge briefly  considered  article  8  but  noted  that  neither
       appellant was  entitled  to  stay  in  the  UK  and  that  both  the
       Vietnamese nationals. The removal of the appellants would not breach
       article 8. The appeals were dismissed.

The grounds of appeal, the grant of appeal and the Upper Tribunal hearing

   10. The grounds contend that the judge misapplied the correct burden and
       standard of proof and failed to apply the liberal application of the
       benefit  of  doubt  principle  in  light  of  the  1st   appellant's
       vulnerability and her age when the events were said to have happened
       to her. It is submitted that the judge failed to properly assess the
       2nd  appellant's  claim  given  the  evidence  that  he  would  face
       difficulties accessing the benefits of nationality as a foreign born
       child, with reference to the respondent's own guidance and Dr Tran's
       report. The 3rd  ground  challenges  the  judge's  approach  to  the
       delayed disclosure. It is argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
       effect to the respondent's guidance "victims  of  modern  slavery  -
       Competent Authority guidance", and failed to  consider  Dr  Halari's
       assessment of the late disclosure and  the  guidance  identified  in
       case law contained in the skeleton argument, specifically SF, R  (on
       the application of) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department
       [2015] EWHC 2705 (Admin). The  grounds  complained  that  the  judge
       failed to explain why a person who had been through the  experiences
       recounted by the 1st appellant would necessarily  trust  her  foster
       carer and other professionals in the UK such that she could overcome
       her trauma and disclose all her  experiences  without  psychological
       support. The grounds additionally contend that the judge  failed  to
       adequately consider  the  medical  report  when  assessing  the  1st
       appellant's credibility. While the judge was not bound to accept the
       content of the report, he  was  required  to  consider  it  and,  in
       rejecting it, provide adequate reasons.  The  grounds  finally  take
       issue with the judge's adverse inference drawn on the basis that  it
       was implausible that the 1st appellant would be left unattended at a
       roadside. The judge, it is said, impermissibly considered the  issue
       of plausibility from the perspective of a western person, and failed
       to consider credibility more holistically.


   11. Although permission was granted  in  respect  of  all  the  grounds,
       particular emphasis was placed on  the  contention  that  the  judge
       failed to sufficiently engage with the medicolegal  report,  and  in
       respect of his adverse credibility finding.


   12. Ms Reid, who was the representative before the  First-tier  Tribunal
       and who drafted the grounds, adopted and expanded her  grounds.  She
       drew my attention to the  medicolegal  report,  noting  Dr  Halari's
       assessment of  the  late  disclosure  at  paragraphs  113  and  131.
       Although there was no document from the 1st  appellant's  counsellor
       before the judge, it was apparent that the expert did  have  letters
       issued by the counsellor. My attention was also drawn  to  the  most
       recent statement, at paragraphs 25 and 26, where the  1st  appellant
       provided her explanation for  her  late  disclosure.  This,  it  was
       submitted, had not been considered by the judge.  Mr  Reid  drew  my
       attention to her skeleton argument and the reference  to  SF.  There
       had been no consideration  of  the  difficulties  the  1st  and  2nd
       appellants would face as a single mother and  her  child.  Mr  Tufan
       submitted that the significant change in the 1st appellant's account
       entitled the judge to hold this against  her.  Dr  Halari  had  only
       considered the issue of late disclosure in two short  paragraphs.  M
       Tufan submitted that the judge was entitled to her  conclusions  for
       the reasons given.

Discussion

   13. having holistic regard to the judge's decision I am  satisfied  that
       he properly directed himself in respect of the  lower  standard  and
       burden of proof. This is readily apparent from [6]. There is nothing
       in the section of the decision containing the judge's  findings  and
       conclusions to indicate that he  applied  anything  other  than  the
       lower standard of proof.


   14. Nor am I satisfied that the  judge  impermissibly  drew  an  adverse
       inference from the description given by the  1st  appellant  of  the
       circumstances in which she travelled from France to the  UK  and  in
       which she came to leave the lorry. The grounds failed  to  refer  to
       the inconsistent evidence relating to whether the 1st appellant  was
       restrained when in the lorry making its way to the UK. The judge was
       mindful of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note when considering the
       1st appellant's oral evidence and was rationally  entitled  to  hold
       the discrepant evidence against her. The judge was  also  rationally
       entitled to find implausible the element of freedom bestowed on  the
       1st appellant when she left the lorry. This  was  inconsistent  with
       all the other trafficking journeys described by the 1st appellant in
       her 3rd statement. If the 1st appellant was trafficked into  the  UK
       for the purposes of exploitation one may legitimately wonder why she
       was left alone in circumstances where she could conceivably have run
       away, even if instructed to  remain.  This  aspect  of  the  judge's
       assessment did not fall foul of the principled approach to issues of
       plausibility as considered in MM  (DRC  -  plausibility)  Democratic
       Republic of Congo [2005] UKIAT 00019, HK v Secretary  of  State  for
       the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1037  and  Ali  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 07001.


   15. I am however satisfied that the judge failed to consider  or  engage
       with relevant evidence relating to the late  disclosure  issue,  and
       factors relevant to a full and proper assessment of late disclosure.
       While the judge summarised the medicolegal report, at  no  stage  of
       his decision has he engaged with Dr Halari's assessment of  the  1st
       appellant's late disclosure. At paragraph 130 the  doctor  indicated
       that the 1st appellant found it difficult to  trust  people  on  her
       arrival in the UK, and in particular men. At paragraph 131 Dr Halari
       stated,


           She was able to open up in her counselling sessions because  she
           was able to develop a trusting therapeutic relationship with her
           therapist and she started to  feel  safe  and  contained  before
           disclosing her past trauma this would be a typical  presentation
           of someone who has been traumatised.
   16. This assessment reflected paragraph  113  of  the  same  medicolegal
       report  where  the  doctor  explained  that   late   disclosure   of
       trafficking trauma  is  consistent  with  the  1st  appellant  being
       scared, anxious and traumatised. And at  paragraph  114  the  doctor
       stated that,  in  her  clinical  opinion,  the  late  disclosure  of
       trafficking trauma would be  in  keeping  with  being  a  victim  of
       trafficking. Nor did the judge consider or engage with the Secretary
       of State's guidance for assessment of delayed disclosure, set out in
       SF at 22(d), "A key symptom of post-traumatic stress is avoidance of
       trauma  triggers,  or  those  that   cause   frightening   memories,
       flashbacks  or   other   unpleasant   physical   and   psychological
       experiences. Because of these symptoms a person  may  be  unable  to
       fully explain their experience until they have  achieved  a  minimum
       level of psychological stability. You  must  not  view  a  delay  in
       disclosing of facts as necessarily manipulative or  untrue.  In  any
       cases it is the result of  an  effective  recovery  period  and  the
       establishment of trust with the person they disclose the information
       to."


   17. I do not accept Ms Reid's submission that the judge entirely  failed
       to consider paragraphs 25 and 26 of the 3rd witness statement. It is
       readily apparent from [8(m)] that the judge had read  those  aspects
       of the statement, and in particular the 1st appellant's  claim  that
       she was unable to talk about the "bad things" that had  happened  to
       her and that she needed to talk about all the bad things for her own
       mental health and that is the  combination  of  the  counsellor  and
       medication that enabled her to do so. What the judge has not however
       engaged with is the further explanation given by the  1st  appellant
       at paragraph 25 of her 3rd statement. There the 1st appellant stated
       that she felt guilty and bad and wanted to forget about the  events.
       She explained that when things like this  happened  girls  would  be
       considered spoilt or bad and people would not want to have  anything
       to do with them. She explained that she did not want this to  happen
       to her and felt that she had to pretend that  nothing  had  happened
       because she did not want to be branded as 'spoilt goods'. This was a
       much more in-depth explanation provided by the 1st appellant for her
       late disclosure. Moreover, in her oral evidence, recorded at [8(o)],
       the 1st  appellant  explained  that  she  had  not  volunteered  the
       information that she had been forced to work  because  she  did  not
       know who to trust. Nor had anyone asked her what happened during her
       journey.


   18. The judge rejected the 1st appellant's credibility because,  on  his
       view, she would have been keen to  show  all  the  reasons  why  she
       should be allowed to stay in the UK and would have been keen to make
       those closest to her aware of  her  problems,  particularly  as  she
       found her care arrangements safe and supportive. While the judge was
       undoubtedly entitled to take account of these factors as tending  to
       undermine the 1st appellant's credibility, he failed to engage  with
       the evidence and the relevant guidance, given judicial approval,  as
       described in paragraphs 15, 16 and 17 above. While the  judge  would
       not be obliged to accept the  1st  appellant's  explanation  or  the
       medical opinion relating to late disclosure,  he  had  to  at  least
       engage with that evidence in the context of  the  relevant  guidance
       issued by the  Secretary  of  State,  and  to  offer  comprehensible
       reasons for rejecting those explanations. I am  satisfied  that  the
       failure of the judge to do so constitutes a material  error  of  law
       rendering the decision unsafe.

   19. Given that the identified error of law relates to a core credibility
       finding, and in light of the representations made by the parties  at
       the hearing, I consider it appropriate to remit this matter back  to
       the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing  before  a  judge  other
       than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Nicholls.


Decision:

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a  material  error  of  law.
The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  (de  novo)
hearing, before  a  judge  other  than  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Nicholls.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellants  in
this appeal are granted anonymity. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                                   16 January 2018
Signed:                                            Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
