
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
AA/04140/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 25th May 2016                        |On: 31st May 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     VP
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Hassan, Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born in  1986.    On  the  2nd
    December 2013 he arrived in the United Kingdom and sought asylum.   His
    application was rejected and on the 24th February 2015  the  Respondent
    refused  him  leave  to  enter.  The  Appellant  appealed  and   in   a
    determination dated 31st  July  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Nicol) dismissed his appeal on asylum, humanitarian  and  human  rights
    grounds.   The Appellant now has permission  to  appeal  against  Judge
    Nicol's decision.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that he has a well-founded  fear
    of persecution in Sri  Lanka  for  reasons  of  his  imputed  political
    opinion.  In very brief summary, he claims to have  been  detained  and
    severely ill-treated because the Sri Lankan authorities believe him  to
    have some connection with the LTTE.  The Respondent  had  rejected  the
    claim on credibility grounds and the matter had come before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 3. On appeal the Appellant had relied on a report  prepared  by  Professor
    Sundara Lingham confirming that the Appellant had scars on  his  person
    "highly consistent" with the  methods  of  torture  he  described.  The
    Appellant further relied on a report by Dr Raj  Persaud,  a  Consultant
    Psychiatrist, who diagnosed him  with  "serious  psychiatric  disorder"
    including PTSD and major depression.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal found there to be a number  of  inconsistencies
    in the Appellant's account. Paragraph 38 finds that  Professor  Lingham
    "is not conclusive in his findings in respect of scarring". The  appeal
    is dismissed.

 5. In finding an error of law  I  take  the  relatively  unusual  step  of
    adopting, in its entirety, the terms of the grant of  permission,  made
    by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  McCarthy  on  the  26th
    August 2015:

         "There are in essence two grounds of appeal:  (i)  that  the  Judge
         failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  the  appellant's
         evidence to be inconsistent or contradictory; (ii) that  the  judge
         erred in his evaluation of the medical evidence.


         The second ground is certainly arguable  because  at  paragraph  38
         Judge Nicol found 'Professor  Lingham  is  not  conclusive  in  his
         findings in respect of the scarring'. Not only does the use of  the
         word 'conclusive' raise questions about the standard of proof Judge
         Nicol applied to the medical evidence, it  also  suggests  that  he
         failed to understand  the  provisions  of  the  Istanbul  Protocol,
         wherein a description of 'highly consistent' might be sufficient to
         discharge the lower standard of proof, as  set  out  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal in KV (scarring - medical evidence) [2014] UKUT 230 (IAC).




         As to the first ground, I am satisfied it is also arguable  because
         it is not clear from paragraphs 33 and 34 whether Judge Nicol  gave
         appropriate  consideration  to  the   question   of   whether   the
         appellant's  psychological  problems  might   have   affected   his
         abilities to give a consistent account over  time.  The  mere  fact
         that there might be inconsistencies in the  accounts  given  by  an
         asylum seeker is not enough to find that such a  person  is  not  a
         refugee; it may simple mean the greater weight has to be placed  on
         other available evidence"

 6.  Mr  Harrison  did  not  make  any  submissions  in  defence  of   this
    determination. He was right not to do so.


 7. The Appellant gives a long and complex  history  of  a  Tamil  civilian
    caught in the cross fire - both literal and metaphorical - in the fight
    between the LTTE and the Sri Lankan state.   It was  an  account  which
    required careful findings of  fact,  and  conclusions  reached  upon  a
    holistic assessment of all of the evidence. That  required  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to examine the account in  the  context  of  the  country
    guidance (and any other  country  background  material  that  might  be
    relevant), the Appellant's own evidence, both documentary and oral, and
    the medical evidence.  In respect  of  the  latter  the  Appellant  had
    produced two reports from Consultant physicians who attested a) that he
    was suffering from serious psychiatric  disorder  consistent  with  his
    having suffered some significant trauma and b) he bore numerous  scars,
    some of which  were  highly  consistent  with  having  been  burned  by
    cigarettes.

 8. This determination fails to make clear findings, supported by  reasons,
    on the Appellant's evidence. The unparticularised assertion that he has
    been "inconsistent" does not enable the Appellant to understand why  he
    has lost. The determination further fails, for the reasons  articulated
    by Judge McCarthy, to properly assess the evidence of Professor Sundara
    Lingham. The determination appears to contain no evaluation at  all  of
    Dr Persaud's opinion. This appeal has not been  examined  with  anxious
    scrutiny and in those circumstances the determination must be set aside
    and the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


      Decisions


 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.


10. Having regard to the extent of the fact-finding required,  the  parties
    agreed that the decision in the appeal should be remade in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

11. Having regard to the fact that this is a protection claim  I  make  the
    following direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  the
        Secretary of State.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could
        lead to contempt of court proceedings".


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce



                                25th May 2016
