


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA044082015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On : 23 May 2016                         |On: 25 May 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           nahom alenu gebrewolde

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Schwenk, instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter

                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Gebrewolde's  appeal
against the respondent's decision to remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom
following the refusal of his asylum claim.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the respondent and Mr  Gebrewolde  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant, born on 2 August 1996, claims to be a citizen of Eritrea  but
is considered by the respondent to be a citizen of Ethiopia. He entered  the
United  Kingdom  on  27  September  2014  concealed  in  a  lorry  and   was
encountered by the police. He was  served  with  illegal  entry  papers  and
claimed asylum on 27 September 2014. His claim was refused  on  27  February
2015 and he appealed against that decision. His  appeal  was  heard  in  the
First-tier Tribunal on 28 May 2015 and was allowed. The Secretary  of  State
has been granted permission to appeal that decision.

The Appellant's Claim

The appellant claims to have been born in Assab,  Eritrea  and  claims  that
his parents were Eritrean nationals who had always lived  in  Eritrea  prior
to his birth. He claims to be of Tigre  ethnicity  and  to  have  been  born
into, and practised, the Pentecostal Christian faith. He did  not  hold  any
Eritrean documents. Shortly after his birth his family moved to Ethiopia  as
his father obtained a job in Addis Ababa and  his  mother,  who  had  become
ill, required medical treatment. His father paid two percent of  his  income
to the Eritrean government.  The  family  did  not  have  legal  immigration
status in Ethiopia but his father was able to work, and his mother was  able
to access medical  treatment,  without  problems  until  the  start  of  the
Eritrean/Ethiopian conflict in 1998. He attended  a  Pentecostal  church  in
Ethiopia. In 2000 his father and sister were deported  to  Eritrea.  He  was
not deported at the time because he was a  small  child  and  was  with  his
mother at the hospital, but remained living in Ethiopia illegally  with  his
mother. His mother died around September 2011 and he went  to  live  with  a
friend of his father. He managed to make contact with his sister in  Eritrea
and found out that  she  was  ill.  She  told  him  that  their  father  was
detained. He decided to visit his sister in  Eritrea.  He  had  no  identity
documents and was scared of being seen as an Eritrean spy if  he  sought  to
contact the embassy and so he travelled  to  Eritrea  illegally.  He  stayed
with his sister in  Eritrea.  He  did  not  register  for  any  identity  or
nationality documents as his sister told him that he would  have  no  rights
as a citizen in any event. He worshipped with his sister and others  at  the
house, but on one occasion on 16 March 2014 the police came and he fled.  He
went to his uncle's house and did not know what happened to his sister.  His
uncle arranged for him to leave Eritrea and he travelled to Sudan  and  then
travelled to France with an agent and on to the UK.

The respondent did not accept that the appellant was an  Eritrean  national,
noting inconsistencies in his account of where he was born  and  considering
it significant that  he  claimed  to  speak  Amharic  with  only  a  limited
understanding of Tigrinya. The respondent considered that the appellant  had
failed to explain why his family did not  take  the  opportunity  to  obtain
legal status in Ethiopia when Eritreans living  in  Ethiopia  were  able  to
acquire Ethiopian citizenship after 2003, or why he did not seek to  acquire
Eritrean  citizenship  when  he  was  living  in  Eritrea.  The   respondent
therefore concluded  that  the  appellant  was  an  Ethiopian  national  and
considered that he would be at no risk on return to Ethiopia  on  the  basis
of his faith which was accepted as Pentecostal Christian.  It  was  accepted
that he would be at risk as a Pentecostal Christian in Eritrea if he was  an
Eritrean national, but it  was  not  accepted  that  he  was  Eritrean.  His
account of his house being raided by the police in Eritrea was not  accepted
and it was not accepted that he would be perceived  as  a  draft  evader  on
return to Eritrea. The respondent confirmed that  removal  directions  would
not be set to Eritrea, although both Eritrea and Ethiopia would be  referred
to in the removal decision. The respondent considered that  the  appellant's
removal to Ethiopia would not put him at risk and that it would  not  breach
his human rights.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Bannerman on 28 May 2015.  The  judge  heard  from
the appellant and also considered a letter from the  Eritrean  community  in
Lambeth charity. He accepted the appellant's account of  having  moved  from
Eritrea with his parents shortly after his birth and accepted  that  he  was
an Eritrean  national.  He  noted  that  the  respondent  had  accepted  the
appellant's claim to be a Pentecostal Christian and he accepted his  account
of the raid on his sister's house  by  the  police  and  accepted  that  his
father and sister were in detention. He accepted that  the  appellant  would
be at risk on return to Eritrea and allowed the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Secretary of State's appeal

The respondent sought permission to appeal  Judge  Bannerman's  decision  on
the grounds that, in accepting the  appellant's  claim  to  be  an  Eritrean
national, he had failed to take into account  the  country  guidance  in  MA
(Ethiopia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ  289
and ST (Ethnic Eritrean - nationality - return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT  252
and had made his findings without any evidence from the  appellant  that  he
was not entitled to Ethiopian nationality.

Permission was granted on 23 June 2015.

At the hearing before me Mr  Harrison  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal,
submitting that the judge had erred by failing to consider  the  requirement
for the appellant to attend  at  the  Ethiopian  embassy  to  establish  his
nationality. Mr Schwenk submitted that  MA  and  ST  were  not  directly  on
point. Those cases were about statelessness and the denial  of  nationality,
whereas the  appellant  had  never  claimed  to  be  entitled  to  Ethiopian
nationality  or  to  have  been  unfairly  denied  such   nationality.   The
respondent had never relied on  those  cases  in  refusing  the  appellant's
claim. There was no legal requirement for the  appellant  to  have  evidence
from the Ethiopian  authorities  denying  him  nationality.  The  judge  was
entitled to accept his account. In response to my enquiry as to whether  the
judge ought to have gone on to consider whether the appellant  was  at  risk
on return to Ethiopia, Mr Schwenk submitted that, having accepted  that  the
appellant had lived in  Ethiopia  under  the  radar,  illegally,  after  his
father's deportation, the only conclusion he could have reached was  that  a
return  to  Ethiopia  would  result  in  refoulement  to  Eritrea.  It   was
inconceivable  that  the  appellant  could  avail   himself   of   Ethiopian
nationality, when considering the Proclamation on Ethiopian  Nationality  in
the bundle of documents.

I advised the parties that, in my view, there was no material error  of  law
in the judge's decision. My reasons for so concluding are as follows.

Consideration and findings.

The respondent, in challenging the judge's decision, relies upon  the  cases
of MA and ST. However I am in agreement with Mr  Schwenk's  submission  that
those cases are not applicable in the appellant's circumstances. Both  cases
involved appellants who were born  in  Ethiopia  and  who  had  a  claim  to
Ethiopian nationality but who were asserting and  relying  upon  deprivation
of that nationality by the Ethiopian  authorities  on  the  basis  of  their
Eritrean origins or ethnicity. That much is made clear in particular in  the
headnote of ST, which states at paragraphs 2 and 3 as follows:

    (2) A person whose Ethiopian identity documents were taken or destroyed
    by the authorities during this time and who then left Ethiopian is as a
    general matter likely to have been arbitrarily  deprived  of  Ethiopian
    nationality. Whether that deprivation amounted to persecution  (whether
    on its own or combined with  other  factors)  is  a  question  of  fact
    (paragraphs 76 to 78).

    (3) The practices just described provide the background  against  which
    to consider today the claim to international protection of a person who
    asserts that he or she is an Ethiopian national  who  is  being  denied
    that nationality, and with it the  right  to  return  from  the  United
    Kingdom to Ethiopian for a Refugee Convention reason. Findings  on  the
    credibility and consequences of events in Ethiopian prior to a person's
    departure, will be important, as a finding of past persecution may have
    an important bearing on how one  views  the  present  attitude  of  the
    Ethiopian authorities. Conversely, a person whose account is not  found
    to be credible may find it difficult to show that a refusal on the part
    of the authorities to accept his or her return is persecutory or  based
    on any Refugee Convention reason (paragraphs 79 to 81)."

In the appellant's case he has never  asserted  that  he  was  an  Ethiopian
national and has never claimed to be entitled to, or to have ever  possessed
Ethiopian nationality. His claim was that he was an  Eritrean  national  who
had lived in Ethiopia for most of his life, but not with any  legal  status.
He claimed to have lived in the country illegally, "under the radar", as  Mr
Schwenk put it, since the deportation of his  father  and  sister  in  2000.
Whilst the respondent did not believe that claim  and  considered  that  the
appellant was an Ethiopian national, Judge Bannerman found  the  appellant's
account to be credible and accepted his claim. The respondent's  grounds  do
not seek  to  make  any  specific  challenge  to  the  positive  credibility
findings made by the judge and indeed, as Mr Schwenk  submitted,  the  judge
was perfectly entitled to accept the appellant's account.  He  gave  reasons
for so doing at [19] which, contrary to the assertion made in  the  grounds,
did not depend solely  upon  the  letter  from  the  Eritrean  community  in
Lambeth. Neither did the issues arising in MA and ST form any  part  of  the
respondent's refusal reasons.

Having made such findings of fact, the judge concluded  that  the  appellant
would be at risk on return to Eritrea as a Pentecostal Christian.  That  was
indeed a matter conceded by the respondent at paragraph 27  of  the  refusal
letter and the judge was accordingly perfectly entitled so to conclude.


However, where the judge erred in his decision-making was in his failure  to
go on to consider the risk of persecution in Ethiopia. At  paragraph  44  of
the refusal letter the respondent  made  it  clear  that  both  Eritrea  and
Ethiopia were being specified in  the  removal  decision  and  that  removal
directions would not be set to Eritrea  because  of  the  accepted  risk  on
return to that country. Removal was, therefore, intended to  Ethiopia.  That
was a matter that the judge ought to have gone  on  to  consider,  given  in
particular that he had accepted the appellant's account  of  having  resided
in Ethiopia for most of his life.


Having said that, I find force in Mr  Schwenk's  submission  that  any  such
error cannot be considered to be material, given  the  appellant's  accepted
circumstances and considering the terms of  the  Proclamation  on  Ethiopian
Nationality, Proclamation No.378/2003,  which  was  before  the  judge,  and
according to which it is clear that the appellant would,  on  the  basis  of
those accepted circumstances, have no  possibility  of  acquiring  Ethiopian
nationality.  I  refer  in  particular  to  Part  2,  section   5   of   the
Proclamation, relating to the acquisition  of  Ethiopian  nationality,  from
which it is plain that  the  appellant,  having  never  resided  legally  in
Ethiopia and having been outside the country for some two years,  would  not
be able to meet the relevant conditions. I accept  Mr  Schwenk's  submission
that a risk would arise that the appellant would be refouled to Eritrea  and
that in any event the respondent had not raised  that  matter  as  a  viable
alternative in the refusal  letter.  Mr  Harrison  did  not  challenge  that
submission.


Accordingly, I find that the respondent's grounds are not made out and  that
the judge's decision is one that was open to him on the evidence before  him
and does not contain any material errors of law.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The  Secretary  of
State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
allow the appellant's appeal stands.




















                                Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
                                Date 25th May 2016
