
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04594/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Sent           |
|On 5 April 2013                               |On 10 June 2013              |
|Prepared 8 April 2013                         |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Parviz Yadollahi

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Harrison  Solicitor of Halliday Reeves Law
Firm


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL


1.   The Respondent (the Claimant) a national of  Iran,  date  of  birth  20
    February 1971, appealed against the Respondent's decision to refuse the
    grant of asylum on 22 March 2011 but granting  discretionary  leave  to
    remain until 21 March 2014.  The appeal by the Respondent  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox (the Judge)  sitting  at  Bradford  on  7
    December 2011, On 9 January 2012 the judge allowed the appeal under the
    Refugee Convention and under the Human Rights  Convention  although  he
    did not identify any particular Article nor apparently was one actually
    relied upon.  In any event the Secretary of State  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal to this Tribunal properly identified the  failure  to  give  any
    reasons for the finding under the  Human  Rights  Act.   Permission  to
    appeal was given by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson  on  13
    February 2012.

2.   It is clear that the issue of Article 1F of  the  1951  Convention  was
    before the judge but the judge; posed the  question  in  the  following
    terms "I have now to determine whether the Appellant 'committed' crimes
    against humanity".

 3.   Article 1F states:-
        'The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to  any  person
        with respect to whom there  are  serious  grounds  for  considering
        that:
        (a)  he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime
             against humanity as defined in  the  international  instruments
             drawn up to make provision in respect of such crimes;
        (b)  he has committed a serious  non-political  crime  outside  the
             country of refuge prior to his admission to that country  as  a
             refugee;
        (c)  he has been guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
             principles of the United Nations.'

3.   The judge noted that the Respondent has to establish the Appellant  had
    personal knowledge of, and intended to contribute to, the commission of
    crimes against humanity but failed  to  consider  whether  or  not  the
    evidence established there were "serious grounds for  considering"  the
    Appellant had committed a proscribed crime, rather than whether he  had
    committed one.

4.    The parties were agreed that it was appropriate for this appeal to  be
    allowed to the extent that the issue  of  Article  1F  of  the  Refugee
    Convention should be properly considered by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cox  in accordance with the case law and in particular to  have  regard
    to the grounds for excluding criminal responsibility under Articles  31
    to 33 and insofar as it may be relevant Article 30 of the Rome  Statute
    of the International Criminal Court.

5.    We agreed with the parties that that was the appropriate course to  be
    taken and that the  decision  must  be  remade  in  the  light  of  the
    applicable  law.

6.     The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge B Cox to determine whether exclusion under  Article
    1F of the Refugee Convention applies to Parviz Yadollahi.


Signed                                  Date 8 May 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


