
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/04384/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly             |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 30 September 2016                       |On 3 October 2016          |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                 HAROON [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Jagadesham instructed by Fadiga & Co.
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge M Davies promulgated on 3 June 2016  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to  remove  the
   Appellant from the UK following the decision to  refuse  the  Appellant's
   claim for asylum
Background
4. The  Appellant  was  born  on  1  January  1988  and  is  a  national  of
   Afghanistan. He claimed to be  an  uneducated  farmer  married  with  one
   child. In essence his claim was that he was  at  risk  from  the  Taliban
   because his brother served in the Afghan National Army. He stated that  8
   months before the death of his brother he was beaten up during  the  rice
   harvest  of  2011.  After  his  brother  was  killed  the  Appellant  was
   threatened via his brother's mobile phone that he would be killed because
   his brother joined the army. The Appellant came to the UK  by  lorry  and
   claimed asylum on 20 September 2012.
5. On 23 February 2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   a) The Appellant claim that his brother was in the Afghan  National  Army
      was not accepted as it was vague at to his role and the  documents  he
      produced in relation to his service were all photocopies.
   b) His account of being attacked because of  his  brother's  service  was
      inconsistent.
   c) The claim that he was attacked by members of the  Taliban  was  purely
      speculative.
   d) The Appellant failed to pursue his complaint to the police  about  the
      attack.
   e) The medico legal report fails to  consider  any  possible  alternative
      reasons for the scars that the  Appellant  had  as  a  result  of  the
      claimed assault and fails in concluding that the scars arose out of  a
      single causative event to  follow  the  guidance  in  KV  (scarring  -
      medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230  (IAC);  the  conclusion
      that the Appellant would be at risk of self harm is inconsistent  with
      the Appellants own evidence and the fact that  he  expressed  no  such
      feelings to the Respondent, his GP or the expert.
   f) The Appellants claim that his  brother  was  killed  during  the  rice
      harvest a week prior to his departure from Iran, 3 months  before  the
      asylum interview was inconsistent with the once yearly rice harvest in
      September/October given that he left Afghanistan on 10 July 2012.
   g) The Appellants late claim for asylum undermined his credibility.
   h) The country conditions did not warrant leave under Article 15(c)


The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Davies ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
   decision.
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing:
   a) That the Judge dismissed  the  medico  legal  report  and  documentary
      evidence on the basis of the negative credibility findings.
   b) Failed to consider the inconsistencies in  the  light  of  the  mental
      vulnerability of the Appellant.
   c) His approach to the medical evidence was flawed.
   d) His approach to s8 of the 2004 act was flawed in that he  treated  his
      failure to claim in countries other  than  the  UK  as  fatal  to  his
      credibility.

8.  On 30 June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Osborne  gave  permission  to
   appeal.

9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Jegadasham on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that he relied on the grounds of appeal.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Mc Vitie submitted relied on the Rule  24
   response.

The Law

11.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.

Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

14. It was argued that the Judges approach to the medico  legal  report  and
   the documentary evidence was flawed in that 'he put the cart  before  the
   horse' relying on the leading judgement in Mibanga [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367
   where at paragraph 24 Wilson J stated:
   1. "What the fact-finder does at his peril is to reach a conclusion by
      reference only to the appellant's evidence and then, if it be
      negative, to ask whether the conclusion should be shifted by the
      expert evidence. Mr Tam has drawn the court's attention to a decision
      of the tribunal dated 5 November 2004, namely HE (DRC - Credibility
      and Psychiatric Reports) [2004] UKIAT 00321 in which, in paragraph 22,
      it said:
      "Where the report is specifically relied on as a factor relevant to
      credibility, the Adjudicator should deal with it as an integral part
      of the findings on credibility rather than just as an add-on, which
      does not undermine the conclusions to which he would otherwise come."




15. The Judge in his decision made  adverse  findings  in  relation  to  the
   Appellants account at paragraphs 58 and 58 stating twice in paragraph  59
   that the  Appellants  credibility  was  'fatally  'damaged.  He  then  in
   paragraph 60 states 'I now turn to the  medico  legal  report'.  Such  an
   approach  suggests  that  having  reached  a   negative   conclusion   on
   credibility he then looked at the  medico  legal  report  and  indeed  he
   stated 'As I have made clear I do not accept that the Appellant has given
   a truthful account. Therefore I do not attach any weight to  the  opinion
   of Dr Robinson based on the Appellants evidence.'  Such  an  approach  is
   flawed in that it clearly deals with the expert evidence  as  an  add  on
   rather an integral part of the findings. This  error  I  consider  to  be
   material since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome could
   have been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

16. It was  also  argued  that  the  Judges  approach  to  s8  Treatment  of
   Claimants Act 2004 was flawed that he was section 8  should  not  be  the
   starting  point  for  the  assessment  of  credibility.   The   behaviour
   identified in that section is a factor to be taken into  account  in  the
   overall assessment of credibility and its importance will vary from  case
   to case.  The Judge in this case stated twice at paragraph  59  that  the
   failure of the Appellant to claim asylum  in  any  of  the  countries  he
   passed through fatally damaged his credibility as  there  was  no  proper
   assessment of the Appellants particular circumstances in that he  claimed
   to be uneducated and illiterate, in the hands of an agent  and  suffering
   from PTSD. To make s8  factors  determinative  of  credibility  in  those
   circumstances was, I am  satisfied,  a  flawed  approach.  This  error  I
   consider to be material since had the Tribunal  conducted  this  exercise
   the outcome could have been different. That in my  view  is  the  correct
   test to apply.

Remittal to the First-tier Tribunal

17. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety.
   All matters to be redetermined afresh.

18. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. In this case I have determined that the case should  be  remitted  as  I
   have found there was an error of law because the Appellant did not have a
   fair hearing due to failure in the overall approach  to  credibility.  In
   this case none of the findings of fact are to stand and the  matter  will
   be a complete re hearing.

20. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me.

21. I made the following directions for the resumed hearing:

      . List for 2.5 hours

      . Pushtu interpreter


Signed                                                              Date 30
September 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell










