
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04981/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 16th January 2015                    |On 20th January 2015        |
|                                        |                            |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between
                              MR RAMU SOTHITHAS
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms A Seehra, Counsel instructed by Nag Law Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sir Lanka born on 30th November 1972.  He
    first came to the UK on 10th May 2013 on false  documents  and  claimed
    asylum on the same day. His application was refused on 8th  July  2014.
    He appealed on 18th July 2014.  His appeal was dismissed on all grounds
    in a determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Rose written  on
    22nd August 2014 following a hearing on 19th August 2014.

 2. On 19th September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Nicholson found
    that  there  was  an  arguable  error  of  law  because  there  was  no
    consideration of MP (Sri Lanka) and NT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 829. This was potentially of significance because Judge Rose simply
    recorded that the second appellant in GJ and Others  (post  civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 had his appeal dismissed when
    in fact it had been allowed by the Court of Appeal in MP  (Sri  Lanka);
    and arguably the Court of  Appeal  had  mitigated  the  force  of  some
    aspects of GJ ( Sri Lanka).

 3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

Submissions

 4. Ms Seehra submitted that she relied upon her grounds of appeal.  In her
    grounds of appeal she sets out that the appellant has been found to  be
    entirely credible. He was a LTTE member from 1995 to 2009,  and  worked
    in the finance division. He  had  photographs  showing  him  with  high
    profile LTTE members such as the former head of  LTTE  police  and  the
    leader, Prabhakaran. It was accepted that he was detained  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities for 18 months between 2009 and December  2010  as  a
    LTTE member. He had scars on his  body  and  it  was  accepted  he  was
    tortured. The First-tier Tribunal found he had escaped  from  detention
    and fled Sri Lanka using a passport that was not his own.

 5. She submits, in summary, that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    because it had not appreciated that the second appellant's  appeal  had
    been allowed in MP (Sri Lanka), and had referred to the fact  that  his
    appeal was dismissed in GJ (Sri Lanka). Further MP  (Sri  Lanka)  found
    that it would be easier to satisfy  the  test  in  GJ  (Sri  Lanka)  if
    elaborate links with the  LTTE  (made  out  in  accordance  with  UNHCR
    guidelines) were present. People with elaborate  links  included  those
    within the administration of the  LTTE  and  those  involved  with  the
    supply and transport of goods for the LTTE, which  of  course  was  the
    position that this appellant had held. Judge Rose had failed to look at
    the issue of elaborate links starting with the  UNHCR  guidelines.  The
    First-tier  Tribunal  placed  emphasis  on  the   appellant's   limited
    political activities in the UK, but MP (Sri  Lanka)  found  that  Tamil
    separatist activity in the UK was  not  an  absolute  prerequisite  for
    protection. It was clear that perceptions of political activity by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities remained  important.  It  was  argued  that  the
    appellant would be perceived in this way due to his significant  period
    of detention and torture; that he had been informed  against;  that  he
    was never  considered  for  release;  and  that  he  had  escaped  from
    detention.  It was not necessary for  the  appellant  to  be  a  senior
    activist to have elaborate links and be perceived as a threat

 6. Ms Seehra also argued that the First-tier Tribunal was in  err  because
    emphasis was placed on the fact that  others  had  been  released  from
    detention (see paragraph 43 of the determination)  when  it  was  clear
    that some of those released from detention continued  to  be  harassed;
    inadequate reasons were given in the determination for discounting  the
    MP's  letter  regarding  continued  interest  in  the   appellant;   no
    consideration was given to the  effect  of  information  the  appellant
    would have to give to the Sri Lankan authorities when he applied for  a
    travel document on return to Sri Lanka (that he  was  in  favour  of  a
    separate Tamil state and his history of LTTE involvement)  about  which
    he could not be expected to  lie;  the  Tribunal  had  also  failed  to
    properly engage with the evidence in the photographs showing the  chief
    of police, Mr Nadesan, at the appellant's  wedding  and  the  appellant
    with the  LTTE  leader  Mr  Prabhakaran.  The  failure  to  accept  the
    appellant's explanations regarding the photographs was  not  compatible
    with him being regarding as a credible witness. As a result  there  was
    no proper application  of  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  which  was
    particularly important given the  concession  by  the  respondent  that
    detention in Sri Lanka would include the risk of ill treatment.

 7. Mr Melvin relies upon his written submissions  enlarging  the  Rule  24
    letter by the respondent. Judge Rose gave careful consideration to  all
    of the evidence in this appeal and came to a lawful decision

 8. MP (Sri Lanka) upheld the approach of the Tribunal in GJ  (Sri  Lanka).
    The Court of Appeal  found  that  it  was  permissible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to depart from the UNHCR eligibility guidelines, see paragraph
    17 of MP (Sri Lanka). The second appellant's (NT's) appeal was  allowed
    in MP (Sri Lanka) to the extent it was remitted to the  Upper  Tribunal
    to consider the issue of his cousin still being in detention four years
    after the end of violence; the payment of a huge bribe for his release;
    the rejection of his mother's evidence; and findings made  in  relation
    to the rehabilitation programme. These issues are not ones relevant  to
    this appellant.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal made it clear that they did not  consider  that
    the appellant was being sought after his  escape  from  detention  (see
    paragraphs 32 and 35 of the determination). Further the  assessment  is
    that the appellant was a low level member of the LTTE (see paragraph 32
    of the determination). Considerations is given to the photos but it  is
    noted that there is no other  evidence  corroborating  the  appellant's
    relationship with the LTTE officials. It is not thought that the  photo
    alone would mean the appellant was seen as a member of the LTTE police.
    Consideration was given to whether the appellant  had  elaborate  links
    with the LTTE at paragraph 37 of the determination, and it  is  decided
    he did not. The MP's letter  is  considered  at  paragraph  35  of  the
    determination but  it  was  found  that  it  was  discrepant  with  the
    appellant's own evidence. The re-documentation process  would  not  put
    the appellant in any risk categories, and Judge  Rose  deals  with  the
    issue of the appellant being on a watch list in any case  at  paragraph
    44 of the determination.

10. At the end of hearing I reserved my determination.

Conclusions

11. It is the case that Judge Rose does not refer to the  Court  of  Appeal
    case of MP (Sri Lanka) in his determination. The appellant argues  that
    this is a legal error in two ways. First because it  means  he  applies
    the wrong test: not giving sufficient weight to the issue of  elaborate
    links and the UNHCR guidelines; and secondly because  it  is  contended
    that Judge Rose is swayed by the fact that he believes that the  second
    appellant (NT) lost his appeal when in reality the facts of the  second
    appellant were such that the Court of Appeal  allowed  the  appeal  and
    asked the Upper Tribunal to reconsider it.

12. I do not find that MP (Sri  Lanka)  found  that  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    approach to the UNHCR guidelines was wrong. The Court of  Appeal  finds
    that the UNHCR guidelines are less demanding and more generous that the
    Upper Tribunals guidance (see paragraphs 16 and 17). It is  clear  that
    where the guidelines are met then it may be that the test at  paragraph
    356(7) of GJ (Sri Lanka) is more likely to be met but  that  this  will
    not be always the case. The Court of Appeal finds that it was "rational
    and permissible to narrow the risk  categories",  at  paragraph  19  of
    judgement. It therefore cannot be an error of law  for  Judge  Rose  to
    have failed to refer to MP (Sri Lanka), in  the  sense  of  failing  to
    apply the wrong test or give sufficient weight to the UNHCR guidelines.

13. Judge Rose does state that the second appellant's appeal was  dismissed
    in GJ (Sri Lanka) and does not refer to the  fact  that  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MP (Sri Lanka) allowed  his  appeal  to  the  extent  it  was
    remitted back to the Upper Tribunal for a new decision.  The  Court  of
    Appeal  was  concerned  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  not   properly
    considered his case because they found that undue to weight  have  been
    given to his not being placed in a rehabilitation programme  given  the
    Tribunal had found that he had been released  following  payment  of  a
    huge bribe only three months after he was detained.  This  had  wrongly
    led the Tribunal to discount evidence from the appellant's  mother  and
    give little weight to the fact his cousin was still in  detention  four
    years after the end of the civil war. (See paragraphs 42 and 43 of  the
    judgement in MP (Sri Lanka). It is not said  in  this  case  that  this
    appellant has had his case dismissed on the basis of weight being given
    to failure to put him into a rehabilitation  programme  or  because  no
    weight was  accorded  to  a  relative  still  in  detention.  In  these
    circumstances I do not find the failure to note  the  eventual  outcome
    for NT in MP (Sri Lanka) amounts to an error of law.

14.  Judge  Rose  assesses  the  appellant's  UK  political  activities  at
    paragraph 36, and provides an  accurate  summary  of  these.  This  was
    clearly a rational factor to consider, and in no way  does  Judge  Rose
    make UK political activities a prerequisite for the appellant being  at
    risk on his return to Sri Lanka or set this out as factor which reduced
    his risk. I find Judge Rose's approach in keeping with that in MP  (Sri
    Lanka) at paragraph 43 of the Court of Appeal judgement.  There  is  no
    error of law in this respect.

15. I find that the treatment of the photographs by  Judge  Rose  was  also
    lawful. He notes there existence at paragraph 32 of the  determination.
    He considers the contention by the appellant that the presence  of  the
    former head of the LTTE police at the appellant's wedding, and does not
    discount that this took place but does find that it would not  lead  to
    the conclusion that the appellant was a seen as a member  of  the  LTTE
    police. Given the total lack of other  evidence  regarding  this  issue
    this was clearly a conclusion Judge Rose  was  entitled  to  reach.  He
    finds the photographic evidence is unsupported by  any  other  type  of
    evidence showing the appellant had senior connections with the LTTE and
    so did not raise him from being a "low level member of the LTTE".  This
    was a conclusion he could also clearly rationally reach.

16. I am satisfied that Judge Rose did not err in law in his  consideration
    of the MP's letter. He has found it to be of little weight because  the
    appellant did not refer to searches at his birth place  or  threats  to
    family members, which this letter mentions, in his  own  evidence.  The
    appellant has not argued that this was inaccurate, and I find this is a
    rational approach to the letter.

17. It was open to Judge Rose to find that escape from  detention  in  2010
    would not necessary lead to interest in him given that many other  LTTE
    members who had been detained were released. It is certainly  the  case
    that many other LTTE members had been released.  All  that  Judge  Rose
    says at paragraph 43 of the determination is that  this  is  a  neutral
    factor: he does not say all those released or who escaped  were  of  no
    further interest but that the fact of the escape  did  not  mean  there
    would necessarily  be  further  risk.  This  was  a  finding  he  could
    reasonably make. Similarly consideration is given to the fact that  the
    appellant may be on a watch list on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  given  his
    history (what I understand Ms Seehra arguing  would  be  the  risk  the
    appellant might face as a result of the information he  would  probably
    give  in  his  re-documentation  process)  but  given  the  appellant's
    evidence, which is set out at paragraph 37 noting that he  still  fully
    supported the Tamil cause  but  that  he  had  not  said  he  would  be
    political active if he returned to Sri Lanka, and the  guidance  in  GJ
    (Sri Lanka) Judge Rose was entitled to conclude that monitoring in  his
    home area would not lead to action by the Sri Lankan authorities  which
    would in turn engage a need for international protection.

18. I find that Judge Rose has made a careful determination which carefully
    notes  and  believes  the  appellant's  history  in  all  key  respects
    including his detention and torture, and his current political beliefs.
    Judge Rose finds however that the guidance in GJ (Sri Lanka) leads  him
    to the  conclusion  that  this  appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  of
    persecution if returned to Sri Lanka. This  was  a  conclusion  he  was
    entitled to reach applying this guidance, which was upheld by the Court
    of Appeal in MP (Sri Lanka).

Decision

      1. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law.


      2.  The  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
         appellant's appeal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 19th January 2015

Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 19th January 2015

Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

