

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
AA/04548/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3rd  May 2016                          | On 16th May 2016                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                     R M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Chapman, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  who  appealed  against  the
    refusal of asylum by the respondent. His appeal was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Birk  ("the  FTTJ")  in  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 26 August 2015.


 2. Given my findings, the appellant is  entitled  to  anonymity  in  these
    proceedings  and  I  make  a  direction  accordingly.   To  ensure  the
    appellant's anonymity I have not named or identified any  prominent  or
    well-known individual with whom the appellant has been  in  contact  in
    this country, notwithstanding they were identified by the appellant  as
    part of his claim and in his appeal.

Background

 3. The appellant's asylum  claim  is  based  on  his  former  role  as  an
    informant for the LTTE, monitoring activities  at  government  military
    camps,  and  his  subsequent  arrest;  whilst  in  detention   he   was
    interrogated about the LTTE and tortured; he signed a confession he did
    not understand. He was released on payment of a bribe in February 2011.
    The appellant left Sri Lanka with the assistance of an agent soon after
    his escape.  He claims to be at risk on  return  as  a  result  of  the
    authorities' continuing adverse interest in him: the  authorities  have
    visited his home in Sri Lanka looking for him and his father  has  been
    arrested and detained on his account.


 4. On appeal, the FTTJ found the appellant's account of being tortured  by
    the authorities whilst in detention in 2011 to be credible  [28].   She
    found [31] the  appellant  had  "provided  a  consistent  and  detailed
    account of why he joined the LTTE, his training, his activities  as  an
    informer, his subsequent detention and torture in January 2011 and [she
    found] he has given a credible account of bribery being  used  for  his
    escape and exit from the country."  The FTTJ accepted  the  appellant's
    account "up until he left Sri Lanka" but did not find  "that  he  [had]
    given an accurate or credible account  that  he  has  been  of  adverse
    interest since he left and that  he  would  currently  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return" [32]. The appellant was  granted  permission  to
    appeal against the decision to refuse his asylum claim.

Error of Law Hearing

 5. A central plank of the appellant's appeal is his claim to  have  mental
    health issues. Whilst the existence  of  repercussions  from  the  ill-
    treatment in Sri Lanka was not  in  dispute  between  the  parties  (as
    conceded by the respondent at the error of law hearing),  I  found  the
    decision of the FTTJ contained an error of law because the FTTJ  failed
    to make an adequate assessment of the degree to which, if at all, those
    "repercussions" impacted on the appellant's ability  to  give  evidence
    throughout the asylum process, including the appeal.  The  FTTJ  simply
    relied on her finding at [33]  that  the  appellant  had  not  provided
    evidence to support his self-diagnosis of a serious mental condition to
    reject the appellant's explanations  on  other  matters,  such  as  the
    discrepancies in the dates he  has  provided  [35]  and  the  delay  in
    seeking asylum [39].  An assessment of  the  impact,  if  any,  of  the
    mistreatment in detention should have been  an  integral  part  of  the
    assessment of this  appellant's  credibility  and,  in  turn,  risk  on
    return.  There was  some  evidence  available  to  the  FTTJ  for  that
    purpose, including the appellant's own evidence in interview, his  GP's
    letter and diagnosis and the (albeit limited) evidence in the  scarring
    report provided by Dr Martin.

 6. As regards  the  appellant's  activities  in  the  diaspora,  the  FTTJ
    erroneously stated that "there is no evidence  of  his  attendance"  at
    celebrations and rallies. This is not correct:  the  appellant  himself
    gave evidence to that effect. The FTTJ has made no assessment  of  that
    evidence  although,  by  inference,  she  rejects  it:  she  notes  the
    appellant has produced no photographs of himself at  these  events  and
    that he accepted he did not know if there were  any  such  photographs.
    She notes the "only  photograph  of  relevance"  is  of  the  appellant
    handing over a petition on 14 March 2014; she accepts this is likely to
    be on the internet.  The FTTJ simply relies on her earlier finding that
    the authorities had not made any visits  to  the  appellant's  father's
    home to find that his father was not, as claimed, shown this photograph
    by the authorities.  Thus there is little analysis of  the  appellant's
    evidence of his activities within the diaspora; instead the FTTJ relies
    on her earlier credibility finding, which is tainted by error  of  law,
    to find there has been no adverse interest in the appellant  since  his
    departure.

 7. I therefore found that  the  FTTJ  had  failed  to  give  adequate  and
    sufficient reasons for making an adverse credibility finding, given her
    failure to scrutinise the evidence, albeit limited, of the  appellant's
    mental health  issues.  This  evidence  includes  references  to  "post
    traumatic  stress",    "flashbacks",   "insomnia",   "medication"   and
    "psychological problems". To have  failed  to  consider  it  in  detail
    before rejecting the appellant's case that  his  mental  health  has  a
    bearing on his appeal is an error of law. It is  material  because  the
    outcome of the assessment of credibility might have been different  had
    a better examination of that evidence and its impact  been  undertaken.
    The medical evidence, such as it is, had a potential bearing on several
    matters,  including  the  appellant's  ability  to  recall  detail   in
    interview and later; his recollection of information he  was  given  by
    his father with regard to the claimed visits to the  family  home;  the
    delay in claiming asylum and the  appellant's  engagement  in  diaspora
    activities.

 8. The error of law impacted not only on the assessment of credibility but
    also on the findings on risk on return.  I set aside the FTTJ's  asylum
    and humanitarian protection decisions but  preserved  her  findings  at
    paragraphs 25-31 (which relate to the appellant's arrest, detention and
    other events prior to his departure from Sri Lanka).   It  was  in  the
    interests of justice for medical evidence to be obtained and  this  was
    being arranged expeditiously. I therefore adjourned the hearing  for  a
    resumed hearing in this Tribunal.  I did not set aside the decision  of
    the FTTJ with regard to Article 8, there  being  no  challenge  to  her
    findings on this issue.

Resumed hearing

 9. I agreed with both representatives that the issues to be decided  could
    be summarised as follows: the appellant's mental health, post-departure
    findings and risk on return (including Article 3 on health grounds,  if
    required).


10. Given the opinion of Dr Dhumad, consultant psychiatrist, I managed  the
    hearing in accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of
    2010: Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance


11. The appellant produced further evidence for the hearing before  me,  as
    follows:

        a. The appellant's further witness statement
        b. Report of Dr Dhumad, following an examination of  the  appellant
           on 26 April 2016, dated 28 April 2016.
        c. Discharge Notification issued by  The  Royal  Wolverhampton  NHS
           Trust dated 21 April 2016.
        d.  Letter  from  the  International  Centre  for  Prevention   and
           Prosecution of Genocide (ICPPG) dated 19 April 2016.
        e. Bundle entitled "Objective Evidence post GJ 2014-2016".
        f. Appellant's skeleton argument.


12. I heard the oral  evidence  of  the  appellant  who  spoke  through  an
    interpreter in  Tamil.  I  was  satisfied  from  the  outset  that  the
    appellant and the interpreter understood each other.  They  assured  me
    that was  the  case.   The  appellant  adopted  the  witness  statement
    produced in the hearing before the  FTTJ  and  his  additional  witness
    statement produced for these proceedings.  He was cross-examined by the
    respondent's  representative  and  I  asked  him  some  questions   for
    clarification of his evidence.


13. I heard the oral submissions of the parties and these are noted in  the
    record of proceedings.


14. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision and this  I  now  give
    having taken into account the parties' documentation and my  record  of
    proceedings.



The Appellant's claim

15. The appellant's claim is set out in his interview record,  his  various
    witness statements and his oral evidence. As regards events post-dating
    his departure from Sri Lanka, it can be summarised as follows.


16. The appellant was involved in diaspora activities in the UK  until  his
    father told him, in  August  2014,  that  he  had  been  arrested.  The
    appellant then stopped those activities, believing that he was  putting
    his father at risk.  The appellant has been a volunteer  at  the  ICPPG
    since February this year. He has been given training but has not so far
    started work for that organisation.  His  activities  there  have  been
    undertaken in private, not in public.


17. The appellant has attempted  suicide  twice  recently.  On  the  latest
    occasion, he was admitted to Wolverhampton hospital,  as  evidenced  by
    the discharge notice issued by that Trust.   He had  taken  paracetamol
    and sleeping tablets. The discharge notice refers to  his  having  PTSD
    and depression with suicidal thoughts although it also records that  he
    regretted his impulsive decision to attempt suicide.   It  is  recorded
    that, after assessment, he agreed to attend counselling sessions to  be
    organised by his GP.

18. The Sri Lankan authorities are in contact with his father on account of
    the  appellant's  activities  in  the  UK  within  the  diaspora.   The
    appellant's father has been told to  surrender  the  appellant  to  the
    authorities.  The appellant's father told the appellant that  they  had
    contacted him because the appellant had acted "in favour  of  the  LTTE
    and  against  them  [the  authorities]".  The  appellant's  father  was
    continuing to report to an army camp (identified by  the  appellant  by
    name) on the first of every  month.   The  authorities  had  shown  the
    appellant's father a photograph and article about the  appellant  which
    had been published on the internet. It was this which  had  caused  the
    appellant's father to be arrested.  The  appellant  believes  that  the
    authorities consider him to be a threat to the country.  He fears  that
    if he is returned to Sri  Lanka  he  will  be  arrested,  detained  and
    tortured again, as he was before.

Submissions

19. Mr Whitwell, for the respondent, relied on  the  reasons  for  refusal,
    taking  into  account  the  preserved  findings  with  regard  to   the
    appellant's experiences in Sri Lanka before  his  departure  from  that
    country. He submitted that little weight should be given to  the  ICPPG
    document which was self-serving; the appellant had not joined  a  Tamil
    organisation  in  the  UK  at  the  time  of  interview.   There   were
    inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  evidence  with  regard  to   the
    authorities' contact with his father in Sri Lanka but he accepted those
    discrepancies had not been put to the appellant before me.


20. Mr Whitwell submitted that it was relevant that, as  at  October  2012,
    the appellant had only attended  one  remembrance  event  (his  witness
    statement, paragraph 42).  This was the only possible source of concern
    for the authorities at that time.  There was a gap of one  and  a  half
    years after the appellant came to the UK before the first  instance  of
    adverse interest by the authorities in Sri Lanka. The appellant had not
    adequately explained the  spike  in  interest  in  October  2012  which
    brought him "back to the fore".  At best, the appellant was a low level
    member of the  LTTE.  According  to  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) this was not sufficient
    to put him at risk.  The other matters were not such as  to  categorise
    him as a person who was perceived as a threat  to  the  unitary  state.
    The appellant does not state there is an arrest warrant or that  he  is
    on a stop list. His only profile is in the UK.

21. The copy article provided by the appellant  had  not  been  translated.
    Whilst the person in public office, with  whom  the  appellant  was  in
    contact, may take an interest in human rights issues in Sri Lanka, this
    connection stood in isolation.  If the appellant's sur place activities
    were "not sufficient", the appeal should be dismissed.

22. As regards the risk of suicide, Mr Whitwell submitted that there was  a
    credibility issue as to what he told Wolverhampton hospital. Dr  Dhumad
    referred to  a  moderate  risk  of  suicide  (paragraph  16.1)  and  an
    increased risk (16.3) but this was not sufficient to engage Article 3.


23. In her submissions and skeleton argument for the appellant, Ms  Chapman
    submitted that the appellant's account of being of adverse interest  to
    the authorities since his departure was credible. Any discrepancies  in
    his evidence were explained by his mental health issues, as  identified
    by Dr Dhumad. The appellant was  at  risk  on  return  because  he  was
    perceived to be a threat to the integrity of the Sri Lankan  state  and
    to have a significant role in Tamil activities in the diaspora  in  the
    UK. This was as a result of his published activities in  the  UK.   The
    appellant's  involvement  with  the  ICPPG  was  consistent  with   his
    commitment to the Tamil cause.  Any inconsistencies or discrepancies in
    the appellant's evidence were explained by his mental health condition,
    as evidenced by Dr Dhumad's psychiatric report.  No  weight  should  be
    attached to the discrepancies in his account; its core was clear.

24. With regard to the respondent's concern about the lapse of time between
    the appellant's arrival and his engagement with Tamil activities in the
    UK, he first attended those in May 2012  (as  stated  in  his  original
    appeal statement); he did not immediately start  activities  after  his
    arrival. There is thus a link between the appellant' activities in  the
    UK and the events in Sri Lanka.

25. Ms Chapman submitted that the background evidence supports the claim of
    continuing atrocities in Sri Lanka against Tamils. The adverse interest
    of the authorities arises not only  as  a  result  of  the  appellant's
    activities with the LTTE, for  which  he  was  arrested,  detained  and
    tortured (preserved findings) but also the authorities'  perception  of
    his activities here.   It  is  relevant  that  the  appellant  was  not
    questioned and released in Sri Lanka: he escaped. If he was of  adverse
    interest at that  time,  he  remains  so  now.   Whilst  there  was  no
    translation  of  the  internet  article,  it  had  been   produced   to
    demonstrate its existence and to corroborate the  appellant's  evidence
    that the internet article been shown to the appellant's father when  he
    was arrested. Also of relevance is the  appellant's  contact,  in  this
    country, with a person in public office  with  a  special  interest  in
    human rights.

26. With regard to Article 3, it was submitted by Ms Chapman that this  was
    based principally on the psychiatric evidence. Whilst it was not clear-
    cut about the level  of  risk  of  suicide,  that  risk  was  moderate,
    increasing to high or severe (paragraph 16.3).  Even  if  the  risk  of
    suicide were to  be  managed,  the  appellant  would  not  be  able  to
    withstand questioning; he would be subjected to inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment. It was accepted that the primary case was risk on return  as
    a result of the appellant's perceived political opinion. It was not the
    appellant's case that he was on a stop list.

Burden and Standard of Proof

27. The burden is on the appellant to show as at the date of hearing  there
    are substantial grounds for believing  that  the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of the Qualification Regulations and that returning him to
    Sri Lanka will cause the United Kingdom to be in breach thereof and/or,
    insofar as applicable, the decision appealed against is a breach of his
    protected human rights under the 1950 Convention. The standard of proof
    is lower than the balance of probabilities.

My findings and conclusions

28. I have been referred by both parties to the  guidance  in  GJ.  I  have
    taken this into account.


29. I have also borne in mind the provisions of Section 8 of the Asylum and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 (the 2004  Act)  in
    making my assessment of the appellant's credibility.

30. I take into account the evidence  of  Dr  Dhumad  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's mental health.  He examined the appellant on 26 April  2016
    and prepared his report two days later. It is contemporaneous.  I  have
    preserved the findings that the appellant was  arrested,  detained  and
    tortured whilst in detention.  There is no doubt  the  appellant  would
    have suffered some negative impact on his health as  a  result  of  his
    treatment in detention. Indeed in his asylum interview he  referred  to
    insomnia and having taken medication; the appellant had been advised to
    undergo counselling by his GP  and  the  GP  refers  to  the  appellant
    suffering from flashbacks to  torture,  nightmares  and  insomnia.   Dr
    Dhumad's findings are consistent with  this  background.   He  makes  a
    diagnosis of moderate depressive episode  with  somatic  symptoms;  low
    mood, lethargy, suicidal thoughts, hopelessness and inability to  sleep
    with  poor  appetite  and  concentration.   Dr  Dhumad  concludes   the
    appellant suffers from PTSD with symptoms such as avoidance, flashbacks
    and  nightmares.   He  notes  the  appellant  is   on   anti-depressant
    medication which is not suitable for him; he is awaiting  psychological
    therapy.  Dr Dhumad concludes that, whilst  the  appellant  is  fit  to
    attend court and to give oral evidence, his concentration is "poor  and
    is likely to be worse, if he were to be cross-examined...".  Dr  Dhumad
    specifically discounts the possibility  that  the  appellant  might  be
    feigning or  exaggerating  his  mental  illness.   There  has  been  no
    challenge by the respondent to the opinion of Dr Dhumad and I therefore
    adopt his opinion as findings of fact.

31. Whilst the respondent has identified a  number  of  discrepancies  with
    regard to the dates provided by the appellant, I am satisfied that such
    discrepancies are explained reasonably by the  evidence  of  Dr  Dhumad
    that the appellant suffers from  poor  concentration.  Given  that  his
    current mental health issues arise from his experiences, prior  to  his
    entry to the UK, as a victim of torture in Sri  Lanka,  he  would  have
    been afflicted by poor concentration throughout the asylum  and  appeal
    process. I accordingly give little weight  to  the  existence  of  such
    discrepancies in his evidence. In other respects his account is largely
    consistent and plausible.  It is also  relevant  that  his  account  of
    events in Sri Lanka involving his  father  is  not  first-hand:  he  is
    reporting what he has been told by his father.


32. Whilst the appellant has not produced a  translation  of  the  internet
    article, it is not in dispute between the parties that the appellant is
    depicted in the photograph on the website together  with  a  person  in
    public office in this country who is known to take an interest in human
    rights issues in Sri Lanka.  It is plausible that the  appellant  would
    have come to the attention of the authorities in Sri Lanka as a  result
    of such publication and that he would be identified by the  authorities
    as a person of adverse interest, given their knowledge of his  previous
    LTTE activities, his arrest, detention, torture and unofficial  release
    from detention. It is wholly plausible  that  the  appellant  would  be
    perceived in such circumstances to be a person who  has  continued  his
    political activities against the Sri Lankan state whilst in the UK  and
    that this would trigger a visit to his family home by the authorities.

33. I find wholly consistent and credible the appellant's account that  his
    father has been the subject of continuing adverse interest as a  result
    of his son's activities.  This is not discordant with  the  appellant's
    own mistreatment in Sri  Lanka,  his  escape  from  detention  and  his
    various published activities in the UK prior to August  2014  (when  he
    became aware  of  his  father's  arrest).   The  appellant's  published
    involvement in Tamil activities in the UK in March 2014 is a particular
    trigger for adverse interest,  in  combination  with  his  former  LTTE
    activities.  I accept the appellant's father is reporting monthly to an
    army camp: the appellant's oral  evidence  on  this  was  detailed  and
    clear.

34. Taking the evidence in the round, I am satisfied that  the  appellant's
    evidence as regards his activities since his departure from the  UK  is
    wholly credible and reliable.  I find that he has  been  identified  by
    the Sri Lankan government as a person who is perceived to be  a  threat
    to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state; he is perceived, as  a
    result of his published activities in the UK,  to  have  a  significant
    role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora
    here.  I rely on the guidance in GJ and find that the appellant  is  at
    risk  of  further  mistreatment  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   Internal
    relocation is not an option. He is entitled to the grant of asylum.   I
    also find, for similar reasons, that the decision engages Article 3.

35. Given my findings above, I have not made findings with  regard  to  the
    potential breach of Article 3 insofar as the claimed risk of suicide is
    concerned.

Decision

36. This appeal is allowed on asylum and human rights grounds.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
           Date:  10 May 2016



Direction regarding anonymity - rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005
The appellant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings, unless  and
until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No report of these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.

Fee Award
No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
           Date:  10 May 2016


