
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04480/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 5 February 2015                            |On 9 February 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE PATTERSON DBE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                                     A Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Talacchi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
      ("DRC"). She has  appealed  with  the  permission  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal against a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Onoufriou, promulgated on 26  November  2014,  dismissing  her  appeal
      against a decision of the respondent, made on 18 June 2014, to  remove
      her to DRC, having refused her asylum application.


   2. The core of the appellant's asylum claim is that she had been a member
      of a women's group known as "Les Abeilles" in DRC as a result of which
      she was arrested and detained in March 2004 and accused of being anti-
      government.  During  her  two-week  detention  she  was  interrogated,
      tortured and raped. She escaped and made her  way  to  the  UK.  Since
      arriving in the UK she has been politically  active  as  a  member  of
      APARECO and also the Congo Support Group  ("CSG").  She  believes  her
      frequent attendance at meetings and demonstrations would be  known  to
      the authorities in DRC.


   3. Judge Onoufriou rejected many parts  of  the  appellant's  account  as
      lacking credibility. He did not believe her account of  detention  and
      ill-treatment in DRC. He also found her claimed membership of  APARECO
      was not genuine. However, he found she had been a low-level member  of
      CSG in the UK. He accepted that, were the appellant to be perceived as
      an active opponent of the government, she would be at risk on  return.
      However, he reasoned that a low-level member  of  the  CSG  would  not
      necessarily come to the attention of the  authorities.  He  considered
      the background evidence and case law shown to him and then  stated  as
      follows (paragraph 38):

         "I  have  not  been  provided  with  any  evidence  that  the   DRC
         authorities have checked any particular websites and in  particular
         that the appellant is shown on those websites as  being  an  active
         political opponent to the  DRC  authorities.  The  photographs  she
         provided appear to relate to two demonstrations at most and both of
         them in the last few months prior to this appeal and yet she claims
         to have attended numerous demonstrations over the years  but  there
         are no photographs from previous years. I am of the view  that  due
         to the recent date of the photographs they may have been  contrived
         for the purpose of this appeal. I am, therefore, not satisfied that
         the appellant is at risk of  persecution,  either  because  of  any
         political activities in the DRC or  any  future  political  opinion
         because of her sur place activities in the United Kingdom."

   4. The Judge also dismissed  the  appeal  on  article  3  and  article  8
      grounds.


   5. Counsel who prepared the grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal,  Mr
      Talacchi, made four points: (1) the  Judge's  reliance  in  making  an
      adverse  credibility  finding  against  the  appellant  on  the   non-
      attendance at the hearing of the appellant's brother was perverse; (2)
      the Judge had made no finding regarding the background  evidence  that
      failed asylum seekers are identified and taken  for  interrogation  on
      return to DRC, which detention may last up to one month; (3) the Judge
      failed to make any finding on the risk of gender-related violence; and
      (4) the use of the words "not necessarily"  in  paragraph  38  of  the
      decision showed the Judge had applied too high a standard of proof.


   6. The appellant was granted permission to appeal by Judge of the  First-
      tier Tribunal Robertson. Although  she  thought  the  first  and  last
      grounds were not made out, she granted permission  to  appeal  on  all
      grounds.

   7. The respondent has filed a response opposing the appeal.  This  argues
      the Judge  had  been  entitled  to  find  the  non-attendance  of  the
      appellant's brother was  in  indicator  that  the  appellant  was  not
      credible. The Judge had taken into account the background evidence  in
      reaching his conclusion on risk on return.


   8. We heard submissions  on  whether  the  Judge's  decision  contains  a
      material error of law such that it should be set-aside and re-made.


   9. Mr Talacchi did not challenge the Judge's adverse  findings  but  said
      his starting-point was the positive finding  that  the  appellant  had
      participated in CSG activities in the  UK  since  2011.  He  said  the
      important point was how the appellant would be perceived on return. In
      the country guidance decision of BK (Failed  asylum  seekers)  DRC  CG
      [2007] UKAIT 00098 it was held that returnees who were  failed  asylum
      seekers would be questioned[1]. He said there was a  "lacuna"  in  the
      Judge's findings about this. The appellant would be  questioned  about
      her status and she could not reasonably be expected to lie  about  her
      political  beliefs[2].  Mr  Talacchi  then  referred  to  the  Judge's
      assessment of the background evidence, particularly  the  Fact-Finding
      Mission to Kinshasa report of November 2012 ("FFM") and the assessment
      of that evidence found in the judgment of Philips J in P (DRC), R  (on
      the application of) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 3879 (Admin) at  paragraphs  47
      to 49. He argued that the appellant could  be  distinguished  from  an
      ordinary failed asylum seeker because of her political activities,  as
      found by the Judge. The Judge had not made  findings  about  what  the
      appellant would say if she was questioned on arrival in DRC.


  10. Mr  Talacchi  argued  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
      additional risk to this appellant in the situation that  she  will  be
      questioned on return arising from the fact she is a  woman.   He  also
      argued the Judge had given weight to an irrelevant matter, namely, the
      non-attendance of the appellant's brother at the hearing.   There  was
      no basis for finding this undermined the appellant's claim.


  11. Mr Avery said the Judge was clearly aware that, if the appellant  were
      perceived to be an opponent of the regime, she would  be  at  risk  on
      arrival. In that context, having considered  the  background  evidence
      about what happens on return, the Judge concluded he was not satisfied
      the appellant's case was made out. Being a low-profile member  of  the
      CSG was  not  enough.  His  decision  was  perfectly  sound  and  well
      reasoned. There was insufficient evidence to show that the appellant's
      gender would have made a difference so the Judge's failure to  address
      it was not material to the outcome. The point  about  the  appellant's
      brother's non-attendance went to the  issue  of  contact  with  family
      members in DRC and the Judge was entitled to take it into account.


  12. We reserved our decision.


  13. We have concluded the Judge did not make a material error of law  such
      that his decision dismissing the appellant's appeal must be set aside.
      Our reasons are as follows.


  14.  As  noted,  Mr  Talacchi  did  not  challenge  the  Judge's   adverse
      credibility findings. The only parts of the appellant's claim accepted
      by the Judge were that she had been a low-profile member  of  the  CSG
      since 2011 and she may have attended some recent  demonstrations.  The
      Judge directed himself correctly in law as to the burden and  standard
      of proof in paragraph 27. He made his findings in the context  of  the
      background evidence, some of which he set out in paragraphs 29 to  33.
      On the basis of his findings of fact,  we  find  the  Judge's  overall
      conclusion on risk on return was one he  was  entitled  to  reach.  We
      shall deal with the grounds of appeal in the order in which  they  are
      set out in the application for permission to appeal.


   Ground 1
  15. We find the Judge was entitled to draw an adverse inference  from  the
      non-attendance of the appellant's brother at the hearing.  By  way  of
      background,  we  noted  that  the  appellant  stated  in  her  witness
      statement dated 15 June 2010 that mere association  with  her  brother
      would place her at  risk  on  return.  At  the  hearing  before  Judge
      Onoufriou the issue gained additional importance because the appellant
      said she had no contact with her family in DRC. The  Judge  asked  the
      appellant about this because he found it "very strange" that she would
      not have remained in contact with them. The appellant had said she had
      not asked her brother whether he had had any contact with them  either
      (see paragraph 16). It was appropriate for the Judge to try to clarify
      why there was no contact with the family given they would  be  a  good
      source of information as to the current situation in DRC in  terms  of
      the authorities'  interest  in  the  family.  On  the  basis  of  this
      evidence, the Judge was entitled to find the appellant had been trying
      to enhance her appeal (paragraph 34.3). In any event, this  issue  was
      one of a number  of  reasons  given  by  the  Judge  for  his  overall
      assessment and it cannot be said that this matter carried undue weight
      in his deliberations.


   Ground 2
  16. On the face of paragraph 38, there is no assessment  of  the  residual
      risk to the appellant as a failed asylum seeker returning from the UK.
      Mr Talacchi characterised this as a "lacuna" in the Judge's  findings.
      However, we find no error of law in the Judge's approach.


  17. As Mr Talacchi acknowledged, the starting-point for the Judge was  the
      most recent country guidance of BK. The head note of that case  states
      that failed asylum  seekers  do  not  per  se  face  a  real  risk  of
      persecution or serious harm or treatment contrary  to  article  3.  It
      would have been an error of law for the  Judge  to  depart  from  that
      finding unless there were sufficiently strong background  evidence  to
      justify such a course. The  Judge  set  out  much  of  the  background
      evidence and expressly referred to the FFM report on which Mr Talacchi
      placed particular emphasis. However, we do not accept  that  this  was
      evidence requiring a  departure  to  be  made  from  existing  country
      guidance.


  18. It is unhelpful to pick out one paragraph from the FFM report, such as
      the first subparagraph  of  paragraph  4.1,  which  seems  to  be  the
      reference relied on in paragraph 9 of Mr Talacchi's  written  grounds.
      The report must be read as a whole and chapter 4 contains a wide range
      of opinions from interested parties about the treatment of  returnees.
      In its Country Policy Bulletin of November 2012 the respondent  stated
      that the 'consensus' within the FFM report was that there was no  risk
      to failed asylum seekers per se. This assessment was challenged  in  P
      (DRC) and rejected by Philips J, who found the  respondent's  reliance
      on the Bulletin and on BK as justified and rational (see paragraphs 40-
      42 of his judgment). We respectfully adopt his analysis and find  that
      there is no change to the risk facing failed asylum seekers.


  19. We note that Mr Talacchi relied on  later  paragraphs  from  the  same
      judgment but they form part of the Judge's assessment of the  risk  to
      criminal deportees, not failed asylum seekers[3]. These paragraphs did
      not therefore assist us.


  20. We conclude the position  in  terms  of  procedures  for  interviewing
      returnees has not changed materially since BK. It  follows  the  Judge
      did not err by relying on the main holding from that  case.  A  failed
      asylum seeker is not at risk on return by reason  of  being  a  failed
      asylum seeker from the UK. She will be interviewed  to  establish  who
      she is ('proces verbale') but that does not mean she faces a real risk
      of ill-treatment. The point about not being forced  to  lie  does  not
      arise.


  21. If we understood him, Mr Talacchi also broadened the point in his oral
      submissions and argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not
      considered the risk on return as a failed asylum seeker who  had  been
      active in the CSG. However, that is unarguable  in  our  view.  It  is
      entirely clear that the Judge  had  this  additional  feature  of  the
      appellant's case firmly in  mind  when  he  arrived  at  his  ultimate
      conclusion on risk. As said, we find this was a  conclusion  which  it
      was open to the Judge to arrive at on the basis of  the  evidence  and
      country guidance available to him.


   Ground 3
  22. We accept there is nothing in the decision to indicate the Judge  gave
      separate consideration to the possibility that the appellant faced  an
      enhanced risk on return as a  woman  and  that  there  was  background
      evidence of gender-based violence in DRC before the Judge. Although he
      has not recorded her submissions, counsel for the appellant relied  on
      a skeleton  argument  which  set  out  extracts  from  the  background
      evidence on this point (see paragraphs 13 and 45 to 52).


  23. However, if this amounted to an error on the part  of  the  Judge,  we
      would not find it material to the outcome of the appeal. We agree with
      Mr Avery that, properly understood, the evidence does  not  provide  a
      sufficient  evidential  basis  for  finding  an  enhanced  risk.   The
      appellant in BK was female. The 'consensus' from the FFM report is not
      gender-specific. On our reading of the FFM report there is not a clear
      weight of evidence suggesting female gender  adds  materially  to  the
      risk to failed asylum seekers on return to DRC. The  paragraphs  cited
      in the skeleton argument we have referred to are not representative of
      the whole of the report or background evidence. We do not  find  that,
      had the Judge given this argument consideration, it would have led him
      to reach a different conclusion.


   Ground 4
  24. Finally, we can deal shortly with Mr Talacchi's last ground about  the
      Judge's self-direction.  The  use  of  the  sentence  "she  would  not
      necessarily come to the attention of the DRC authorities" in paragraph
      38 of his decision is unfortunate but we regard  it  as  nothing  more
      than loose wording. It is important to read it in context.  The  Judge
      directed himself clearly in paragraph 27 and the decision  read  as  a
      whole satisfies us that he applied the  low  standard  of  proof  when
      making his findings.

NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of
    law and his decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.



                               Signed                 Date 6 February 2015




                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
-----------------------
[1] Although not provided by Mr Talacchi, we find reference to this point
in paragraphs 188-189 of BK. The fact a failed asylum seeker has a laissez
passer will arouse interest.
[2] Again we were not assisted by the citation of any authority on this
point but we assume Mr Talacchi had in mind RT (Zimbabwe) & Anr v SSHD
[2012] UKSC 38 in which the Supreme Court held that to expect an individual
to profess political beliefs he did not hold in order to avoid persecution
was just as much a breach of his Refugee Convention rights as to expect him
to conceal his true beliefs.
[3] The position for deportees, not covered in BK, was significantly
different: they would be held in custody in circumstances which could
breach article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

