
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04622/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice Belfast      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2018                           |On 10 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                                     SB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Smith, instructed by R P Crawford & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  4  April  2018  allowing  SB's
    appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  made  on  27
    February 2015 to refuse her asylum claim and refuse  her  human  rights
    claim.  There is a long history to this case which must be set  out  in
    some detail.

 2. The appellant's case as put to the Secretary of State and to the First-
    tier Tribunal is that, having overstayed in the United Kingdom after  a
    family visit which began on 12 July 2011 that she became  pregnant  and
    had a child born on 9 October 2014.  Her case was that she feared being
    killed by her parents having giving birth to a  perceived  illegitimate
    child outside of marriage.

 3. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter of  27  February
    2015.  In summary, the respondent did not  find  the  appellant  to  be
    credible concluding that there was in place in Morocco a sufficiency of
    protection for her.  She therefore refused the application pursuant  to
    the Refugee Convention.

 4. The respondent also concluded that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and refused her claim on that basis.

 5. At her appeal on 5 July 2016 the appellant gave evidence as did KI, the
    father of her child and of her second child born on 15  December  2015.
    KI has leave to remain in the United Kingdom and has another child  who
    is a British citizen in respect of whom there is a residence  order  in
    his favour; the mother (not the appellant) has a contact order.

 6. The judge who heard the appeal found neither the appellant nor KI to be
    credible and specifically rejected the appellant's case  that  she  had
    been threatened by her parents and did not accept the explanation given
    for the delay in claiming asylum.

 7. The judge found that KI had lied to the Registrar of Births and  Deaths
    about the birth of his daughter Y, maintaining that he  had  only  done
    the appellant a favour by allowing his name to be added  to  the  birth
    certificate to avoid any stigma that might be perceived to an unmarried
    mother yet the DNA report confirms that he is the  father.   The  judge
    concluded that both the appellant and KI  had  known  that  he  is  the
    father of her child [27].

 8. The appellant was given permission to appeal against that decision, and
    it then came before me on 26 July 2017. I set aside  the  decision  but
    preserved some of the  findings  of  fact.  The  appeal  was,  however,
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. In its decision, the Tribunal noted [58] the findings  that  Judge  Fox
    had made (and which were preserved) but observing that this appeal  was
    constrained to the consideration of Article 8 issues and that  in  that
    regard the credibility of the appellant and  her  partner  as  to  past
    known facts and her personal history it  is  of  less  relevance.   The
    panel noted also that it was not in doubt that KI  was  the  father  of
    three children and it was clear from the  evidence  that  he  conducted
    himself, with respect to all three children, as a father would and that
    it was the housing circumstances of the appellant and her partner which
    would appear to prevent them living in the same premises.   They  found
    this did not in  any  way  detract  from  the  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship which we they found the appellant enjoys with her partner.



10. The Tribunal noted also at [60] that there was  daily  contact  between
    the five members of the family unit and that the previous  findings  of
    lack of credibility should not be applied to the evidence they heard in
    relation to the current  family  unit  circumstances,  there  being  no
    reason to doubt the accuracy of what they were told,  cross-examination
    not causing doubt of the stated family arrangements.   They  also  took
    into account the documents, including school correspondence  confirming
    the view with respect to the family  unit  and  the  closeness  of  the
    relationships between each family member of  the  unit.   It  was  also
    noted that a very small amount of time was spent by the  younger  child
    with his birth mother.

11. The panel then directed themselves that they needed to  consider  first
    the best interests of the children, addressing  that  of  A  who  is  a
    British citizen, the panel held this:-

         "62.     Concerns particularly relate to A who is a British citizen
             and whose mother  has  British  nationality.   A's  mother  is
             entitled to have contact with him and that fact must be  found
             to be a matter which is in the best interests of  A.   If  the
             appellant's partner were to relocate to his home country  with
             the appellant and her two Moroccan children, he would have  to
             take A with him (assuming  that  consent  were  given  by  the
             appropriate  Family  Court).   They  agreed  with   the   view
             expressed by Mr McTaggart that this simply is not a course  of
             action which could reflect reality.

         63.  Therefore we find that a requirement that the appellant should
             be  removed  to  Morocco  would  undoubtedly  interfere   very
             significantly with the current family life enjoyed between the
             five  members  of  the  family  unit.   Whether  it  might  be
             reasonable, in  isolation,  for  the  appellant  and  her  two
             Moroccan children themselves to return to Morocco  might  well
             be a different matter.  However we must consider  the  reality
             of the current family circumstances as we have  clearly  found
             them to be."

12. On that basis they found that any interference caused by  removing  the
    appellant would be a breach of Article 8.

13. The Secretary of State then sought  permission  to  appeal  in  grounds
    which are, as  Mr  Duffy  accepted,  somewhat  prolix.   In  short,  as
    summarised by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin when granting  permission  on
    30 May 2018, they argue that:-

      i) the Tribunal erred in failing to give adequate consideration to the
         damning adverse credibility findings of an earlier judge; and

     ii) failed to adequately conduct a proportionality exercise taking into
         account the public interest.

14. Judge Martin also said this:-

         "It is arguable also that  the  Tribunal  has  not  given  adequate
         consideration to the fact that four of the five family members  are
         Moroccan and that the British child is not a trump card.  There  is
         no consideration of the possibility of the appellant  and  her  two
         Moroccan children returning to Morocco.  She is not the  mother  of
         the other child and her partner has a choice as to whether he  goes
         to Morocco or remains in the UK  with  his  child.   There  was  no
         examination of whether  the  British  child  could  live  with  his
         mother."

15. It should be borne in mind that even if an appellant  is  found  to  be
    generally incredible, it does not necessarily  mean  that  his  or  her
    claim must fail; at best it is only his or her  evidence  and  evidence
    derived from what he or she has said  and  done  which  is  potentially
    undermined.  Other evidence may  put  the  appellant's  evidence  in  a
    better light and may enable his claim to succeed.   Simply  because  an
    appellant is disbelieved even on very large parts  of  her  story  that
    does not mean that other evidence in support of a case  can  be  relied
    upon depending upon what that is.   If,  for  example,  it  comes  from
    wholly independent sources on the face of its impartial  objective,  it
    is difficult to see  how  a  finding  that  the  appellant  herself  is
    dishonest can materially affect the weight to be attached to it.

16. Bearing that in mind and bearing in  mind  that  the  Tribunal  clearly
    directed themselves to the adverse findings of fact  reached  by  Judge
    Fox and clearly took them into account, I  do  not  accept  that  their
    approach to the evidence was flawed albeit that it may well  have  been
    generous.  It was open to them to note what matters were put in  cross-
    examination and also to note as they did that  the  evidence  that  the
    family was a unit were supported by external evidence.

17. The external evidence, particularly that  in  relation  to  the  oldest
    child, A, which, with the benefit of hindsight, could  have  been  more
    fully set out in the decision.  That does  not,  however,  absolve  the
    Secretary of State from drafting grounds apparently in ignorance of the
    exact situation.

18. Turning to the oldest child, there is an unusual factor  in  the  order
    made by the Family Court.  The order is that  the  child,  then  barely
    over a year old, is to live with his father and that the mother  is  to
    have only limited contact every second Saturday at a contact centre for
    one and a half hours at a time.  The order also provides  for  this  to
    drop down to once a  month  if  the  mother  fails  to  attend  without
    providing a good excuse.  It appears from the evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal that this  is  what  has  now  happened.   It  is  in  my
    experience very rare for a court to make an order limiting the mother's
    access to such an extent with a child who was at the time of the  order
    barely over a year old.

19. Equally of note is  the  statement  of  special  educational  needs  in
    respect of the child A.  It is noted here the child has

         "Effectively no functional verbal communication  skills  expressing
         his needs through whole body language, facial expressions and  hand
         gestures.   The  conclusion  is  that  he  has   severely   delayed
         expressive language skills coupled with significant difficulties in
         respect to auditory comprehension; the cognitive  assessment  would
         suggest that A has moderate learning difficulties, is  hyperactive,
         impulsive and has very limited concentration and attention".

20. It is also of note that he is affectionate to his father  and  familiar
    adults

21. Subsequent to this, his needs were assessed as sufficiently acute  such
    that as at 2018 it was decided that he  required  to  be  placed  in  a
    special educational needs school.

22. I note in passing from the  medical  report  appended  to  the  special
    educational needs assessment that Social Services became involved  with
    the  child's  father  during  his  mother's  pregnancy.   There  is  no
    indication that the biological mother has at any  state  been  involved
    with the educational and psychological or with the  school  other  than
    the observation that the child and she have regular visits as  provided
    for in the court order.

23. In the light of this information there is in reality no  real  prospect
    of A living with his biological mother.  It  is  also  clear  that  his
    father is his sole carer and that realistically were he not  here,  the
    child would most probably have to go into  care  given  the  assessment
    that his best interests are such that his mother should only have  very
    limited contact with him and only then in a contact centre.   A  has  a
    number of additional needs which would not exist in the case of a child
    with normal levels of development such that it is wholly unrealistic to
    consider that he could go to live in Morocco even were the court permit
    that.  Any order to that effect would have to  take  into  account  the
    best interests of a child and given the level of intensive  support  he
    receives from the special school he attends that is  in  my  experience
    highly unlikely to be ordered.

24. I do, however, consider  that  the  Tribunal  did  err  in  failing  to
    consider properly whether the interference proposed  in  the  appellant
    and her children returning to Morocco  and  being  separated  from  the
    father would be proportionate.  What is said at [63], even taking  into
    account other matters, does not show how the public interest was  taken
    into account.  That, bearing this in mind that the appellant's case  is
    clearly outside the Immigration Rules, it is a significant factor.

25. On that basis, I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    heard further submissions, it being agreed  between  the  parties  that
    there was no need to receive further evidence.

26. I consider that the best interests of the children in this case must be
    assessed first.  In the case of A, for the reasons set out above, it is
    very strongly in his best interests to remain in the United Kingdom and
    for his father to be here with him.  He has particular,  special  needs
    and his interests are very strongly to remain in this country.  That is
    not only because of the educational support he receives but because  of
    the lack of any viable contact with his mother beyond the very  limited
    contact that exists.  I see no reason to go behind the  order  made  by
    the Family Court which must clearly  have  factored  into  account  his
    interests, that those were to be with his  father  and  to  have  some,
    limited, contact with his mother.  Whilst  at  that  time  his  special
    education needs were not known, that now increases his  best  interests
    in being in the United Kingdom.

27. There is evidence that A has a relationship with  the  appellant.   For
    example, it is evident from  the  letters  from  the  school  that  the
    appellant is treated as one of A's parents.  It is  also  important  to
    note the findings of the First-tier Tribunal that they formed a  proper
    family unit.

28. Mr Duffy did raise tentatively whether there could  be  more  than  two
    parental relationships.  That is an issue  which  I  consider  requires
    further consideration.  I accept that as a matter  of  law,  there  can
    only be two parents and  also  as  a  matter  of  biology.   Here,  the
    situation is complex; the biological mother has  limited  contact  with
    the child and  it  is  evident  that  the  father's  new  partner  (the
    appellant) has a closer relationship in terms of time  spent  with  the
    child.  It is important not to impose rigid bright lines between family
    life  and  private  life  which  covers   a   spectrum   of   different
    relationships but on the facts of this case it is important to focus on
    why the relationship between the appellant and A is important and  that
    is because of  the  importance  that  the  relationship  has  to  A  in
    assessing his best interests.  There is no evidence before me from, for
    example, a child psychologist or from a school as to  how  important  A
    sees the relationship with the appellant.   This  is  not  meant  as  a
    criticism, merely as an observation.  But it is difficult to  see  that
    the day-to-day care and support given by the  appellant  would  not  be
    seen by the A as being an important part of his life.   It  provides  a
    degree of stability.   Or, put it another way, it is difficult  to  see
    how what the school perceives as a supportive relationship for A  would
    not be something which is important to him.

29. To an extent, the rationale behind Section 117B(6) as  analysed  in  KO
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58 is an indicator that  the  strength  of
    certain personal bonds are such that once the  best  interests  of  the
    child to remain in the United Kingdom are established, it is because of
    the effect on the best interests of that child that the public interest
    in in removal must be greater.

30. There is, I accept, a strong public interest in removing the  appellant
    and her children.  The appellant came here as a visitor, made  a  false
    asylum claim and has simply chosen to stay here without leave, to enter
    into a relationship and to have children.  That is not to say that  her
    conduct should be taken into consideration in assessing the  children's
    best interests, but it  is  a  factor  to  be  taken  into  account  in
    assessing the public interest in removal.

31. Apart from child A, none of the  parties  are  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom and, in the case of the appellant and her two children, have no
    leave to be here.  Significant weight  must  in  the  circumstances  be
    attached to the need to maintain immigration control and  therefore  in
    the removal of A and her children.

32. The respondent's case that the appellant and  her  children  should  be
    remove presents a stark choice on the facts of this  case:  either  the
    appellant's partner remains in the UK to look after his child,  A,  who
    otherwise faces severe consequences including effectively the  severing
    of a  family  relationship,  or  he  remains  here,  and  his  parental
    relationship with his younger children is  effectively  severed.    The
    best interests of all the children require them and  the  appellant  to
    remain here so that the family unit can be preserved. I  conclude  that
    viewed as a whole, on the particular  facts  of  this  case,  that  the
    effect on the children would be severe and  harsh,  especially  in  the
    case of A.

33. Further, given that they all now form a unit as a whole, I am satisfied
    that removal of the appellant would not be in child A's best interests.
    She clearly meets some of his needs and irrespective of whether she  is
    a parent as such, that is effectively the role she plays.

34. Thus, on the particular facts of this  case,  there  are  a  number  of
    reasons of a compelling nature, not least the fact that the family life
    of the children which now exists, could not exist  outside  the  United
    Kingdom, such that removal may not be in the public interest.

35. The public interest in this case is strong, bearing in mind the need to
    maintain immigration control. It is strengthened by the  act  that  the
    appellant  does  not  speak  English  well  and  is   not   financially
    independent. Little weight (but not no weight) can be attached  to  the
    family life she has established with her partner,

36. Nonetheless, given the impact of separation on  the  children,  and  in
    particular child  A,  which  would  inevitably  flow  from  removal,  I
    conclude that on the particular facts of this case, and the  difficulty
    of maintaining the family life of the children which now exists, except
    within the United Kingdom, that removal would be disproportionate.

37. Accordingly, I conclude that the error made by the First-tier  Tribunal
    was not material, and in the  alternative,  for  the  reasons  set  out
    above, I reach the same conclusion as the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

Summary of Conclusions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision allowing it on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 27 December 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

