
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04623/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 5 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                               TEM (ZIMBABWE)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Corban
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of TEM, a citizen of Zimbabwe born 20 April  1985,
       against the decision to set removal  directions  against  her  as  an
       illegal entrant under paragraphs 8-10 of the  Immigration  Act  1971.
       The appeal having been dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal, she  now
       appeals to the Upper Tribunal with permission.

    2. She arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 January 2006  as  a  student,
       and her leave to remain was extended until some  time  in  2007;  she
       then returned to Zimbabwe, coming back to the United  Kingdom  on  22
       July 2007, again as a student, extending her leave until 30 September
       2011. She then overstayed until she claimed asylum on 26 June 2013.

    3. Her asylum claim is as follows. She  is  from  Rusape  in  Manicaland
       Province, Zimbabwe. She is present in the United Kingdom with her two
       children APV and OTV. She had no history of political  activity  when
       she was last in Zimbabwe.

    4. During her residence in the United Kingdom, since August 2010, and in
       pursuance of her political beliefs, she  has  consistently  protested
       against the Mugabe regime, involving herself with the Restoration  of
       Human Rights group ("ROHR"), and joined the Zimbabwe Vigil  in  2011.
       She considered that these were the only protest groups that had  been
       steadfast in their campaign against the  present  government,  unlike
       the MDC who had entered  coalition  government.  They  had  been  the
       subject  of  international  media  coverage  and  had  been  bitterly
       criticised in the Zimbabwean press, and accused of being  puppets  of
       Gordon Brown and Kate Hoey MP. Demonstrations are  frequent  and  she
       has  attended  them  on  a  weekly  basis;  they  have   concentrated
       specifically on topics including  the  disputed  elections,  Mugabe's
       birthday, and the perceived betrayal of Zimbabwean independence. ROHR
       activists had been murdered in Zimbabwe in 2008 and 2013.

    5.  She  has  participated  in  various  demonstrations  every  Saturday
       afternoon since then. Her activities have included issuing  leaflets,
       recruiting new members, and organising events; she manned  the  front
       table at  demonstrations  outside  the  Zimbabwean  Embassy,  seeking
       signatures on permission, answering questions, signing petitions  and
       distributing fliers. She was organising secretary of ROHR's  Coventry
       branch.

    6. She has received anonymous threats stating that "you  think  you  can
       say what you want, wait till you come home" and  "what  do  you  know
       about democracy": she does not know their origin,  but  assumes  they
       are Zanu-PF CIOs. She feared that given that  her  political  profile
       was in the public domain, interrogation of an internet search  engine
       would at once reveal her political sympathies, and so she would  come
       to light and receive adverse attention from the moment of  return  at
       Harare International Airport. Back in Manicaland she would be seen as
       a sell-out and might be denied access to medical help or other  basic
       necessities controlled by Zanu-PF. She did not feel she could  desist
       from her political activities on a return to Zimbabwe. She lacked up-
       to-date knowledge of that group's political slogans and songs, and so
       could not feign loyalty to the regime even were  that  acceptable  to
       her conscience.

    7. Her partner Mr  V  is  a  failed  asylum  seeker,  whose  appeal  was
       originally dismissed on 27 April 2004 for failure to demonstrate that
       he was a MDC member with any record of  detention  or  harassment  by
       Zanu-PF;  various  attempts  to  resurrect  his  claim  via   further
       representations had  failed.  The  Appellant  had  learned  that  her
       partner's legal representative, who she had originally  charged  with
       progressing her own asylum claim alongside his,  was  not  qualified,
       and they had complained about him.

    8. Her application was refused because, whilst its detail and supporting
       documents impressed the  Secretary  of  State  sufficiently  for  her
       account to be accepted as true, she lacked evidence as to the  source
       of the threats, and it was considered speculative to assume that they
       were from a Zanu-PF source. She had not claimed asylum for some  time
       after first receiving the threats. An  asylum  seeker  from  Bulawayo
       without any significant MDC profile would  not  need  to  demonstrate
       loyalty to Zanu-PF on a return there; nor would they  in  Harare,  to
       where she could reasonably be expected to relocate, being healthy and
       educated, with the  advantage  of  her  partner  and  father  of  her
       children returning with her as part of a family unit.  There  was  no
       reason to think she could not earn the family's livelihood  utilising
       her skills.

    9. Evidence referenced by the First-tier Tribunal includes a letter from
       ROHR of 26 June 2013 asserting the physical and  psychological  abuse
       of their activists and stating that some had been murdered by Zanu-PF
       militias. Zimbabwe Vigil wrote in November 2012 that a supporter  who
       returned to visit Zimbabwe had been  arrested,  beaten  and  tortured
       following his being identified as one  of  their  supporters;  within
       days of a newspaper report picturing one of their  supporters,  their
       family home was raided by the police.

   10. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal without  departing  from
       the Home Office's  favourable  assessment  of  the  underlying  facts
       because her family had not received any adverse  attention  from  the
       authorities, contrary to the cited experience of  at  least  some  of
       those victims of political persecution mentioned  in  the  supporting
       letters. Those letters had not specified the  level  of  activity  of
       those who suffered  political  persecution  in  Zimbabwe.  There  was
       insufficient  evidence  to  positively  find  that  the   Appellant's
       activities had come to the attention of the  Zimbabwean  authorities.
       Her father lived in Harare, her partner's home  town,  to  where  she
       could reasonably relocate if she did not wish to remain in  her  home
       area, given the resilience and fortitude she had shown in  relocating
       to this country.

   11. Grounds of appeal alleged the First-tier Tribunal had failed to  have
       regard to the Country Guidelines findings relating to the presence of
       the security forces at  Harare  airport  in  HS  Zimbabwe  which  was
       relevant  given  the  Appellant's  accepted  profile  of  activities.
       Permission to appeal was granted on that ground by  Judge  Deans  for
       the First-tier Tribunal on 6 August 2015.

   12. At the hearing Mr Duffy made it clear that  the  Respondent  accepted
       the asserted flaws in the decision, and he joined with Mr  Corban  in
       submitting that the appropriate disposal of the appeal would  be  for
       the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision for itself.  Mr  Duffy  was
       content to rely on the refusal letter as the basis for the  Secretary
       of State's case upon that reconsideration, whereas Mr  Corban  argued
       that the facts of her claim as set out in the  First-tier  Tribunal's
       decision established her entitlement  to  refugee  status  once  read
       alongside the relevant Country Guidelines.




  Decision:

   13. Giving its guidance in EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]
       UKUT 98 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal essentially ruled  that  there  was
       significantly less politically motivated violence  in  Zimbabwe  than
       had prevailed previously. Whereas life in most rural regions  outside
       Matabeleland might expose a returnee to  political  loyalty  testing,
       that would  not  be  the  case  in  Matabeleland  (subject  to  local
       variations where a village was under the sway of a  pro-Mugabe  local
       chief).  Harare  would  not  generally  present  risks  of  political
       persecution via loyalty-testing or otherwise  unless  someone  had  a
       significant MDC profile; and in Bulawayo there was no real chance  of
       serious harm at the hands of Zanu-PF supporters even for people  with
       such a profile. Accordingly those two cities were eligible sites  for
       internal relocation: where any socio-economic difficulties would  not
       generally render life as unduly harsh, though there  was  a  need  to
       assess the individual facts of each case.

   14. That guidance, however, was expressly stated not to  impinge  on  the
       separate question of circumstances at the airport upon which findings
       had been made in SM and Others (MDC-internal flight-risk  categories)
       CG [2005] UKIAT 00100 (affirmed  in  HS  (returning  asylum  seekers)
       Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094 and again in EM Zimbabwe at [266]):
           "41. ... those deported to Zimbabwe from the United Kingdom will
           be subject to interrogation on  return.  In  the  light  of  the
           interest and comment the resumption of returns has raised in the
           government press in Zimbabwe it seems to  us  to  be  inevitable
           that this will be the case. If  it  is  being  asserted  by  the
           Zimbabwe government that returns are being used as a  cloak  for
           British agents and saboteurs to be smuggled into the country, it
           is likely that those returns will be carefully monitored whether
           for that reason or to identify and intimidate opponents  to  the
           regime. The reports in the newspapers in Zimbabwe are consistent
           with there being an atmosphere of suspicion to those returned.
           42. Nonetheless the Tribunal is satisfied in the  light  of  the
           statements made by the Zimbabwean authorities that returnees are
           regarded with contempt and suspicion on return  and  do  face  a
           very hostile atmosphere. This by itself does not  indicate  that
           all returnees are at real risk of persecution but that returnees
           are liable to have their background and circumstances  carefully
           scrutinised by the authorities. We are satisfied that those  who
           are suspected of being politically active with the MDC would  be
           at real risk.  We  agree  with  Professor  Ranger  that  if  the
           authorities  have  any  reason  to  believe  that   someone   is
           politically active the interrogation will be followed up.  There
           is a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that  this  will  include
           treatment sufficiently serious to amount to persecution."

   15. The upshot of these two cases read together is that in general  there
       will be no real risk of  serious  harm  once  past  the  border,  via
       loyalty  testing  or  otherwise,  for  a  returnee  who   lacks   any
       significant political profile, either because they come from  one  of
       the safer areas  or  because  they  can  reasonably  be  expected  to
       relocate there. However, there  is  intelligence-based  investigation
       into returnees at the airport, so that a person who has a significant
       profile that would put them at risk at that point may be in danger of
       interrogation including serious mistreatment at the  point  of  entry
       for all that they might live safely once past the border controls.

   16. As to the expectations that a decision maker should  reasonably  hold
       when making an assessment as to what information to come to light, in
       YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA Civ 360, Sedley LJ stated at [18]:
           "Where, as here,  the  tribunal  has  objective  evidence  which
           "paints  a  bleak  picture  of  the  suppression  of   political
           opponents" by a named  government,  it  requires  little  or  no
           evidence or speculation to arrive at a strong possibility -  and
           perhaps more - that its  foreign  legations  not  only  film  or
           photograph their nationals who demonstrate in public against the
           regime  but  have  informers  among   expatriate   oppositionist
           organisations  who  can  name  the  people  who  are  filmed  or
           photographed. Similarly it does not require affirmative evidence
           to establish a probability that  the  intelligence  services  of
           such  states  monitor  the  internet   for   information   about
           oppositionist groups. The real question in most  cases  will  be
           what follows for the individual claimant. If, for  example,  any
           information reaching the  embassy  is  likely  to  be  that  the
           claimant identified in a photograph is a hanger-on with no  real
           commitment to the oppositionist cause, that will go directly  to
           the issue flagged up by art 4(3)(d) of the Directive."

   17. Article 4(3)(d)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  states  that  one
       relevant consideration in assessing the merits of an asylum claim  is
       whether the applicant's  activities  since  leaving  the  country  of
       origin were engaged in for the sole or main purpose of  creating  the
       necessary conditions for applying for international protection, so as
       to assess whether these  activities  will  expose  the  applicant  to
       persecution or serious harm if returned to that country. No challenge
       has been made in this case to  the  genuineness  of  the  Appellant's
       political beliefs.  I  join  with  the  Home  Office  and  First-tier
       Tribunal in accepting these as  established,  along  with  the  other
       relevant facts as set  out  above.  The  only  cavil  raised  by  the
       Secretary of State with her claim related to the timing of her asylum
       claim, but that is explained by the difficulties with the  inadequate
       legal representative set out above, which I consider to  be  credible
       bearing in mind the fact that there are all too many non-professional
       advisors who prey on the unwary and given my  general  acceptance  of
       her credibility.

   18. As stated in SM and HS "returnees are liable to have their background
       and circumstances carefully scrutinised by the authorities". It seems
       to me that in the modern era of information technology, social  media
       and internet search engines would be standard  reference  points  for
       security forces charged with investigating the role of a returnee  in
       expatriate political activity. It seems  highly  unlikely  that  they
       would fail to interrogate a search engine for  a  person's  name.  As
       shown by extracts in the Appellant's bundle, such enquiries would  be
       likely to yield pictures such as those from the Yahoo flickr  account
       which pictures the Appellant with a caption  "Zimbabwe  human  rights
       activist ... with the coordinator of the ... Vigil  ...  outside  the
       Zimbabwean Embassy."

   19. Once her involvement  with  the  Vigil  came  to  light,  that  would
       inevitably lead to further questioning, during which  she  cannot  be
       expected to lie  as  to  her  political  beliefs  (see  generally  RT
       (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38), and which in any event  might  place  her
       under significant duress. She has not simply played  the  role  of  a
       supporter generally inclined to protest against Mugabe but  has  been
       involved in the running of the Coventry branch office  of  the  ROHR.
       She has been especially prominent in staffing the table  outside  the
       Zimbabwean Embassy. These considerations place her as someone closely
       associated with building the capacity of the anti-regime movement.

   20. Beyond this she has of course received  individualised  threats,  and
       paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules states that "The fact that  a
       person has already been subject to persecution or serious harm, or to
       direct threats of such persecution or such harm, will be regarded  as
       a serious indication of the person's well-founded fear of persecution
       or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons
       to consider that  such  persecution  or  serious  harm  will  not  be
       repeated." One of course appreciates that  these  are  as  likely  to
       emanate from malignant  Zanu-PF  supporters  as  they  are  from  the
       security forces themselves, but they nevertheless indicate  that  her
       activities are of  a  nature  liable  to  promote  antagonism.  These
       considerations taken together lead me to conclude that she  would  be
       attributed a significant political profile on a  return  to  Zimbabwe
       and that she thus falls within the class still identified as at  risk
       by the web  of  Country  Guidelines  findings  cited  above.  She  is
       accordingly owed refugee  status  as  defined  by  the  1951  Refugee
       Convention.

ANONYMITY ORDER

I have found the Appellant to be a Convention refugee  with  family  members
remaining in  Zimbabwe.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

Decision

The appeal is allowed.


Signed      Date: 20 January 2016

[pic]
Judge Symes
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 20 January 2016


[pic]
Judge Symes
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

