
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04978/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |     Decision & Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                      |
|On 4 January 2016                            |     On 4 February 2016          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     il
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kevin Scott of Pickup & Scott Sols
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 6 March 2015 refusing to grant him  further
    leave to remain and to remove him to Sri Lanka.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a Tamil citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1984.  He  claims
    that he worked in a bank in Akkaraipatto  and  was  forced  to  provide
    banking services for the LTTE, along with an assistant  manager  called
    IH. The appellant arrived in the UK as a student and resigned from  the
    bank in July 2008. The bank  became  aware  of  the  LTTE  transactions
    towards the end of 2008. The appellant returned to Sri Lanka in October
    2013 to pursue his master's degree in banking and finance. In  November
    2013 he was detained by the armed forces in Sri Lanka and taken  to  an
    army camp. He was  told  that  IH  had  provided  information.  He  was
    tortured, photographed and made to sign a document in Sinhalese. He was
    told that he was dead by the documentation and should leave the country
    within a week. Two summonses were later sent to his home address.

 4. The appellant claims that he left Sri Lanka after passing  through  the
    airport accompanied by an immigration officer to whom he had given  his
    passport. He arrived in the UK on 22 November 2013 and  claimed  asylum
    on 25 January 2014.

 5. The respondent accepted nationality, identity  and  employment  at  the
    bank but rejected the claim  to  have  helped  the  LTTE  with  banking
    services. Neither the appellant nor his family were  LTTE  members  and
    the appellant had not explained why he and IH were the  correct  people
    to approach. Even taking his claim at its highest, he did not fall into
    any identified risk categories. His  credibility  was  damaged  by  the
    delay in making his claim.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing in Birmingham on  17  June  2015.  The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had failed to claim asylum on arrival  in  the  UK  and  that
    damaged his credibility. It was not likely that he would have travelled
    to and from Sri  Lanka  if  he  had  been  actively  involved  in  LTTE
    financial affairs. It was not credible  that  the  appellant  had  been
    unaware of IH's dismissal in 2008 when he returned to Sri Lanka  for  6
    weeks in 2012. It was not likely that he would have  his  own  identity
    documents at the airport if he was in genuine fear  of  being  stopped.
    The  affidavit  sworn  by  the  appellant's  father  contradicted   the
    appellant's own account. The judge rejected the appellant's account  as
    lacking in credibility.

 7. The judge only then considered the medical  evidence  but  against  the
    background of his findings was not satisfied  that  the  injuries  were
    caused in the manner claimed by the appellant.  The  alternative  cause
    was self-infliction by proxy. The appellant was not at risk on return.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 29 July 2015 on the  basis
    that the judge erred in law by finding that it was  unlikely  that  the
    appellant would have chosen to travel to and from Sri Lanka if  he  was
    involved in the financial activities of  the  LTTE  because  the  Upper
    Tribunal in GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319
    (IAC) reiterated that risk is not limited to actual anti-unitary  state
    activities but also  perceived  anti-unitary  state  activities.  Their
    intelligence is not infallible. The  judge  further  erred  in  law  by
    failing to consider the detail of the medical evidence and  the  expert
    consideration of  self-infliction  by  proxy.  The  judge  artificially
    separated the medical evidence  from  the  rest  of  the  evidence  and
    reached  credibility  conclusions  without  reference  to  the  medical
    evidence. There was a lack of anxious scrutiny.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman on 18
    September 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge  erred
    by  considering  the  medical  report   immediately   after   rejecting
    credibility.

10. In a rule 24 response dated 8 October 2015, the  respondent  sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that the appellant was not  at
    risk even taking the appellant's claim at its highest and  the  medical
    evidence was properly considered in the round. The judge  assessed  the
    appellant's  account,  the  documents  provided,  then  considered  the
    medical evidence and then  made  findings  on  the  Refugee  Convention
    against the backdrop of the country guidance.  There  was  no  material
    error of law.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

12. Mr Scott relied upon both grounds of appeal but  the  main  ground  was
    considering credibility before consideration  of  the  medical  report.
    Also,  the  judge  did  not  consider  the  medical  report  correctly.
    Credibility was assessed without consideration of the  medical  report.
    The appellant falls within GJ, taking his case at its highest,  because
    he would be perceived as a threat to the unitary state.

13. Mr Staunton submitted that the grounds only amount to  a  disagreement.
    Paragraph 32 of the decision was just a precursor to paragraphs  33-34.
    There was full consideration of the medical  evidence.  The  judge  was
    entitled to find that the appellant was still not credible. He does not
    fall within the GJ risk categories in any event.

14. I concur with Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman that judges  have  to  deal
    with the evidence in some order and should not too readily be found  to
    have artificially separated the medical evidence from the  rest  or  to
    have reached adverse credibility findings in isolation from the medical
    evidence. However, in this appeal the judge made a  series  of  adverse
    credibility findings at paragraphs 28-31 of the decision  and  then  at
    paragraph 32 stated that, "For these reasons I reject  the  Appellant's
    account as lacking in credibility even  against  the  low  standard  of
    proof applicable". That was effectively  the  end  of  the  appellant's
    appeal. At paragraphs 33-34 the judge went on to consider  the  medical
    evidence but given  that  the  appellant's  account  had  already  been
    rejected, it is difficult to see  how  that  consideration  could  have
    assisted the appellant.

15. I reject the submission that paragraph 32  is  merely  a  precursor  to
    paragraphs 33-34. It  contains  a  clear  and  final  finding  of  fact
    rejecting the appellant's case, before any consideration was  given  to
    the medical evidence. That is contrary to the guidance from  the  Court
    of Appeal in Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 where it was held  that
    medical evidence should be at the forefront of the judge's mind, should
    not be artificially separated from the rest of the evidence and  should
    not be disregarded at the end of a  decision  on  the  basis  of  other
    credibility findings. At paragraph 34 of the decision, the  judge  fell
    into  precisely  that  last  error  when  stating  that,  "Against  the
    background of  my  findings  above  I  cannot  be  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant's injuries were caused in the way he claims".  The  judge  in
    effect placed no weight on the medical evidence because the appellant's
    account had already been rejected. I find that the judge's approach  to
    the medical evidence amounts to a material  error  of  law.  The  final
    credibility finding  should  not  have  been  made  until  the  medical
    evidence had been fully considered.

16. I further reject the submission that the appellant cannot succeed under
    GJ, even taking his case at its highest. If the  appellant  is  telling
    the truth then it would be open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that
    he would be perceived to be a threat to the unitary state or that he is
    on a stop or watch list and therefore at risk of further detention  and
    ill  treatment.  Careful  fact  finding  would  be  required,  if   the
    appellant's account was found to be credible.

17. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its  decision  cannot
    stand. I have not found it necessary to consider the other  grounds  of
    appeal because the matters raised can  all  be  addressed  at  the  re-
    hearing.

Decision

18. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if  we  set  aside  the  judge's  decision.  Bearing  in  mind
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider
    that an appropriate course of action. I find  that  the  error  of  law
    infects the decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de
    novo with all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

19. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge


Signed

[pic]

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Archer
            Date 1 February 2016


