
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04151/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd October 2015                 |On 6th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              mr Anh Long Tran
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bundock of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant's Claim

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Vietnam who was born on  8th  June  1995.
    He appealed against a decision of the Respondent to refuse to grant him
    asylum dated 30th June 2014.  His appeal was allowed at first  instance
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Samimi sitting at Hatton  Cross  on
    25th June  2015.   The  Respondent  appeals  with  leave  against  that
    decision and the matter thus comes  before  me  as  an  appeal  by  the
    Respondent to establish whether there is an error of law in the Judge's
    decision.  If there is not then the decision will stand but if there is
    then the decision falls to be set aside and the appeal reheard.  I will
    nevertheless continue to refer to the parties as  they  were  known  at
    first instance for the sake of convenience.

2.   The Appellant's claim was summarised by the Judge  at  paragraph  6  of
    her determination:

         "(i) The Appellant's father Hua Long Tran passed away ten years ago
             having been killed by the police.  He was a  fisherman  and  a
             Catholic church preacher.  The  Appellant's  mother  Tri  Tran
             died in 2011.  The Appellant's  brother  Ba  Long  Neugyen  is
             living in Korea and his brother Honag  is  living  in  France.
             The Appellant has not had any contact with his brothers  since
             they left Vietnam.

         (ii) The Appellant received home schooling but from the age  of  10
             the police harassed his family.  On one  occasion  his  father
             was shot because he had tried to stand up to the police.   The
             following day the police apologised  for  the  shooting.   The
             Appellant's brothers fled Vietnam several days later  but  the
             Appellant remained in Vietnam  and  continued  to  attend  the
             catholic church.  The Appellant's mother arranged for  him  to
             flee Vietnam in April 2009.  The Appellant was taken to France
             by boat and the journey took two weeks.  The Appellant  stayed
             in a forest for another two weeks.

         (iii)    The Appellant travelled to the United Kingdom by a  lorry.
             The  Appellant  stayed  in  a  house  for  six  months  before
             travelling to Wales where he was taken to  work  in  cannabis.
             On 28th March 2011 the Appellant was arrested  as  part  of  a
             raid on the premises and  he  was  charged  will  the  illegal
             production of drugs on  13th  May  2011  at  Swansea  Juvenile
             Court. The Appellant travelled to London as he  did  not  feel
             safe in Wales.  In London he met  a  man  on  the  street  and
             subsequently  claimed  asylum  on  21st  October  2011.    The
             Appellant began living at unknown place where he helped  carry
             light bulbs for people cultivating cannabis.  He stayed  there
             for two or three weeks before being encountered by the police.
              He pleaded guilty at  Isleworth  Crown  Court  where  he  was
             sentenced to a community sentence order of  60  hours  on  5th
             October 2012.

3.   The Respondent rejected the Appellant's claim  finding  it  not  to  be
    plausible  and  giving  reasons  for  that  conclusion  summarised   at
    paragraph 7 of the Judge's determination.  The Appellant's  credibility
    was damaged by his failure to claim at the first available  opportunity
    after arrival in France.  There were inconsistencies regarding the date
    of the Appellant's father's death.

The Decision at First Instance

4.   The Judge considered the Appellant's credibility in the  light  of  the
    fact that he was only 14 years old when he claimed  asylum  and  was  a
    minor who had been a victim of trafficking to  and  within  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Judge considered Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 in the light of the Appellant's
    overall credibility, age and circumstances at the time  of  his  asylum
    claim.  The Appellant was 16 years old at the  time  of  the  screening
    interview and 17 by the  time  of  his  asylum  interview  and  written
    statement.  She therefore attached greater weight to the  evidence  and
    explanations given by the Appellant at the time of the hearing by which
    time he was an adult and had had the benefit of receiving  support  and
    counselling.  She concluded that the Appellant had been  trafficked  to
    the United Kingdom in order to work in a cannabis factory.  As a result
    of which he had been prosecuted and served a four month sentence before
    being re-trafficked to a second cannabis factory as a result  of  which
    he was arrested and received a community service order in October 2012.
     The UKVI concluded on 6th June 2014 that  the  Appellant  had  been  a
    victim of trafficking.

5.   The Respondent accepted that the Appellant was of  the  Roman  Catholic
    faith.  The Judge had before her an expert country report by  Professor
    Christopher Bluth who stated that although officially there was freedom
    of religion in Vietnam  the  Vietnamese  government  was  very  hostile
    towards  Christians  and  Christianity.    Christians   faced   regular
    discrimination  and  harassment  by  the  authorities  and  were  often
    arrested by the police.  Such persecution was getting worse. The  Judge
    held that if returned to Vietnam the Appellant would be returning as  a
    vulnerable young adult with limited education and no  work  experience.
    He was a devout catholic with some  experience  of  discrimination  and
    harassment on account of his faith.  Victims of trafficking were at  an
    increased risk of being re-trafficked greater than that  faced  by  the
    general population.  On the totality of the evidence the Appellant  was
    a member  of  a  particular  social  group  namely  former  victims  of
    trafficking.  He would be at risk of future trafficking.   She  allowed
    the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

6.   The Respondent appealed that decision arguing that the Judge had  found
    in favour of the Appellant mainly on the  basis  of  Professor  Bluth's
    report but had not explained why she  preferred  his  evidence  to  the
    Country of Origin Information Report relied upon by the  Respondent  at
    the appeal.  The Presenting Officer had discredited the expert's report
    and yet the Judge had made  no  mention  of  the  Presenting  Officer's
    submissions.  A sufficiency of protection existed for the Appellant.

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    on the papers on 7th August  2015.   Judge  Simpson  noted  that  Judge
    Samimi had not relied solely on the expert's report when assessing  the
    situation for Catholics in Vietnam.  She had  also  considered  the  US
    State  Department's  International  Religious  Freedom   Report   which
    confirmed the tension between the government and the  Catholics  within
    Vietnam.   That  said  the  Record  of  Proceedings  showed  that   the
    Presenting Officer had made a number of submissions in relation to  the
    reliability of Professor Bluth's report in particular that he was not a
    country expert, that he had not interviewed the Appellant in person and
    he had not referred to the refusal letter.  In those  circumstances  it
    was arguable that the Judge gave  undue  weight  to  Professor  Bluth's
    report.

8.   The Appellant replied to the grant of permission stating that the  Home
    Office appeal should be dismissed.   The  submissions  referred  to  by
    Judge Simpson were made in respect of another expert whose  report  had
    been relied upon by the Respondent but not by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  In any event  there  were  no  particulars  given  of  how  the
    evidence of Professor Bluth  conflicted  with  the  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report.  In fact the Respondent's evidence in the COIR  was
    consistent with the evidence of Professor Bluth.  The submissions  made
    by the Presenting Officer that  Professor  Bluth's  report  was  either
    under reasoned or under supported was not truly a conflict  of  opinion
    calling for  resolution.   The  Judge's  silence  on  the  Home  Office
    submissions did not amount to a material error of law.

9.   The Respondent's own report on religious  minority  groups  in  Vietnam
    conceded that a person fearing persecution in  Vietnam  on  account  of
    their religion would not be able to  apply  to  state  authorities  for
    protection given that the persecution is at the  hands  of  the  state.
    Sufficiency of protection  was  not  argued  in  respect  of  religious
    persecution in the refusal letter.  In any  event  police  capabilities
    were generally very limited. The expert's report suggested  that  local
    police continued to use contract thugs against citizens and  to  harass
    and beat them including religious worshippers.

The Hearing Before Me

10.  At the outset the Presenting Officer very fairly submitted  that  there
    was a great deal of weight to be attached to the  submissions  made  by
    the Appellant in the Rule 24 response to the grant of permission.   The
    available country information on Vietnam was in part favourable to  the
    Respondent's case but also in part was not, the evidence was mixed.  It
    was nevertheless unfair of the Judge to have  made  so  little  of  the
    submissions made by the Respondent in the appeal.  The  Judge  had  not
    fully stated what the Respondent's objections to  the  expert's  report
    were.  The Judge should have quoted all of it.

11.  I did not call on the  Counsel  for  the  Appellant  to  make  detailed
    submissions in response but indicated that I was going to  dismiss  the
    Respondent's appeal in this  case  on  the  basis  that  there  was  no
    material error of law in the Judge's determination. The  assessment  of
    the credibility of the claim  was  a  matter  for  the  Judge.   Having
    established the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  been  persecuted  and
    trafficked into this country, it was again a matter for  the  Judge  to
    analyse the country background information to see whether the Appellant
    would be at future risk  upon  return.   She  did  this  and  gave  her
    reasons.  As the Presenting  Officer  fairly  conceded  the  background
    information does not unequivocally support  the  Respondent's  position
    that there is no risk.  In fact  there  is  background  information  to
    suggest that certain persons including religious believers are at  risk
    in Vietnam.  In those circumstances there was no error on the  part  of
    the Judge to extrapolate from her findings of past persecution to  find
    that there was a real risk of future harm and  allow  the  appeal.  The
    Judge was not picking one side  of  the  argument  and  without  reason
    preferring that to the other side. Rather she was aware  that  even  on
    the Respondent's side of the argument the evidence was mixed whereas on
    the Appellant's side the evidence was more clear cut.

12.  I would make one further point which is  that  the  Appellant  has  two
    separate convictions in this country for assisting in the production of
    illegal drugs.  Indeed another  Judge  might  have  formed  a  somewhat
    unfavourable view of the Appellant's credibility  given  this  criminal
    activity.  However that the Judge in this case did not do so is not  of
    itself an error of law.  The Appellant should bear in mind that further
    criminality on his part should there be such would only  serve  to  get
    him into more trouble with the authorities in this country and he would
    be wise to pay heed to that.  It is for the Appellant now  to  put  his
    past offending behind him and to  respect  the  protection  which  this
    country has afforded to him.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law and I dismiss the  Respondent's  appeal  against  that
decision.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

Respondent's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 5th day of November 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 5th day of November 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
