
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04711/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th September 2016               |On 29th September 2016               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Bennett dated 25th February  2015  to  dismiss  his
    claim for protection and  human  rights  claim.   The  appellant  is  a
    citizen of Sri Lanka and a Tamil born on 31st July 1986.  He arrived in
    the UK on 8th September 2014  and  claimed  political  asylum  on  17th
    September 2014.  That claim was refused by the Secretary  of  State  on
    25th February 2015 and the matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge
    N J Bennett who dismissed the appeal.

 2. Application for permission to appeal set  out  the  following  grounds.
    The first and primary ground was that the judge erred in his failure to
    make a finding of whether the appellant was  a  vulnerable  witness  as
    required in the light of the medical evidence and whether there was  in
    fact an explanation for the inconsistencies in his account.  The  judge
    had before him a psychiatric report of Dr Persaud  who  concluded  that
    the appellant was not fit to give evidence.  The report made  reference
    to the appellant's tendency to become confused and his memory problems.
     The appellant was not called to give evidence.  The judge did not make
    a finding as to whether the appellant was indeed a vulnerable  witness.
    The judge accepted the expertise of the psychiatrist albeit  he  raised
    concerns regarding certain aspects of the  report  but  still  did  not
    treat his evidence overall in the  light  of  him  being  a  vulnerable
    witness.  The judge considered that his mental health may  explain  the
    confusion between whether the detentions were in 2013 or 2014  not  the
    dates but no reasons were given for reaching the conclusion as  to  why
    the discrepancy in the year may be viewed as explicable  but  not  with
    regards to the month.

 3. At the hearing before me  Mr  Coleman  submitted  that  the  respondent
    accepted the appellant had been detained by the Sri Lankan  authorities
    between 2006 and 2011 and against this background it was plausible that
    he would have the mental health difficulties that were identified.  The
    judge had not addressed the mental health difficulties in  relation  to
    the appellant's evidence. At the appellant's screening interview he was
    clear that he had  memory  problems  and  declared  that  he  had  been
    arrested and as Mr Coleman indicated this was consistent with the  fact
    that he had indeed been in detention for some considerable period.

 4. Despite Mr Bramble's  valiant  attempts  to  defend  the  decision  and
    reference to paragraphs 19 and 20 I find that there is an error of  law
    in the determination.  I note Mr Bramble's submission  that  the  judge
    was not  looking  at  the  appellant's  health  in  isolation  and  was
    considering the evidence in the round and that the  judge  referred  to
    factors set out at [12] and  [15]  which  were  said  to  fundamentally
    undermine the appellant's  case.  Training  with  the  LTTE,  which  is
    addressed at [12], however, is not the only factor which might make him
    of interest to the authorities. I will address [15] below.

 5. The judge notes  and  accepts  that  the  appellant  was  arrested  and
    detained between August 2006 until  July  2011  and  accepts  that  the
    appellant may well have been tortured during his detention. The  judge,
    however, proceeds at paragraph 15 stating

         "But I do not accept the appellant's account of how he came  to  be
         released from detention.  He says he was  found  guilty,  that  his
         parents bribed anyone in the CID by paying them Rs3,000,000 to drop
         the case and that the judge released him from court".

 6. The judge found that he had produced an incomplete copy of  a  judgment
    from the High Court in Jaffna which showed that the  appellant  was  in
    fact acquitted.  For this reason the judge stated "I do  not  therefore
    accept that it is reasonably likely that the appellant was found guilty
    or that anyone in the CID was paid Rs3,000,000 to drop the case".

 7. The judge then goes on and states with reference to the later arrests

         "17. ... his evidence about this was  confused  and  contradictory.
             At his screening interview, he said that he was arrested again
             on 26th November 2013 and that he got out  in  December  2013,
             after a bribe had been paid.  At his substantive interview, he
             initially said that he was arrested only once  on  8th  August
             2006 (question +A118) but then said that he was arrested again
             on 7th January 2013 that he was released on 7th February  2014
             (sic) (question A119 - A120), that he was  rearrested  on  1st
             June 2014 and that he released  on  6th  June  2014  (question
             +A121).  Later on he said that he was held for a month when he
             was arrested in January 2013 (question A224 and  229)  but  he
             was rearrested on, he thought, 1st June 2013 (sic) and that he
             was released on 5th June 2013 sic (232 - 233).  He  then  said
             that he had only been  arrested  twice  (Q+A241).   After  the
             dates he had given earlier had been read back to him he denied
             saying that he was arrested on 1st June 2014 (question  +A242)
             and then said that he was arrested on 8th August 2006, that he
             was detained until 20th July 2011, that he was  rearrested  on
             1st July 2013 and that  he  was  released  after  a  few  days
             (question A243-244).

         18.  He went on to say that he was repeatedly harassed,  questioned
             beaten and punched by the CID and  by  the  army  (Q+A245-249)
             every two or three days until he left Sri Lanka  and  that  he
             was arrested once and abducted once in this  process  (Q+A245-
             255).  His claim to have moved from  place  to  place  in  his
             village in this period to avoid the harassment (Q+A245 &  262)
             does not fit happily with his  claim  to  have  been  harassed
             every two  or  three  days.   Although  he  claims  that  this
             harassment led to him leaving Sri Lanka (Q+A248), he  did  not
             mention any of this harassment  at  his  screening  interview,
             when he was asked why he left Sri Lanka and why he  could  not
             return there (Q+A4.2).

         19.  Dr Persaud says that the Appellant had a variety  of  symptoms
             which  led  him  to  be  distracted  and  confused,  that  the
             Appellant  was  withdrawn  and  that  the   Appellant   lacked
             concentration and focus, which was  part  of  the  Appellant's
             PTSD.  While this might explain some of he  contradictions  in
             the evidence if they stood in isolation, such as  whether  the
             Appellant was arrested on 1st June 2013 or on  1st  June  2014
             and whether the Appellant was released in February 2013 or  in
             February 2014, the difficulties  with  the  evidence  go  well
             beyond this an are also  consistent  with  this  part  of  the
             account not being founded in truth.

         20.  Dr Persaud said that he  considered  that  the  Appellant  was
             unfit to give evidence but went  on  to  say  that  his  would
             depend "quite a bit" on the Appellant's state on  the  day  in
             question and whether the hearing was conducted in a  way  that
             took account of the Appellant's disorder.  This might  explain
             why the Appellant did not give evidence  and  might  therefore
             make it unfair to draw any adverse inferences from his failure
             to give evidence, but it does not alter the incidence  of  the
             burden of proof or the standard  of  proof.  I  am  left  with
             substantial  difficulties  with  the  evidence  that  are  not
             adequately explained or resolved."

 8. Credibility findings were  central  to  the  decision  The  judge  does
    address the fact that the appellant had  a  variety  of  mental  health
    symptoms which led him to be distracted  and  confused  and  the  judge
    appears at [19] to address the issue of discrepancy and  the  confusion
    of the  appellant  by  stating  that  the  discrepancies  were  not  in
    isolation and 'the difficulties of the evidence go  well  beyond  this'
    but this finding does not factor in the  appellant's  vulnerability  in
    relation to his account as it contrasted with the court documents which
    the judge found important.  Those particular findings  at  [15],  which
    were said Mr Bramble to undermine the appellant's case, were  important
    but prefaced by  the  judge  with  the  words  'I  do  not  accept  the
    Appellant's account of how he came to be released from detention'.

 9. Further, it is not clear that because the judge rejected the account of
    his actual release in relation to his  five  year  detention  that  his
    account in relation to the further alleged detentions  should  be  also
    dismissed on the basis of confusion particularly in the  light  of  the
    accepted medical evidence.  I find that separate from any  findings  in
    relation to suicide.

10. The judge dismissed the fact that the appellant  would  remain  of  any
    interest to the Sri Lankan authorities because no evidence was drawn to
    his attention.  There is, however, background  information  to  suggest
    that the Sri Lankan authorities may act in a  persecutory  manner  even
    where there are no formal charges pending. The appellant  had  been  in
    detention for five years.

11. The judge bases his adverse credibility  findings  on  the  appellant's
    contradictory and confused evidence in relation to his account  of  his
    detention and of his arrests after 2013, in addition to his conclusions
    that the authorities would have no interest in those who are acquitted.
    The judge finally at [20] took into account the fact that the appellant
    may be unfit to give evidence at the hearing but stated "I am left with
    substantial difficulties with the  evidence  that  are  not  adequately
    explained or resolved".

12. Although it is not incumbent upon the judge  to  actually  mention  the
    vulnerable witness guidelines they should be applied consistently which
    they were not and I therefore find there is an error of law which  goes
    to the heart of this decision.

13. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 27th September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



















