
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04127/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 2 November 2016                   |On 3 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     T N
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Trussler, Counsel, instructed by Legis Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a national of Uganda born on 18 December 1995. She
         entered the UK as a visitor on 14 October 2013, shortly before  her
         18th birthday and following a successful appeal against the refusal
         of entry clearance. Prior to that she had made  an  application  to
         join her parents for settlement but that was  refused  in  December
         2011  and  her  appeal  against  that  decision  was  dismissed  in
         September 2012.  Following  her  arrival,  the  appellant  made  an
         application to remain on article 8  grounds.  The  application  was
         refused on 25 November 2013. A  further  application  on  the  same
         basis was made on 30 November 2013. This was refused on 16  January
         2014  and  on  21  August  2014  her  appeal  against  removal  was
         dismissed. On 12 September 2014 she claimed asylum.


      2. The applicant chose not to pursue her asylum claim at  the  hearing
         before First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver at Hatton Cross on 28  July
         2016. She  relied  on  her  human  rights  claim.  The  appeal  was
         dismissed on 23 August 2016.


      3. The appellant's claim to have been sexually abused by her  mother's
         step brother for several years until the age of  ten  and  to  have
         contracted HIV as a result was accepted by  Judge  Woolley  in  her
         determination of  21  August  2014  (IA/06617/2014).  It  was  also
         accepted that the applicant had family life with her  parents.   In
         his determination, Judge Oliver relied on the previous findings  to
         dismiss the asylum and  article  3  claims.  He  then  went  on  to
         consider article 8 (at his concluding paragraph 16) and it is those
         brief conclusions that the appellant takes issue with.

    The Challenge

      4.  The  challenge  to  the  determination  is  that  the  judge  gave
         inadequate reasons in his brief determination  for  his  article  8
         findings, both within Appendix FM and  outside  the  rules.  It  is
         maintained that when concluding that the article 8  claim  did  not
         satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM, he  did  not  provide  any
         reasons. Nor did he clarify which requirements had not been met. It
         is also argued that in finding that the  appellant's  relationships
         with her mother and sisters (her father has passed  away)  did  not
         contain any additional significant emotional dependency, he  failed
         entirely to have regard to the emotional support  provided  to  the
         appellant as confirmed by a medical report which,  though  referred
         to in a single sentence at paragraph 13, was not engaged with.


      5. In her Rule  24  response,  the  respondent  does  not  oppose  the
         appellant's application for permission to appeal  and  invites  the
         Tribunal to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
         hearing. It is accepted that the  judge  failed  to  integrate  any
         relevant findings on the medical  evidence  within  his  article  8
         analysis and that there was an overall inadequacy of reasoning.

      6. At the hearing before me on 2 November  2016,  Mr  Trussler  relied
         upon  that  concession  and  Ms  Ahmad  confirmed  that   was   the
         respondent's position.

      Conclusions


      7. The respondent's approach is entirely correct and  is  appreciated.
         It is plain that  the  sparse  'findings',  if  they  can  even  be
         described as such, are wholly inadequate. It has to be said that an
         article 8 claim based on sexual abuse to the appellant as a  child,
         the long term effect it has had on her and the contraction of  AIDS
         as a result are matters which deserve more consideration  that  the
         six lines contained in paragraph 16.   The judge has failed in  his
         duty to provide reasons for his decision and it is regrettable that
         the appellant has had to endure this  long  period  of  uncertainty
         whilst his determination was challenged.


      8. I have no hesitation in finding that the judge's  determination  is
         wholly devoid of reasoning and therefore so flawed that it must  be
         set aside in its entirety.

    Decision

      9. The determination contains material errors of law and is set aside.
         The matter shall be transferred back to the First-tier Tribunal for
         consideration afresh by a different judge and for a fresh  decision
         to be made.


    Directions


     10. No later than 7 working days prior to the hearing, the appellant is
         to serve upon the Tribunal and the respondent a paginated bundle of
         all the documentary  evidence  to  be  relied  on  including  those
         documents already submitted. Up to date witness statements from the
         appellant and her mother shall be provided.


     11. The appeal shall be heard in camera.

    Anonymity


     12. Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify  him/her  or  any  member  of
         his/her family. This direction applies to both the appellant and to
         the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
         contempt of court proceedings.


         Signed





                   Judge of the Upper Tribunal

             Date: 2 November 2016

