
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04624/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 29th January 2016                     |             On 16th February 2016   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                     mo
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Benfield, Counsel instructed by CK Law
Solicitors, Ashford Kent
                                  ANONYMITY

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
an anonymity order is made in respect of each of the Appellants. Unless  the
Upper Tribunal or other competent Court orders otherwise, no report  of  any
of the  proceedings  herein  or  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall,
directly or indirectly, identify any of  the  Appellants.  This  prohibition
applies to, amongst others, all parties.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the purposes of this decision I shall refer to the Appellant as  he
    was  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Mr  MO.   He  is  a  person  whose
    nationality is in contention.  His date of birth is  recorded  as  24th
    April 1982.

 2. On 12th August 2014 the Secretary of State decided to  give  notice  of
    removal pursuant to Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.
    MO appealed and his appeal was heard on 5 February 2015 by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Shergill sitting at Taylor House.  The substance of
    the appeal is not material given the issues that are before me  but  it
    was the Secretary of State's firm contention that the Appellant  was  a
    citizen of India.  That was not MO's case.  There was  evidence  before
    Judge Shergill by way of a SPRAKAB Report but the author of that report
    could not determine whether MO was Indian or Pakistani.   It  also  was
    part of the Secretary of State's case  that  MO  might  be  from  Saudi
    Arabia.  In  issue  was  whether  that  was  his  country  of  habitual
    residence.

 3. Given that the Secretary of State positively asserted  that  MO  was  a
    citizen of India contrary to the Appellant's own case,  the  burden  of
    proof was upon the Secretary of State. She has guidance on point:  'The
    Nationality, Doubtful, Disputed and Other Cases, Version 5' valid  from
    26th October 2013.  There is no issue before  me  that  the  burden  of
    proof in the appeal before Judge Shergill was indeed upon the Secretary
    of State.

 4. Judge Shergill was of the view that the appeal succeeded to the limited
    extent set out in directions which were made by  him  which  directions
    included a direction that the Secretary  of  State  should  permit  and
    consider  further  evidence  in  relation  to  nationality  and   other
    pertinent issues.

 5. The Secretary of State did consider the matter  and  on  25th  February
    2015 a further decision  was  made.   However,  on  this  occasion  the
    Secretary of State had altered her  position.   Instead  of  positively
    asserting that MO was Indian she left open the issue of nationality  on
    the basis that she could not  determine  the  matter.  Nationality  was
    categorised as "doubtful".

 6. The effect of that change of position was  that  the  burden  of  proof
    shifted back to the Appellant because nationality is an  ingredient  of
    the definition of a refugee under the 1951 Refugee Convention. If there
    were any doubt about where the burden of proof lay, then I am  assisted
    by the guidance in the case of MA [2009] EWCA Civ  289  which  followed
    the Upper Tribunal decision in MA (disputed nationality)  [2008]  UKAIT
    00032. It is now common ground amongst all concerned that the burden of
    proof was upon the Appellant.

 7. The Appellant appealed and his appeal was heard on  26th  October  2015
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fox sitting  at  Hatton  Cross.
    Judge Fox clearly had in mind  the  judgment  of  Judge  Shergill  and,
    though both parties were represented, it would seem that they  did  not
    give Judge Fox much assistance.  He was misled, though  I  do  not  say
    intentionally.  He was left to believe that the  burden  of  proof  was
    upon the Secretary of State, it was not.  Judge Fox  finding  that  the
    Secretary of State failed to satisfy  the  burden  of  proof  upon  her
    (which it was not) went on to allow the appeal.

 8. The Secretary of State made application for permission to appeal on the
    basis that the burden of proof was in fact upon the Appellant and  also
    that the issue of statelessness ought to have been considered, as ought
    the issue of the Appellant's human rights  which  were  hardly  touched
    upon in the decision of Judge Fox.

 9. On one view the Secretary of State now complains that  the  judge  fell
    into error in circumstances in which she offered very little assistance
    and arguably conceded the point. However a concession of  fact  is  one
    thing, a concession of law is another.  The judge simply  got  the  law
    wrong.  The burden of proof was on the Appellant and that means because
    clearly that error was fundamental and  therefore  material,  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is to be set aside.

10. The question is what then should I do?  My initial  view  expressed  to
    both parties was that  I  ought  simply  to  re-make  the  decision  by
    dismissing the appeal on the basis that the Appellant had the burden of
    proof and he did not discharge it.  But after some discussion with both
    parties' representatives to whom I am extremely grateful, I agree  that
    little is achieved by that approach because a finding  eventually  must
    be made.  The Appellant simply cannot be left indefinitely in limbo. It
    was urged upon me by Ms Benfield that some judicial findings need to be
    made and indeed, although Ms Everett made no concessions on the  merits
    of the appellant's appeal in the First-tier Tribunal, she agreed.

11. It is to be noted that the grounds submit that  the  Appellant's  human
    rights position at the very least needs to  be  considered.   In  those
    circumstances, with the agreement of the parties, I have  decided  that
    the proper course is to remit the matter to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    There will be no preserved findings.  The matter will start afresh  but
    for the avoidance of doubt I remind everyone  that  in  this  case  the
    issue of nationality is one which must be established and the burden is
    upon the Appellant.  If the judge in the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  not
    able to determine the nationality of the Appellant then it will be  for
    that judge, upon hearing submissions, to decide what follows, including
    a proper consideration of the Appellant's Article 3 and Article 8  ECHR
    rights.

Decision

12. The appeal of the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed.
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh before a  judge  other  than
    Judge Fox or Judge Shergill.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker


