
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04128/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th April 2015                            |On 23rd April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL



                                   Between

                                 MALEK ELAHI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal E M M Smith promulgated following a hearing on 21st July 2014.

 2. The Appellant is an Afghan citizen born 1st January 1995.   His  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse his claim for asylum and to
    remove him from the United Kingdom was heard by Judge Smith (the judge)
    on 21st July 2014 and dismissed.  The judge  heard  evidence  from  the
    Appellant and his uncle Abdul Karim Allahie.  The judge  did  not  find
    the Appellant credible, and did not find that he would be  at  risk  if
    returned to Afghanistan.  The appeal  was  dismissed  on  all  grounds,
    including Article 8 of the 1950 European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    (the 1950 Convention).

 3. The Appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal  relying  upon  three
    grounds.

 4. Firstly it was contended that the judge had failed to take into account
    or make any findings on the evidence of the Appellant's uncle  who  had
    given  evidence  at  the  hearing  that  corroborated  the  Appellant's
    account, in particular in relation to  the  Appellant's  brother  being
    killed.  The judge only assessed his evidence in  the  context  of  the
    Appellant's Article 8 claim.  Reliance was placed upon AK Turkey [2004]
    UKIAT 00230 at paragraphs 10 and 11.

 5. The second ground contended that the judge had made flawed  credibility
    findings, and the third ground contended that the judge  had  erred  in
    considering Article 8 by failing to consider adequately the Appellant's
    private life in the United Kingdom and the length of time that  he  had
    been in the United Kingdom as a minor.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Blandy who gave the following reasons for his decision;

         "The grounds of this application argue that the judge erred in  law
         in failing to assess and make relevant findings in relation to  the
         evidence of the Appellant's uncle, Abdul Karim Allahie.  I do  find
         this arguable.  That evidence was clearly relevant in  the  context
         of  its  apparent  corroboration  of   the   Appellant's   account,
         particularly having regard to the fact that the Appellant  came  to
         this country when he was still a child.  It is right that the judge
         appears to make no mention of it.  I also find it arguable that the
         judge failed to give adequate reasons for the credibility  findings
         referred to in ground 2 of the  grounds  of  this  application  and
         failed to give adequate reasons for  his  finding  in  relation  to
         proportionality in relation  to  Article  8  ECHR.   Permission  to
         appeal is accordingly granted on all grounds."

 7. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending in summary that the judge had not erred in law and  had
    directed himself appropriately, and identified clear inconsistencies in
    the Appellant's account.

 8. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.





The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. Ms Cleghorn relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal and submitted  that  the  first  ground  alone
    meant that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  fatally  flawed
    and must be set aside.  This was on the basis that the judge  had  made
    no findings whatsoever on the evidence given by the Appellant's  uncle,
    which supported the Appellant's evidence.

10. Ms Cleghorn submitted that in addition, errors of law were disclosed in
    that flawed credibility findings had been made, and in relation to  the
    assessment of Article 8, for the reasons given in the grounds contained
    within the application for permission to appeal, read with the grant of
    permission.

11. Mr Smart relied upon the rule 24 response and accepted that  the  judge
    had made no findings in relation to the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    uncle.  Mr Smart however argued that this was not material, and that it
    was difficult to see what weight should  be  placed  upon  the  uncle's
    evidence, given that he had been granted refugee status in  the  United
    Kingdom, but his evidence was  that  he  had  returned  to  Afghanistan
    following the death of the Appellant's  brother.   Mr  Smart  submitted
    that the judge did not reject the claim that  the  Appellant's  brother
    had died, but rejected the claim that he had been killed  by  the  gang
    that kidnapped the Appellant.

12. Mr Smart argued that the credibility findings made by  the  judge  were
    open to him to  make,  and  the  judge  had  carried  out  an  adequate
    proportionality assessment when considering Article 8.

13. Ms Cleghorn indicated that if the decision was set  aside,  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  afresh  as
    none of the credibility findings could stand.   Mr  Smart  agreed  that
    would be appropriate if an error of law was found to  the  effect  that
    material evidence had not been considered, but not otherwise.

14. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. I conclude that the judge erred in law  in  not  analysing  and  making
    findings upon the evidence of Abdul Karim Allahie.   This  witness  had
    provided a witness statement  dated  15th  July  2004  and  given  oral
    evidence at the hearing.

16. It cannot be said that the evidence was irrelevant to the issues to  be
    decided by the judge.  In paragraph 9  of  the  witness  statement  the
    witness claimed that he had received a telephone call to say  that  the
    Appellant's brother had been killed, and the witness then travelled  to
    Afghanistan to support the Appellant's family.   In  paragraph  10  the
    witness expressed  serious  concerns,  claiming  that  the  Appellant's
    brother had been killed by the criminal  gang  that  had  targeted  the
    Appellant's family and which had influence with the  police.   Evidence
    was also given that the Appellant could not seek  protection  from  the
    police and that he would not be able to live safely or anonymously in a
    different part of Afghanistan.

17. If this evidence had been accepted  as  credible,  the  result  of  the
    appeal may have been  different.   The  failure  to  analyse  and  make
    findings upon that evidence amounts to a material error  of  law.   The
    judge did refer to the evidence given by  the  Appellant's  uncle,  but
    only in the context of Article 8 and made no assessment of the evidence
    so far as it related to risk on return to Afghanistan.

18. In my view this makes the credibility findings unsafe, and  I  conclude
    that the grounds on this issue, do more than demonstrate a disagreement
    with the findings made by the judge, and disclose a material  error  of
    law.

19. In relation to Article 8 the Appellant had a  private  life  claim  and
    this was set out in the skeleton argument.  It was  contended  that  he
    had established a private life in the United Kingdom, and that  it  was
    relevant that this had been developed between the ages of 13 and 19, he
    having arrived in this country as a minor.  Consideration of Article  8
    by the judge considered the family  life  claim  in  the  main  with  a
    passing reference to private life in paragraph 43,  and  a  finding  in
    paragraph 47 that the Respondent's interference  with  the  Appellant's
    family and private  life  is  proportionate.   The  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Budhathoki [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) confirms that judges do not need  to
    rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case, but must identify  and
    resolve any conflicts in the evidence, and explain in clear  and  brief
    terms their reasons, so that the parties can understand why they won or
    lost.  In relation to Article 8 I find that there is an  inadequacy  of
    reasoning and therefore the decision needs to be re-made on this issue.

20. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  in  its
    entirety with no findings preserved.

21. In deciding whether to remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  I
    have  taken  into  account  paragraphs  7.2  and  7.3  of  the   Senior
    President's Practice Statements which are set out below;

         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make a decision, instead of remitting the  case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision and the  appeal  to
                  be re-made is such that, having regard to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

             7.3   Re-making  rather  than  remitting   will   nevertheless
                  constitute the  normal  approach  to  determining  appeals
                  where an error of law is found, even if some further fact-
                  finding is necessary.

22. In my view, because the appeal is to be  considered  afresh,  extensive
    fact-finding is  required,  and  it  is  appropriate  for  this  to  be
    undertaken by the First-tier Tribunal rather than the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The error of law that I found amounted to a failure  to  make  findings
    upon material evidence, and both representatives agreed  that  if  that
    were the case, it would be appropriate to remit the appeal back to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

23. The appeal will be heard by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  other  than
    Judge Smith, at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent and the parties  will  be
    given     written     notification     of     the     hearing     date.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

There was no order for anonymity made in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There
has been no request to the Upper Tribunal for an  anonymity  order,  and  in
the absence of such a request the Upper Tribunal makes no  anonymity  order.





Signed                              Date 20th April 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Any fee award is to be decided by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed                              Date 20th April 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

