
IAC-BH-PMP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04608/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent       |Determination Promulgated      |
|On 9th April 2015                            |On 24th April 2015             |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES


                                   Between

                           KARWAN IBRAHIM MOHAMMAD
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Woodhouse
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appealed against the  Respondent's  decision  dated  25th
    June 2014 to remove him from the United Kingdom, his asylum  and  human
    rights claims having been refused.  His appeal was dismissed  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal D Birrell on 27th October 2014.

 2. This was the Appellant's second unsuccessful asylum claim  in  the  UK.
    His immigration history shows that he  came  to  the  UK  in  2007  and
    claimed asylum.  His claim was  refused  and  an  appeal  against  that
    refusal was dismissed following an appeal  hearing  on  1st  May  2008.
    After his claim had  been  refused  the  Appellant  absconded  and  was
    eventually removed in 2011.

 3. So far as the present appeal  is  concerned,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the Appellant's account was lacking in credibility and  that
    in any event it would be not unreasonable to expect him to relocate  to
    the KRG.

 4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on 17th November 2014.
     Judge Kelly held that it was not open to the Appellant to  argue  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in applying Section 8 of the  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004.   The  judge  held  that  the
    Tribunal would only have erred had  it  not  applied  it  and  in  that
    respect I am sure that Judge Kelly was correct.  It  was  further  held
    that the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  consider  the  entirety  of  the
    Appellant's conduct since leaving  Iraq,  and  to  conclude  that  this
    adversely affected his credibility.  The arguments to the contrary that
    were contained in paragraphs 1 to 6 of the Appellant's grounds  do  not
    disclose any arguable error of law, and permission to appeal  on  those
    grounds was accordingly refused.

 5. However,  Judge  Kelly  considered  it  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal misapplied the guidance in MK (Documents - relocation) Iraq CG
    [2012] UKUT 126 (IAC) by finding that the Appellant could  relocate  to
    the KRG in order to escape the situation of internal armed conflict  in
    Kirkuk.  Permission to appeal was therefore restricted to  the  grounds
    that are contained within paragraphs 7 to 13 of the application.

 6. The Respondent's representative served and filed a Rule 24 response  on
    4th December 2014.  The  response  argues  that  the  First-tier  Judge
    directed herself appropriately.  It is submitted that at  paragraph  35
    of the decision the First-tier Judge made findings  open  to  her  with
    adequate reasons and refers in that paragraph to the CG case of MK.

 7. Thus the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal for  an  error  of
    law  hearing  on  9th  April  2015.    The   Appellant   was   present.
    Representation was as mentioned above.

 8. In submissions, Mr Woodhouse adopted the Grounds of  Appeal  dated  5th
    November 2014 which were submitted in support of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  He referred to a death certificate purporting to
    show that the Appellant's  cousin  was  killed  by  gunshots  fired  by
    terrorists.  This is one of three documents which  the  Respondent,  in
    the reasons for refusal letter, found to be  unreliable  and  that  the
    submission of such documents undermined  the  Appellant's  credibility.
    At paragraph 25 of the decision, the First-tier  Judge  refers  to  the
    fact that the Appellant's account was that  his  cousin  was  shot  and
    killed in the night of "29/30 September 2013".  This  was  the  version
    given in his screening interview, initial witness statement and  asylum
    interview.  However, a translation of the death certificate states that
    the date of death was 20th September 2011 i.e. ten days earlier.  As  a
    result, the First-tier Judge considered  that  this  document  was  not
    reliable.  Mr Woodhouse agreed that the translation giving the date  as
    20th September 2011 is inconsistent with the Appellant's claim  but  he
    submitted that this could be due to a simple error.  A  translation  at
    Annex D6 in the Respondent's bundle gives the date  as  30th  September
    2011 which is consistent with the claim.

 9. Referring to paragraphs 7 to 13 of the application for  permission  (to
    which permission to appeal was limited), Mr  Woodhouse  submitted  that
    the First-tier Judge gave inadequate  consideration  to  the  issue  of
    internal flight.  At paragraph 32 of the decision, the judge  concluded
    that the Appellant could relocate  to  Kurdistan  or  to  Baghdad.   No
    consideration had been given to the need for a food  ration  card.   In
    this respect Mr Woodhouse submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  were
    contrary to the guidance given in MK.  He submitted that the  Appellant
    would be at risk in the Kurdish regional area and therefore it would be
    unduly harsh to expect him to relocate there.  Inadequate consideration
    had been given to the matter of a PDS card which amounted to a material
    error of law.

10. For the Respondent, Mr McVeety submitted that the general  findings  in
    the country guidance decision in MK do not support the Appellant.   The
    general findings are at paragraph 88.  At  paragraph  88(2)  the  Upper
    Tribunal held that relocation to the  KRG  is  in  general  reasonable.
    Entry into and residence in the  KRG  can  be  effected  by  any  Iraqi
    national with a CSID, INC and PDS, after registration  with  the  local
    security office.  An Arab may need a Sponsor; a Kurd will not.   Living
    conditions in the KRG for a person who has  re-located  there  are  not
    without difficulties, but there are jobs, and there is access  to  free
    healthcare facilities, education, rented  accommodation  and  financial
    and other support from UNHCR.

11. Mr McVeety pointed out that there are direct flights twice a week  from
    Manchester to Sulymaniya.  He submitted that the First-tier  Judge  had
    applied the country guidance in MK correctly.

12. So far as the date of the death certificate is  concerned,  Mr  McVeety
    submitted that this is a matter which should have been addressed by the
    Appellant's  representative  at  the  hearing  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.  He pointed out  that  either  translation  could  be  wrong.
    There was no way of knowing which version, if either, was correct.

13. I have considered the First-tier Tribunal's decision and reasons in the
    light  of  the  submissions  and  I  have  also  reminded  myself  that
    permission to appeal was limited as mentioned above.   I  am  satisfied
    that the First-tier Judge has given  adequate  and  cogent  reasons  in
    support of her adverse credibility findings.  I am also satisfied  that
    she has correctly applied the country guidance in MK  when  considering
    the issue of internal relocation.  Her conclusion that it would not  be
    unreasonable for the Appellant to  relocate  to  the  KRG  is  properly
    reasoned and in accordance with the country guidance.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of any material error on a point of law.  I uphold the  determination
and dismiss the appeal.



Signed        Date 23rd April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates
