
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04102/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 15 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Chelvan of Counsel, instructed by Asylum Aid


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cooper promulgated on  3  September  2015  in
    which he allowed BK's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision
    to refuse to grant asylum.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I shall refer  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent and to BK as the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted, and while not restricted, stated that
    it was arguable that the judge only had evidence of  discrimination  of
    homosexuals in Russia, not evidence of persecution.

 4. At the hearing Mr. Bramble produced a copy of a minute made by  Harriet
    Murphy, the HOPO at the hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  dated  5
    August 2015 which set out  her  notes  of  what  had  occurred  at  the
    hearing.

 5. Mr. Bramble stated that he was relying only on paragraphs 3, 4 and 6 of
    the grounds of appeal.  He had not had the opportunity to consider  the
    Rule 24 Response provided by the Appellant's  representative.   I  gave
    him some time to consider this in relation to paragraphs 3, 4 and 6  of
    the grounds of appeal.  Following this, he was referred by Mr.  Chelvan
    to the letters sent  by  the  Appellant's  UK  representatives  to  his
    Belgian representatives.  He was also referred to the asylum  interview
    (pages 8 to 10 of Tab A of the Appellant's bundle).   On  consideration
    of these documents, Mr. Bramble conceded that paragraphs 3 and 4 of the
    grounds of appeal fell away and that he was no longer relying on  these
    grounds.

 6. In the light of this,  Mr.  Chelvan  submitted  that  ground  6,  which
    related to the evidence of the  treatment  of  homosexuals  in  Russia,
    could not be material.  The concession by Mr. Bramble that  he  was  no
    longer relying on grounds 3 and 4 meant that there was no challenge  to
    the decision that the Appellant fell to be regarded as a refugee on the
    grounds of his imputed political opinion, as  found  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph [47].  Therefore any  finding  in  relation  to  the  further
    ground on which the Appellant was claiming asylum was immaterial.

 7. Paragraph [47] of the decision states:

         "I therefore conclude that there is a real risk that on  return  to
         Russia/ Chechnya the Appellant will be persecuted on the grounds of
         imputed political opinion.  Given that the risk would arise at  the
         airport, the question of internal relocation does not arise."

 8. Given the confirmation by Mr. Bramble that he was no longer relying  on
    paragraphs 3 and 4 of the grounds such that the  finding  in  paragraph
    [47] stood, even if there were to be an error of  law  in  the  judge's
    consideration of the Appellant's treatment in Russia on account of  his
    homosexuality, I find that this could not be material  given  that  the
    Appellant had already been found to be a  refugee  on  account  of  his
    imputed political opinion.

Error of law decision

The decision does not involve the making of an error on a point of  law  and
I do not set it aside.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Directions

The Rule 24 Response contains an application for a wasted costs  order  made
under rule 10 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   There
was a brief discussion of this at the hearing.   Mr.  Bramble  confirmed  at
the hearing that he had not had any communication with the draftsman of  the
grounds of appeal and, as he had only seen the Rule 24 Response on  the  day
of the hearing, he had not prepared any response  to  this  application.   I
therefore make a direction that the  Respondent  file  within  14  days  any
response to the wasted costs order application.


Signed   Date 14 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
