

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      AA/04056/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 4th November 2014                         |On: 6th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NCC
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:           Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
                       Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Trinidad and Tobago date of birth  29th
    December 1988. On the 17th July 2014  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Lloyd-Smith) allowed  his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to remove him from the UK pursuant to s10 of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999.  The  appeal  was  allowed  on  human  rights  and
    humanitarian  protection  grounds.  The  Secretary  of  State  now  has
    permission to appeal against that decision.


 2. The Respondent's claim to international protection was that he is a gay
    man. He submitted that he had already suffered  very  serious  harm  in
    Trinidad and Tobago as a result  of  his  membership  of  a  particular
    social group and that the state had failed to protect him.  He  further
    submitted that return would result in a breach of Article  3  ECHR  and
    Article 8 because he is now HIV+ and would not be able  to  access  the
    necessary medication.


 3. The Secretary of State accepted that the Respondent is gay and that  he
    is from Trinidad and Tobago.  It was accepted that he is HIV+.  It  was
    further accepted that he had  suffered  serious  harm  including  being
    carjacked and raped, being assaulted with a bottle,  having  his  house
    broken into and  homophobic  graffiti  sprayed  on  the  wall.  It  was
    accepted that societal discrimination and  harassment  is  an  on-going
    problem.  The Secretary of State was not however satisfied that all, or
    any, of these incidents could  be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant was gay.  A further claim, that the Respondent  had  been  in
    attendance at a New Years Eve party which was  attacked  by  homophobic
    thugs,  was  rejected  because  of  perceived  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence.  Overall the Respondent was not satisfied that the  level  of
    discrimination and harassment suffered by homosexuals in  Trinidad  and
    Tobago was "such that it reached the  level  of  persecution";  it  was
    further found that the state would offer a sufficiency of protection.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal begins its consideration by noting that much of
    what the Respondent says was accepted. In light of that acceptance, and
    the country background material, the Tribunal finds as  fact  that  the
    carjacking and gang-rape of the Respondent in 2008 were because he is a
    gay man.  It is further  accepted  that  his  house  was  broken  into,
    vandalised and homophobic graffiti sprayed in 2009.   Judge Lloyd-Smith
    notes that the Respondent's evidence is supported in large  measure  by
    the country background which notes that homosexuality  is  illegal  and
    that society at large considers it to be "immoral and  unnatural".  She
    refers to the  country  guidance  case  of  MB  (inability  to  provide
    protection -JAM) Trinidad and Tobago CG [2010] UKUT 448 (IAC)  and  the
    concerns set out therein about the crisis in policing on  the  islands.
    In the context of this claim that evidence accords with the evidence of
    the Respondent himself that he received no support from law enforcement
    officials  and  the  country  background  material  that  gay  men  are
    reluctant to report crimes because of  a  fear  of  harassment  by  the
    police and court officials.  At paragraph  20  of  the  decision  these
    findings are distilled into the following findings:


         "there are substantial grounds for believing that harm  would  come
         to him on return to Trinidad. It seems apparent that the police are
         unable or unwilling to offer the required protection. The appellant
         would  be  forced  to  live  a  secret  life  living  covertly  and
         concealing his sexuality...it follows therefore that on return  the
         appellant would face a real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm  and
         consequently he is entitled to humanitarian protection"




    Having made those findings the appeal was allowed on human  rights  and
    humanitarian protection grounds.

 5. In respect of asylum the determination says this at 19:


         "Despite  the  above  findings  the  objective  material  does  not
         conclude that homosexuals in Trinidad will suffer from persecution.
         Therefore I cannot find that this appellant is a refugee..."


    The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.


 6. The Secretary of State now appeals on the grounds that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was perverse. It is submitted that it cannot be
    correct to allow the appeal on humanitarian protection  grounds  if  it
    could not be allowed on asylum grounds. The reasons given  fall  within
    the refugee convention.


 7. In a bizarre twist the Rule 24  response  prepared  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent by his  representatives  actually  asks  me  to  uphold  the
    decision on the grounds that "it was open to the Judge to find that the
    Appellant may not be at risk of persecution but would  be  at  risk  of
    serious harm (and) significant harm"


    Error of Law

 8. The matters in issue before the First-tier Tribunal were  narrow.  Much
    of what  the  Respondent  had  said  had  already  been  accepted.  The
    reasoning of the refusal letter was that there was no reason  to  think
    that the atrocious persecution already endured by the Respondent was in
    any way connected to his sexuality. That  was  frankly  nonsensical  in
    light of the accepted fact that people had broken into  his  house  and
    sprayed homophobic messages on the wall and  that  when  he  was  being
    raped the Respondent was being called "pretty boy".   Whilst  some  gay
    men may be able to live in Trinidad and Tobago and suffer no more  than
    discrimination, harassment and the disapproval of society, it was clear
    from the facts that this was not the case for this gay  man.  The  only
    matters in issue were whether the  persecution  was  for  a  Convention
    Reason, and whether there would be a sufficiency of protection.


 9. This is, for the most part, a perfectly lucid and clear  determination.
    The First-tier Tribunal accepts that the  persecution  already  endured
    was for reasons of the Respondent's membership of a  particular  social
    group. There had been no sufficiency of protection for him in the past,
    and there was no reason to conclude, on the evidence before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, that this had changed.  These findings are all well made
    and were open to the Judge on the evidence before her.

10. Paragraph 19 is something  of  an  aberration  from  the  rest  of  the
    reasoning. It may be that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  referred  to
    evidence showing that not  all  homosexuals  in  the  country  do  face
    persecution, but that was not a basis upon which to dismiss this appeal
    on asylum grounds. Nor was it a basis upon which to allow it under  the
    head of humanitarian protection.

11. I find that paragraph 19 contains an error of law. The  fact  that  the
    country background material did not conclude that  all  homosexuals  in
    Trinidad face persecution did not mean that the Tribunal was  precluded
    from allowing the appeal on  refugee  grounds.  That  was  because  the
    Tribunal had already made clear findings of fact that  this  homosexual
    man had suffered Convention persecution in the recent past,  and  there
    had not been a sufficiency of protection for  him.  There  was  on  the
    evidence no reason to suppose that such  a  sufficiency  of  protection
    would be forthcoming now or in the future.   On the facts as  found  by
    the First-tier Tribunal he is a refugee.  If he is a refugee, he is not
    entitled to humanitarian protection.

12. In respect of the decision to allow the appeal on human rights grounds,
    this has not been challenged by the Secretary of State.  That  decision
    is upheld.


    Decisions

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that it must be set aside.

14. I re-make the decision in the following terms:

    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


      The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he is
      a refugee.


      The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".

15. In view of the sensitive nature  of  the  evidence  in  this  case,  in
    particular that the Appellant is a survivor of sexual violence,  I make
    a direction for anonymity in the following terms:


         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
         Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings".



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             4th November
                                    2014
