


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04999/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Sent           |
|On : 30 October 2013                          |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                                     AM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, instructed by Cavendish Legal Group
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This matter  comes  before  me  following  a  grant  of  permission  to  the
appellant to appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Swaniker
dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision to remove  him  from
the United Kingdom.

The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born in November 1970. He  claims  to
have arrived in the UK on 31 August 2000, having previously come here  as  a
visitor for one month in July 1998. He applied for asylum on 24 March  2009.
His claim was refused on 12 May 2009 and his appeal  against  that  decision
dismissed on 27 June 2009.  Following  an  order  for  reconsideration,  the
appeal was reconsidered by the Upper Tribunal on 5 March 2010 but was  again
dismissed and the appellant's appeal  rights  were  exhausted  on  30  March
2010. On 23 August 2011 he  submitted  further  representations,  but  these
were rejected on 29 September  2011.  Following  the  appellant's  assertion
that the representations amounted to a fresh claim, a further  decision  was
made by the respondent on 9 May 2013 and was accompanied by  a  decision  to
remove him from the United Kingdom, giving rise to an appeal which was  then
heard before the First-tier Tribunal on 25 June 2013.  That  appeal  was  in
turn dismissed and it is against that decision that  the  appellant  sought,
and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

The Appellant's initial claim

The basis of the appellant's claim, made in March 2009, was that he  was  at
risk of persecution in Zimbabwe as a result of his former role as  a  record
company marketing manager. He  provided  various  differing  accounts  which
were summarised by the Upper Tribunal in its decision of 16 March  2010  and
which I summarise again as follows. The appellant claimed to  have  been  an
MDC supporter. He worked in Zimbabwe for  the  Zimbabwe  Music  Corporation,
also known as Spin Along, a privately owned music distribution company.  His
responsibility  was  marketing  and  as  such  he   authorised   music   for
distribution  and  radio  airplay.  The  music  included  pieces  by  banned
musicians.  The  appellant  initially  claimed  to   have   experienced   no
difficulties with the Zimbabwean authorities and to have come to the  United
Kingdom for the purposes of education. However he also gave  an  account  of
his colleagues in the company having been arrested and tortured in 1999  but
being released when someone else took the blame, at which  time  he  escaped
from the country (a claim which he later denied having made).  He  undertook
studies in the United Kingdom with funding from the company, but  the  funds
ceased either in 2000 or November 2002 and he  discovered  that  his  former
colleagues had gone missing. He was told that the authorities  were  looking
for him and his family warned him not to return to Zimbabwe.

The First-tier Tribunal made some adverse credibility findings  against  the
appellant and found that there was no reason why  he  would  be  of  adverse
interest to the Zimbabwean authorities  on  return  to  that  country.  That
decision was, however, set aside by the Upper Tribunal on the  grounds  that
it was unclear which  elements  of  the  appellant's  claim  the  judge  had
accepted and which he had not  and  that  both  his  fact-finding  and  risk
assessment were incomplete and inadequate.

Having reconsidered the appeal and heard from  the  appellant,  his  claimed
partner and a witness, Designated Judge  Manuell,  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,
made adverse credibility findings and dismissed the  appeal.  He  found  the
appellant to be a "fluent liar, willing to say  anything  which  served  his
perceived advantage" and considered that he had been  dishonest  in  seeking
to dissociate himself from the record  of  his  screening  interview  and  a
draft statement which had set out varying accounts of his  claim.  He  found
the witnesses to be equally lacking in credibility.  The  judge  found  that
the appellant was a former  employee  of  a  Zimbabwean  music  company  who
became an overstayer after his sponsorship ran out  and  made  a  fictitious
asylum claim at the last moment possible. He noted that on  the  appellant's
own case he was not a member of the MDC and that the only branch of the  MDC
he claimed to  support,  namely  the  Southend  branch,  was  not  currently
recognised by the MDC  itself.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  was
unknown to the  Zimbabwean  authorities  and  that,  having  regard  to  the
country guidance at that time,  RN  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
00083 there was no risk that he would be persecuted on  return.  The  appeal
was accordingly dismissed  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
rights grounds.

The Appellant's current claim

The  appellant's  new  claim  was  set  out  in  representations  from   his
representatives dated 4 August 2011, and was on the basis of his  sur  place
activities for the Southend branch of the MDC in the United Kingdom. It  was
claimed that he was the web  designer  and  administrator  of  the  branch's
website and also administered the website of the MDC-UK  and  Ireland  South
East district.

The respondent, in their initial consideration of the claim on 29  September
2011, noted the adverse credibility findings made by the Upper Tribunal  and
also took account of the documents produced for the  new  claim,  consisting
of  numerous  copies  of  photographs  of  the  appellant  at  meetings  and
demonstrations in the United Kingdom, from which it was considered that  the
appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate  how  the  CIO  or  the   Zimbabwean
authorities would be able to identify him as an individual. With  regard  to
newspaper reports produced by the appellant, the respondent considered  that
those were of a general nature and not specific to him. Regard  was  had  to
two letters purporting to confirm the appellant's  high  ranking  membership
of the MDC and receipt of "hate emails" which were not accorded weight.  The
respondent noted, from minutes that had been produced of MDC meetings,  that
the appellant  was  not  recorded  as  having  taken  any  active  part  and
considered his involvement in the local branch of  the  party  to  be  self-
serving. It was not considered that  he  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
Zimbabwe.

Further and more detailed consideration was given by the respondent  to  the
representations and documents in their subsequent letter of 9 May 2013.  The
respondent accepted that the appellant had attended  some  MDC  meetings  in
the United  Kingdom  and  that  he  had  an  involvement  in  the  blog  and
distribution to members but considered that that was simply  an  attempt  to
bolster an otherwise weak  claim.  The  respondent  noted,  from  a  general
internet search in the appellant's name, that he was mostly  connected  with
social networking and photographic/media work and it was not  accepted  that
the Zimbabwean authorities would have knowledge of  his  claimed  activities
within the MDC in the United Kingdom. The respondent  did  not  accept  that
the appellant was a committed political  activist  and,  in  line  with  the
country guidance in CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG  [2013]
UKUT 59, considered  that  he  would  be  of  no  adverse  interest  to  the
authorities and at no risk on  return  to  Zimbabwe.  The  respondent  noted
further that the appellant  had  not  raised  family  life  in  his  further
submissions, but nevertheless considered his relationship with his  partner,
whom he  claimed  to  have  traditionally  married  in  December  1999,  and
concluded that family life had not been established on that  basis.  It  was
not accepted that his removal from the United Kingdom would  breach  Article
8 of the ECHR.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

In the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Swaniker heard from the appellant and  his
partner and found  neither  to  be  credible  witnesses.  She  found  little
further credible  evidence  to  point  to  the  appellant's  position  being
materially different to that before Designated Judge Manuell. She noted  the
appellant's claim to have been elected in  February  2011  to  the  post  of
executive member of the MDC  in  the  United  Kingdom.  She  considered  two
letters, dated 25 July 2011, from the branch  secretary  of  the  MDC  UK  &
Ireland Southend-on-Sea branch and from the  MDC-  UK  South  East  District
Secretary, but attached little weight  to  them.  She  considered  that  the
appellant, when questioned about his election to  executive  member  of  the
MDC, was making up his evidence as he went along, and that he had  used  his
skills in information technology to create the documents  he  had  submitted
and to manipulate the internet items. She did not accept that the  appellant
had any real commitment to the MDC, noting his lack  of  regular  attendance
at meetings, and concluded that his involvement with the party had been  for
the purpose of creating and supporting an asylum claim. She found that  even
if taken at its highest, the appellant had not engaged  in  activities  that
would have brought him to the attention of the Zimbabwean authorities.

The judge noted the appellant's attempt, at the hearing, to google  the  MDC
UK websites to find evidence  in  support  of  his  claim  that  there  were
internet records revealing his involvement with the MDC and found  that  his
inability to find such evidence with ease was indicative  of  the  inability
of the Zimbabwean authorities to access such records.  She  noted  that  the
appellant's partner's asylum claim had been accepted  by  the  Tribunal  and
that she had been granted refugee status, but she did  not  find  that  that
detracted from the adverse credibility findings  made  about  the  appellant
himself. The judge did not accept that the appellant and  his  partner  were
in a genuine relationship and accordingly did not find that  her  successful
claim took his case any further forward. She did not accept  that  he  would
be at risk on return to Zimbabwe  and  found  that  his  removal  would  not
breach Article 8.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on  the  grounds  that
the judge had misdirected herself as to the test  to  be  applied  in  human
rights appeals and had wrongly taken account of the appellant's  ability  to
lie about his political opinions in assessing whether he would  be  at  risk
on return; that her conclusion that the documentary evidence was forged  was
unfair and irrational; that she had failed to consider a number  of  witness
statements; that she had failed to give any weight to the relevant  findings
of the Tribunal in the  appeal  of  his  wife;  that  her  approach  to  the
appellant's evidence as to the extent of his involvement in  and  commitment
to the MDC failed to take account of all relevant  evidence;  and  that  her
conclusions as to the inability of the  CIO  at  Harare  airport  to  access
details of the appellant from internet searches was unreasonable.

Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

Appeal hearing

 The appeal came before me on 30 October 2013 and  I  heard  submissions  on
the error of law.

Mr Jones expanded upon the grounds of appeal, submitting that the judge  had
taken the wrong approach in expecting the appellant to  lie  on  arrival  to
Harare airport; that her approach to the documentary  evidence  was  unfair,
irrational and inconsistent; that she had  erred  in  her  approach  to  the
Upper Tribunal decision in his partner's appeal;  that  she  had  failed  to
give adequate consideration to the statements from the witnesses;  and  that
her findings, that the records of the appellant's involvement with  the  MDC
could not be accessed with ease, were wrong.

Ms Martin submitted that the judge had not erred in law.  She  was  entitled
to find as she did about the appellant's lack  of  profile  and  involvement
with the MDC; she was entitled to place no weight upon the evidence  of  the
authors of the statements in the light of their absence  from  the  hearing;
she did not need to go on to consider the findings of fact in  the  decision
in his partner's appeal because she did not  accept  that  he  was  involved
with the Southend branch of the MDC; and she was entitled to find  that  the
appellant was not easily identifiable through a search of the internet.

I advised the parties that in my view the judge had made material errors  of
law in her decision such that it had to be set aside in its entirety and re-
made. My reasons for so concluding are as follows.

Consideration and Findings

I find particular merit in Mr Jones' second  ground  of  appeal  and  am  in
agreement with his submission that the judge's approach to the evidence,  in
particular the documentary evidence, was flawed.  At  paragraph  17  of  her
determination she made the following finding on the documentary evidence  "I
note from  the  evidence  before  me  that  he  is  skilled  in  information
technology and I consider that he has created these documents and  concocted
or manipulated the internet items and 'records'  for  the  purposes  of  his
latest asylum claim/ appeal."  It  appears  that,  contrary  to  my  initial
reading of that finding, the judge was  referring  to  all  the  documentary
evidence before her, and  not  merely  the  two  documents  referred  to  at
paragraph 16. It also  appears  to  me  from  the  wording  she  used  that,
contrary to the suggestion in the respondent's Rule 24 response,  the  judge
was making an actual finding of forgery with respect to the  documents.  Yet
that was inconsistent with the respondent's own view of  the  documents,  as
set out at paragraphs 20 to 26 of the refusal letter of 9 May 2013,  whereby
it was considered that the documents added little weight to the  appellant's
claim to be of adverse  interest  to  the  Zimbabwean  authorities,  but  no
suggestion of forgery was made.  It  was  also  inconsistent  with  her  own
findings whereby she accepted, on the basis  of  the  documentary  evidence,
that the appellant  had  attended  MDC  meetings.  Indeed,  other  than  the
findings of the previous Tribunal in regard to the appellant's overall  lack
of credibility with respect to  his  earlier  claim,  the  judge  failed  to
identify any evidential basis upon which she  reached  the  conclusion  that
the documents he had produced had been manipulated and fabricated.

It seems to me that the judge's approach to  the  documentary  evidence  was
material to her decision in  that  it  formed  a  significant  part  of  her
overall  adverse  credibility  findings.  Furthermore,  a  reading  of  that
evidence would suggest that the appellant's role  within  the  MDC  included
website  design,  marketing  and  publicity  for  his  local   branch,   and
accordingly if the judge had accepted some of the documentary  evidence,  as
she appeared  to  do  at  paragraph  20  despite  her  adverse  findings  at
paragraph 17, it is reasonable to assume that,  absent  other  reasons,  she
would have accepted that he had held such a role. Yet she did not  give  any
such reasons or make any findings in that regard and, whilst she found  that
the appellant did not hold any political profile within  the  MDC  and  that
his involvement with the organisation was at a low level, she did  not  make
any clear findings as to what his profile was. In that  respect,  therefore,
her conclusion as to the appellant's low level of  involvement  in  the  MDC
was not an adequately reasoned one and her assessment of risk on return  did
not take account of all relevant factors and was thus incomplete.

For these reasons I find that the judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  her
decision and that her findings cannot stand and her decision has to  be  set
aside in its entirety. As such there  is  no  need  for  me  to  go  on  and
consider the other grounds of appeal.

Both parties agreed that, in such circumstances, it was appropriate for  the
appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with  afresh,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before  any  judge  aside  from  Judge  Swaniker,
Designated Judge Manuell and Judge Brown. No findings are preserved.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I continue that
    order, pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.





    Signed                                  Date 1st November 2013
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
