
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04665/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23 October 2014                         |On 11 November 2014        |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                IlYAS SHINWARI
                         (anonymity order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr D Sills of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr S Whitworth, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State and the respondent is a citizen
    of Afghanistan born on 1 June 1982.  However, for convenience, I  refer
    below to Mr Ilyas as the appellant and to the Secretary of State as the
    respondent, which are the designations they had before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herbert  OBE
    promulgated on 7 August 2014, allowing the appellant's  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State made on 26 June 2014,  in  which
    the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection  and  pursuant  to  Article  8  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. Permission was granted by first Tribunal Judge Heynes  on  2  September
    2014 stating that it is arguable that the Judge reversed the burden  of
    proof in relation to documentation and failed to apply Gulshan (article
    8-new rules-UKUT 640 (IAC) and failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the appellant's removal would be disproportionate.

The First-tier Tribunal's Findings

 4. The Judge found the following in his determination,  in  summary.   The
    appellant's account was wholly consistent with the background objective
    materials and plausible. The appellant gave a very detailed and careful
    account of the appellant's involvement with the British  Army  and  the
    missions that he had been on with 42 Marine Commando. He found that the
    original documentation supplied by the  appellant  was  of  significant
    value and that there was no credible evidence before  him  to  discount
    its veracity. The responsibility of  disproving  these  documents  once
    they have been submitted to the respondent fell  on  the  Home  Office.
    There is no evidence from the British Army to say that he did not  work
    for them. Although the respondent states that checks were made with the
    British Army there is nothing from the British Army itself  to  suggest
    that the appellant did not work for them and the documents clearly show
    that the appellant was a corporal. These  records  could  clearly  been
    identified  by  the   respondent.   The   appellant's   documents   and
    testimonials are credible documents. The appellant was  an  interpreter
    with the  British  Army  and  therefore  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Afghanistan.

 5. In respect of Article 8 the Judge was satisfied that the  appellant  is
    in a durable relationship with this partner who has indefinite leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom. The removal of  the  appellant  would  be
    disproportionate to the maintenance of immigration  control  given  the
    fact that he has lived with this partner for a period of just over  two
    years. He allows the appeal pursuant to Article 8.

The respondent's grounds of appeal

 6. The respondent's grounds of appeal state the following in summary.  The
    Judge made a material misdirection of law when he reversed  the  burden
    of proof in relation to the appellant's claim to have  worked  for  the
    British Army  as  an  interpreter.  The  Judge  failed  to  follow  the
    principles in the case of Tanveer Ahmed that it is for the appellant to
    show that a document on which he seeks to rely on can be relied on.

 7. The Judge misdirected himself by failing to apply the correct  approach
    to the appellant's Article 8 claim as outlined in the case of  Gulshan.
    The Judge failed to give adequate reasons for his finding that it would
    be not proportionate for the appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

The hearing

 8. At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in the determination.

 9. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Whitwell adopted the grounds of
    appeal and submitted in summary as follows.  He said that on  the  face
    of it the documents permitted by the  appellant  not  credible  as  for
    example the letter from the appellants alleged Commanding  Officer  had
    many mistakes in spelling. He said it is not the responsibility of  the
    Secretary of State to disprove the document but it is for the appellant
    to show that the documents are credible. The Home Office made their own
    checks and found that there is no record of the appellant had being  in
    the British army. In respect of the second ground which raises  article
    8,  did  not  make  a  proper  assessment   for   why   it   would   be
    disproportionate for the appellant to return to his  home  country.  He
    submitted that the determination should be set aside.

10. Mr Sills adopted his Rule 24 response and his written argument said  in
    summary the following. The appellant complies with the requirements  of
    Tanveer Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318. The Judge at paragraph 34 sets out the
    oral evidence and finds it credible and plausible. The Judge considered
    all the evidence and  came  to  a  sustainable  conclusion.  There  are
    particular circumstances in an individual case where it is incumbent on
    the Secretary of State to make enquiries. Although the respondent  said
    that they had bid enquiries there is no indication as to what enquiries
    were made. There is no indication that the right name for the appellant
    was searched. The appellant provided photographs and to identity  cards
    with names. There were no enquiries made  about  these  documents.  The
    Judge was entitled to find  that  the  burden  of  proof  fell  on  the
    respondent in respect of the documents.  Even  if  there  are  spelling
    mistakes in the documents it is possible that  soldiers  make  spelling
    mistakes. In respect of the insignia which  the  respondent  claims  is
    different this is upon the respondent having googled the  insignia  and
    see it as different. References made to the Singh v Belgium case  where
    it was found that documents from the UNCHR should have been verified by
    the respondent. It is the responsibility of the Secretary of  State  to
    check their own army document and the Judge was entitled  to  find  so.
    The proper procedure for verification has not been  followed.  Even  if
    there is certain errors they are not material  because  the  judge  has
    assessed matters in the round. It is accepted that the Judges reasoning
    for article 8 was brief but he  found  that  the  appellant  was  in  a
    durable relationship.

11. Mr Whitwell in reply said that the error of law  in  the  determination
    was in the Judge reversing the burden of proof.



Findings as to whether there is an error of law

12. At paragraph 34 of the determination the Judge stated that the original
    documentation supplied by the appellant was of  significant  value  and
    there was no credible evidence before him to discount its veracity.  He
    stated "the responsibility for disproving these documents once they had
    been submitted to the respondent fell on the Home  Office".  The  Judge
    further noted that although the respondent stated that  they  had  made
    checks with the British Army there is nothing in itself to suggest that
    the appellant did not work for the British Army given that the identity
    documents and the employee record cards provided by the  appellant  are
    very specific about the corporal and the sergeant's name  that  were  a
    members of the British Army.

13. The Judge fell into material  error  because  it  is  evident  that  he
    reversed the burden of proof and  said  that  once  the  appellant  has
    provided documents that he works for the British Army  the  burden  now
    lies on the respondent to prove that the appellant had not  worked  for
    them. It was argued on behalf of the appellant that the case of Singh v
    Belgium applies in this  case  that  it  was  the  legal  duty  of  the
    respondent to make checks with the British Army.

14. I do not understand this case to say that the burden  of  proof  is  no
    longer on the appellant.  The  Judge  also  fell  into  error  when  he
    disregarded the respondent's evidence that  they  had  conducted  their
    checks which did not yield any results.

15.  The  Judge's  determination  does  not  indicate  that  he  gave   any
    consideration to the principles in Tanver Ahmed  that  it  is  for  the
    appellant to prove that the document he seeks to rely on can be  relied
    upon.

16. The Judge did not take into account the anomalies in the documents such
    as spelling mistakes and the anomalies in the insignia British Army but
    instead said that the burden is  on  the  respondent  to  disprove  the
    documents by conducting their own checks.

17. There is also nothing in  the  determination  to  indicate  that  Judge
    considered Article 8 other than to say that he is  satisfied  that  the
    appellant is in a durable relationship with someone who has  indefinite
    leave to remain. He did not conduct  a  proportionality  exercise.  The
    Judge did not consider guidelines set out in the case of  Gulshan  that
    it would require  exceptional  and  compelling  circumstances  for  the
    appellant to succeed pursuant to Article 8 when he cannot  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules which are Article 8 compliant.

18. I am ultimately satisfied  that  there  is  a  material  error  in  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  that  he  reversed  the
    burden of proof and there is nothing in the determination to show  that
    he gave sufficient consideration to points  adverse  to  the  documents
    that were set out in the reasons for refusal decision.

19. Consequential to my finding that there is a material error  of  law,  I
    set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal preserving  none
    of the findings.



  20. Both parties agreed in such an event, the appeal ought to be sent back
      to the First tier- Tribunal so that findings of fact can  be  made.  I
      agreed that this was the proper course  of  action  to  take  in  this
      appeal in accordance with section 7. 2 (b) (i) the Senior  President's
      Practice Statement of 25 September 2012 as we were of  the  view  that
      the appeal requires judicial fact-finding and should to be  considered
      by the First-tier Tribunal.


21. The re-making of the decision on appeal will be undertaken by a  First-
    tier Judge in the First-tier Tribunal other than by First-tier Tribunal
    Herbert OBE on a date to be notified


Decision




  22. The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed and the determination
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside.  The case is remitted to
      the First-tier Tribunal for re-determination.



Signed by

Mrs S Chana Date 9th day of November 2014

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Judge

