
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04818/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 November 2015                  |On 27 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                     U Z
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, instructed by Cartwright King
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                             ORDER FOR REMITTAL

Preliminary

    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in relation to  the
    appellants  because  of  the  nature  of  the  case.   I  consider   it
    appropriate to make  a  similar  order  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  under
    Procedural Rule 14(1) to prohibit the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    To give effect to this order the appellant is to be referred to by  the
    initials above.

 1. At the end of my decision of 25 August 2015, having  found  that  there
    was an error on a point of law in the decision and reasons statement of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes, I indicated that I would need to hear
    from the parties to decide how to dispose of the appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  As a  result  a  for-mention  hearing  was  arranged  on  10
    November 2015.

 2. At the resumed hearing, Ms Pettersen confirmed that the Home Office was
    not in a position to withdraw the decision  appealed  against  because:
    (1) the appellant was appealing against sentence and  the  Home  Office
    wished to know the outcome of that appeal before deciding what  further
    action might be taken against the appellant, and (2) given  the  length
    of sentence it was  too  early  to  invoke  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions.  As a result Ms Pettersen and Ms Rutherford agreed that the
    appropriate course was to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.



 3. The representatives agreed with the following directions.
          a. The remitted hearing can be  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal
             judge other than Judge Parkes.
          b. The findings made by Judge Parkes  relating  to  international
             protection are preserved.
          c. The remitted appeal is  limited  to  issues  relating  to  the
             appellant's private and family life rights.
          d. The appellant and his wife will give evidence.
          e. As there is no deportation decision, the  First-tier  Tribunal
             will not consider part 13 of the immigration rules relating to
             deportation (paragraphs 398 ff in particular).
          f. Given the facts in this appeal, the First-tier  Tribunal  will
             have to consider article 8 ECHR directly;  if  it  finds  that
             article 8(1) is engaged, then it will have regard to  sections
             117B and 117C of the 2002 Act.
          g.  In  respect  of  section  117C,  although  the  appellant  is
             appealing against sentence, it is accepted that  the  sentence
             will not be  reduced  below  four  years  and  the  First-tier
             Tribunal can proceed on that agreement even if there has  been
             no final outcome regarding the appeal against sentence.

Order

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing  as
per the directions given above.




                               Signed        Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
