
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05567/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th March 2016                            |On 11th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [A M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on [  ]  1983.   The  Appellant
    left Iran on 16th November 2013 travelling  overland  to  Turkey,  then
    onward by lorry to the United Kingdom,  arriving  in  the  UK  on  17th
    December 2013.  The Appellant claimed asylum on his arrest  on  arrival
    by the police based on a fear that if returned to Iran  he  would  face
    mistreatment due  to  his  political  opinion.   That  application  was
    refused by Notice of Refusal dated 13th March 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before the panel  of  Judges
    of the First-tier Tribunal Lever and Hudson sitting  at  Manchester  on
    16th June 2015.  In a decision and reasons  promulgated  on  29th  June
    2015 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds and the Appellant was found not to be entitled to  humanitarian
    protection.  On 11th July 2015 Grounds of Appeal were lodged  with  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 23rd  July  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford
    refused permission to appeal.

 3. On 1st September 2015 renewed Grounds of Appeal were  lodged  with  the
    Upper Tribunal.  These are in exactly the same format as  the  original
    Grounds of  Appeal.   On  23rd  September  2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kopieczek granted permission to appeal.  He found that it  was  evident
    from the determination that the panel directed itself appropriately and
    that it was not evident that the correct  standard  of  proof  was  not
    applied in its assessment of the evidence.

 4. Regarding the suggestion that  the  Appellant  was  prejudiced  by  the
    Respondent's representative being  curtailed  and  questioning  of  the
    Appellant because the Appellant's  representative  was  unable  to  re-
    examine on unknown points had he found no merit at least on that narrow
    basis and that it would  only  be  if  cross-examination  revealed  any
    points adverse to the Appellant that  re-examination  might  have  been
    undertaken.   However,  the  wider  and  more  significant   point   he
    considered was in terms of what was said  about  the  First-tier  Judge
    having apparently truncated cross-examination  in  circumstances  where
    cross-examination on matters in issue may have given the Appellant  the
    opportunity to deal with potentially adverse points.  He noted that the
    grounds contended that the hearing was rapid and  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge stopped the Respondent's representative three  times  in
    his cross-examination, finally ending it by saying "we have  thoroughly
    exhausted this short story" and then "we have enough" and  then  asking
    seven questions of his own on distances between  the  Appellant's  work
    and home and the Iraq/Iran border without explaining why he was  asking
    these.  Judge Kopieczek considered that such an approach  in  questions
    may indicate that one of the panel, at least, had made up his  mind  as
    to the credibility of the account by that early stage.

 5. It is noted that the question of adverse  credibility  issues  had  not
    been raised with the Appellant at least in terms of knowledge that  the
    car would be passing  through  a  checkpoint  is  answered  within  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  If this is correct, it shows that  the  matter  was
    put to the Appellant.   However,  Judge  Kopieczek  considered  it  was
    arguable that if some at least of the other credibility matters were to
    be taken against the Appellant, they should have been put to him at the
    hearing either in cross-examination or by  the  panel.   He  considered
    that if the Tribunal's credibility findings are legally sustainable, it
    is doubtful that the issue of the Appellant's  return  undocumented  or
    having left illegally would have any merit given the  Appellant's  lack
    of credibility but he did not rule on this ground.  He considered  that
    some of the grounds amounted to a mere disagreement with the Tribunal's
    assessment of the evidence but he was not prepared to limit the grounds
    that may be advanced.

 6. The Secretary of State has not I am advised in this matter filed a Rule
    24 response.

 7. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me solely to determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Nicholson.  Mr Nicholson is very familiar with this matter.
     He appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and is the  author  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Harrison.  I am also assisted in this matter  in
    that I am provided with handwritten and typed notes of  the  Record  of
    Proceedings in this matter, both from Mr Nicholson on  the  Appellant's
    behalf and by Mr  Bilsland,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  in
    attendance before the First-tier Tribunal.

Submissions/Discussion

 8. Mr Harrison acknowledges from discussions that he had had with the Home
    Office Presenting  Officer  and  from  the  note  on  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer's handwritten notes that it is clear that  the  Home
    Office were prevented  from  exploring  the  case  any  more  and  that
    questions that they intended to ask of the Appellant were  not  put  to
    him.  Mr Nicholson comments that the issue is actually worse than  that
    in that the panel thereafter speculated as a  result  on  a  number  of
    matters put to the  Appellant  and  refers  to  the  handwritten  notes
    pointing  out  the  Appellant  was  stopped  on  three  occasions  from
    answering questions and that the panel then proceeded to make  findings
    which were pure speculation.  He submits that this is a material  error
    of law and indeed that it would still be an error if the judge had gone
    on and made findings on matters that were not put to the Appellant.

 9. Mr Harrison points out  that  the  Appellant  has  provided  a  witness
    statement subsequent to the Notice  of  Refusal  and  consequently  his
    representatives would be aware of the refusal and that the  Appellant's
    credibility had been challenged.  He points out  it  was  not  for  the
    Secretary of State to make the Appellant's case for him.

10. In response Mr  Nicholson  acknowledges  that  interruption  of  cross-
    examination in itself is not necessarily fatal and that the  Notice  of
    Refusal had been addressed but it is issues that go  beyond  that  that
    show a material error of law.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

13. It is incumbent upon a First-tier Judge or panel to have control of the
    court and Mr Nicholson has acknowledged  that  interruption  of  cross-
    examination would not necessarily be fatal.  However, there is  also  a
    requirement of fairness and I am greatly assisted in this matter by the
    two notes that are provided of the evidence.  It is quite clear from Mr
    Bilsland's  notes  that  cross-examination   was   curtailed   and   he
    specifically states that he was prevented from asking further questions
    of the Appellant because  the  Immigration  Judge  was  satisfied  that
    everything had been explored.  That in itself would not create an error
    of law but I am persuaded that the panel then made a series of findings
    within the determination on questions which had not  been  put  to  the
    Appellant or which were speculative or dismissive about people  seeking
    asylum generally.  I accept, as  the  Respondent's  representative  had
    been stopped  from  completing  his  cross-examination,  there  was  no
    possibility of re-examination of the Appellant on these points (even if
    they had been known) by Mr Nicholson and that this creates a procedural
    unfairness which makes the decision  unsafe.   In  such  circumstances,
    there is a material error of law and I set aside the decision  and  set
    out directions hereinafter below in  the  decision  paragraph  for  the
    rehearing of this matter.

Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside with none of the findings of fact to stand.


 2) That the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Manchester to
    be heard before any Immigration Judge  other  than  Immigration  Judges
    Lever and Hudson with an estimated length of hearing of three hours.


 3) That the appeal be listed after  the  decision  in  Hamma  and  Rostami
    (country guidance appeal) is handed down.
 4) That there be leave for either  party  to  file  and  serve  additional
    witness statements and evidence upon which they seek to rely  at  least
    fourteen days prior to the restored hearing.


 5) That a Farsi interpreter be in attendance.


 6) That in the event that this matter  has  not  been  relisted  for  full
    hearing by 1st July 2016, the matter  be  listed  for  Case  Management
    directions on the first available date after 15th July 2016 with an ELH
    of twenty minutes.  The purpose of such directions are to  monitor  the
    progress of the claim, in particular with regard to any information  as
    to when the country guidance authority is to  be  handed  down  and  to
    ensure that the appeal does not get lost in the administrative system.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
