
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05681/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 8th November 2013                            |On 28th November 2013      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                        carine cynthia amandine tchei
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Simpson
    made following a hearing at Manchester on 15th July 2013.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of the Cote D'Ivoire born in 9th July  1984.
    She entered the UK as a visitor on 16th October 2012 and claimed asylum
    the following day.  She was refused in a letter dated  14th  May  2013.
    The Respondent did not believe the Appellant's account of  her  alleged
    problems resulting from her boyfriend's membership of the  FESCI.   The
    judge agreed with the Respondent, and there is  no  challenge  to  that
    aspect of her decision.

 3. The judge also considered the Appellant's human rights claim.  She  has
    no family in the UK and does not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE.  The judge set out the guidelines contained in Razgar and  said
    that  whilst  the  Appellant's  removal  to  the  Cote  D'Ivoire  would
    interfere with her private life, on the facts, the  removal  would  not
    have consequences of such gravity as to engage the operation of Article
    8.  Even if it did, such interference would be in accordance  with  the
    law and she therefore made no findings in relation to proportionality.

The Grounds of Application

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had not properly considered the Appellant's claim to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.  The Appellant is a disabled person who competed in the
    London 2012 Paralympics as a weight lifter.  Part of her case was  that
    as a person with disabilities she would not be able to  live  a  normal
    life on return to the Ivory Coast.  Since she had arrived in the United
    Kingdom she had acquired an  electric  wheelchair  which  had  a  life-
    changing impact on the way she is able to conduct  her  life.   It  has
    given her an independence and mobility which is an integral part of her
    moral and physical integrity.  Even if she  was  allowed  to  keep  the
    wheelchair and return to the Ivory Coast there was background  evidence
    before the judge that wheelchair accessible facilities were not  common
    there.

 5. On 25th September 2013  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge
    Wellesley-Cole for the reasons stated in the grounds.

 6. On 31st October 2013 the Respondent served a reply  pointing  out  that
    the issue was not raised in the original Grounds of  Appeal  and  there
    was no reference in the determination to  any  freestanding  Article  8
    issue in relation to the Appellant's disability.

Submissions

 7. Mr Brown relied on his grounds and in  particular  submitted  that  the
    drastic change which had taken place in the Appellant's life  following
    the  supply  of  a  much  improved  wheelchair,   which   had   had   a
    transformative effect on her life, should have been  properly  weighed,
    and if it had been, could potentially have led to a different decision.
     The difference which the wheelchair had made to her life should not be
    minimised  and  without  that  equipment  her  private  life  would  be
    diminished.

 8. The judge had  not  engaged  with  the  issues  of  disability  in  the
    determination.

 9. Mrs Pettersen relied on  her  reply  and  submitted  that  no  separate
    argument had been made at the hearing in relation  to  the  Appellant's
    disability.

Findings and Conclusions

10. At the date of the hearing before the judge the Appellant had  been  in
    the UK for nine months.   She had  been  able  to  train  in  the  Cote
    D'Ivoire to such  a  high  standard  that  she  had  been  selected  to
    represent her country in the Paralympics.

11. There  is  no  reference  in  the  determination,  which  recorded  the
    Appellant's submissions, to a stand alone  claim  in  relation  to  her
    disability.  Mr Brown clearly made submissions  on  Article  8  private
    life but was not able from his notes to confirm whether he had put  the
    claim on the basis of her access to a much enhanced wheelchair or  not.
    It cannot be an error for the judge not to deal with points which  were
    not made to her.

12. She did deal with the Article 8 issue both in relation to the Rules and
    on Razgar principles.  Given that she had been in the  UK  for  such  a
    brief period of time and that she had been able to train  in  the  Cote
    D'Ivoire it was quite open to the judge to find  that  the  Appellant's
    removal would not engage Article 8.  The fact that  the  Appellant  has
    access to a better wheelchair  than  would  be  available  in  her  own
    country cannot found a claim that removal would be disproportionate.

13. It was therefore not an error of law for the judge not to deal with the
    question of proportionality.

Decision

14. The judge's decision stands.  The Appellant's appeal  is  dismissed  on
    all grounds.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

