

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05509/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 6 January 2016                             |On 12 May 2016               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     R O
                           (anonymity ORDER made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Head instructed by Lawrence Lupin solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

      (on 30 November 2015) and
      Mr P Nath, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
      (on 6 January 2016)

The Upper Tribunal has made an anonymity order pursuant to  paragraph  14(b)
of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  (as  amended).   The
effect of such order is to prohibit the disclosure of any matter  likely  to
lead members of the public to identify the appellant until  the  termination
of these proceedings or further order.  Any breach  of  this  order  may  be
treated as a contempt of court.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is an Afghan citizen and is 19 years old.  He came  to  the
   United Kingdom as  a  minor.  He  appeals  with  permission  against  the
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Miller, who  dismissed  his  appeal
   against  the  respondent's  decision  to  set   removal   directions   to
   Afghanistan, his country of origin, after refusing  him  refugee  status,
   humanitarian protection or leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human
   rights grounds.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision has  been  set  aside
   and I now remake it.

Background

2. The appellant was born in  Kunduz  Province  in  August  1996.   He  left
   Afghanistan in 2011 and travelled to Austria, with the help of an  agent,
   spending 15 days in Iran, 5-6 days in Turkey, then travelling on  through
   Serbia, Macedonia and another unknown country, to Austria where he  spent
   a year, and claimed asylum.  His asylum claim was refused by the Austrian
   authorities.

3. The appellant did not wish to return to Afghanistan, so he  travelled  on
   through Italy, France and Belgium, heading for the United Kingdom,  where
   he arrived on 8 November 2012 and claimed asylum on 28 November 2012.  He
   was served with a form IS 151A as an illegal entrant.  He was still  only
   16 years old.

4. In his asylum statement of 17  December  2012,  the  appellant  gave  his
   name, nationality and date of birth. He is now 19 years old and was  born
   in Chardarah District, Kunduz Province.  His father (whose date of  birth
   the appellant does not know) died in  a  suicide  attack  in  2011.   His
   mother now lives with his grandfather in Kunduz.  He had two brothers and
   two sisters:  One brother and one sister have been killed.   One  brother
   is missing and one sister lives with his mother.  She  is  now  about  17
   (she was 13 in 2012).  The other brothers and sisters, both brothers  and
   his late sister, were all older than the appellant.

5. The appellant had only 5 years of schooling before coming to  the  United
   Kingdom.  His education, in two  High  Schools  in  his  home  area,  was
   interrupted by threats to his life and the poor general situation.

6. The particular problem which the appellant's family faced  arose,  as  so
   often in Afghanistan, from a land dispute which went back to  before  the
   appellant's birth.  The land dispute  has  been  resolved,  but  the  ill
   feeling between the parties persists.

7. The appellant's late father was the elder of their village  and  a  close
   friend of the district chief, who bears  the  same  surname.   They  were
   always together. The district chief  was  also  a  close  friend  of  the
   appellant's uncle (his maternal uncle).

8. When the Taliban captured Kunduz Province,  they  asked  his  father  for
   money and weapons.  His father's cousins had links with the Taliban,  and
   one of them was a  Taliban  commander.   In  2009,  the  Taliban  cousins
   captured two tankers of American oil next to a  river,  and  invited  the
   villagers to come and get oil.  They stopped the American oil supply: the
   Americans bombed the area where the tankers were. 150 people were killed,
   including the appellant's maternal uncle and brother.  There are  YouTube
   and Al Jazeera reports of the incident. It seems  that  compensation  was
   paid to the appellant's family by the Americans  for  the  death  of  his
   uncle and brother.

9. The appellant's surviving brother wanted revenge and killed  one  of  the
   Taliban cousins, a brother of the  Taliban  commander.   Another  of  the
   Taliban commander's brothers registered a complaint with the authorities,
   naming the appellant's surviving brother as the killer.

10. The authorities arrested the appellant and his father.  They  took  them
   to the police station and beat them and  tortured  them.   The  appellant
   still bears scars on his chin and back.  The district chief, his father's
   close friend, facilitated their release: the appellant thinks bribery was
   involved but is not sure. The appellant would then  have  been  about  13
   years old.

11. His father and the district chief  set  up  a  negotiation  meeting  and
   invited the Taliban commander's family, to settle the matter  peacefully.
   The Taliban commander's family did  not  attend:  instead,  they  sent  a
   suicide bomber, and when the bomb exploded, the appellant's  father,  the
   district chief, and four other elders who had  come  to  help  negotiate,
   were all killed.

12. The district chief was succeeded by his brother, who was sympathetic  to
   the appellant's family.  He warned the appellant's  maternal  grandfather
   to get the appellant out of the country as soon as possible as  he  would
   be next to  be  targeted.  The  appellant's  grandfather  told  him,  and
   arranged the journey, using the American compensation money.

13. The appellant supported his  account  with  photographs  of  the  people
   concerned and the American bombardment site.

Refusal letter [18 July 2014]

14. The respondent considered the application as one  of  imputed  political
   opinion. She noted that the appellant had  not  produced  a  passport  to
   verify his nationality and/or identity. However, the appellant  responded
   to geographical questions about Afghanistan and she accepted that he  was
   an Afghan citizen.

15. The respondent accepted that the appellant had been diagnosed with post-
   traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), but that on his evidence, he no  longer
   met the criteria for that diagnosis as he had recovered to  some  extent.
   She did not place any weight on the photographs  as  they  were  of  poor
   quality, in the public  domain,  and  added  little  to  the  appellant's
   account. She accepted that the appellant's  account  of  the  US  Tankers
   Incident was consistent with publicly available  information  about  what
   had occurred.  She  accepted  that  there  was  a  reasonable  degree  of
   likelihood that the appellant's father and brother  had  been  killed  in
   that incident, as alleged.

16. The respondent also accepted that the Taliban Commander cousin  existed,
   and that there was a reasonable degree of likelihood that  the  appellant
   was related to him as claimed. She accepted that the suicide  attack  had
   occurred and that the appellant's father and brother had been  killed  in
   that attack.

17. The respondent did not accept that the appellant's  brother  had  joined
   the Taliban because at interview, the appellant had stated  that  he  had
   joined Al-Qaeda and that it was a branch of the Taliban.  The  respondent
   did not accept that the two organisations were linked  as  claimed.   She
   had been unable to verify the death of the  Taliban  commander's  brother
   from publicly available information.

18. In relation to the appellant's  2011  arrest,  the  respondent  accepted
   that the account  of  torture  during  questioning  was  consistent  with
   external information about Afghanistan but was  not  satisfied  that  the
   evidence produced showed that the appellant himself  had  been  arrested.
   However, having regard to the lower standard of proof, she also  accepted
   that the appellant's brother had killed the Taliban  commander's  brother
   and that  the  appellant  had  been  arrested,  tortured  and  killed  in
   consequence.

19. It was on that basis that the respondent approached the risk on  return.
    As she had found that the appellant's brother was not a  member  of  the
   Taliban, and the appellant  himself  had  never  been  involved  with  or
   supported the Taliban, she did not consider that there was a real risk of
   persecution or serious harm  because  of  any  direct  or  indirect  link
   between the appellant and the Taliban.  She did not condone  the  killing
   of the Taliban  commander's  brother:  she  considered  that  the  Afghan
   authorities had an  interest  in  investigating  murders,  but  that  the
   methods used were improper.  As the  appellant  had  been  released,  the
   respondent considered that the Afghan authorities would  have  no  future
   interest in questioning him about it. He had remained in Afghanistan  for
   some time after his arrest and had not been  questioned  further.   There
   was no real risk of persecution or serious harm from the  authorities  by
   reason of his brother's criminal activity.

20. The respondent did accept that the appellant had a well-founded fear  of
   persecution for a Refugee Convention  reason  from  'those  with  Taliban
   links in your local area'.  She considered the available protection  from
   the Afghan authorities  and  whether  internal  relocation  elsewhere  in
   Afghanistan would enable the appellant to be  safe  from  persecution  or
   serious harm. On the basis of the international materials, the respondent
   accepted that in Taliban controlled areas, the Afghan state was  able  to
   provide only limited, if any, protection.

21. The respondent considered that the appellant had an internal  relocation
   option to Kabul.  He would not have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
   there: he speaks Pashtu, has family in Afghanistan (albeit in a  Taliban-
   held region), had been educated in Afghanistan for 5 years  and  also  in
   the United Kingdom. There was at least  some  provision  for  psychiatric
   care in Kabul, should the appellant need it.  He had an aunt  in  Faryab,
   in western Afghanistan close to the border  with  Turkmenistan.   He  had
   spent two months living with her before travelling to Austria  and  could
   choose to live there without difficulty. The Refugee Convention claim was
   rejected. The humanitarian protection claim failed for the same  reasons,
   as did the appellant's claims under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

22. The respondent then considered Article 8 ECHR.  The appellant  had  been
   in the United Kingdom for only 2 years and was approaching 18 years  old.
   He had lived in Afghanistan for approximately 15 years.  She applied  the
   'no ties' test in paragraph 276ADE and concluded that the appellant could
   not meet the requirements of the Rules.  His section 55 best interests as
   a child would be best served by return to his family in Afghanistan and a
   culture with which he was familiar.

23. The respondent did not consider  that  the  appellant's  schooling,  his
   friends,  or  his  community   involvement,   amounted   to   exceptional
   circumstances for which  leave  to  remain  should  be  given  under  the
   Immigration Rules.

24. The respondent then considered the possibility of  discretionary  leave.
   She began by considering the PTSD diagnosis. She did  not  consider  that
   the high standard required for foreign medical cases (Article 3 ECHR) was
   met in this case.  There were medical facilities in Afghanistan should he
   require them. The asylum  claim  was  refused  and  no  other  basis  for
   granting leave was identified in the refusal letter.

First-tier Tribunal decision [30 March 2015]

25. The appellant appealed. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the
   authorities would now have no interest in this appellant and that he  was
   not entitled to refugee status or  humanitarian  protection.  As  regards
   Article 8 ECHR, the Judge said this:

      "43.  With regard to Article 8 ECHR, it  is  clear  from  the  country
      information that there is not only  a  specialist  psych  hospital  in
      Kabul  but  also   out-patient   mental   health   facilities   across
      Afghanistan.  He would be returning to the culture in  which  he  grew
      up, and, I suspect, would be able  to  resume  contact,  albeit  maybe
      initially only by telephone or letter, with  his  mother,  this  being
      somewhat easier to do from Kabul than from  the  United  Kingdom.   If
      this were the case, whilst undoubtedly he would not  be  in  the  same
      position that he would have been in, in the United Kingdom,  where  he
      could have sent money across to  his  family,  there  would  be  other
      positive aspects, such as  renewing  communication  with  his  mother,
      which could only be beneficial.

      44.   It was agreed by Mrs Head [for the appellant] and Miss  Pountney
      [for the respondent] that the appellant has no Article 8 family rights
      in the United Kingdom, and that  he  cannot  succeed  under  paragraph
      276ade  in  respect  of  his  private  life.   Mrs  Head  nevertheless
      submitted that, taking account of all the circumstances, the case  was
      sufficiently exceptional for the appeal to be allowed.  Having  regard
      to all that I have stated above, however, I do not find this to be the
      case.  It is, of course, true that the  appellant  has  lived  in  the
      United Kingdom for 4 years, since November 2010.  It is also true that
      the respondent has delayed in interviewing  him  and  considering  his
      claim. That said,  the  reality  is  that  there  will  inevitably  be
      considerable delays, given the pressure on the existing system, caused
      by the large influx of migrants to this country.  Moreover, in view of
      the fact that the appellant was a minor, he was never likely  to  have
      been removed before his 18th birthday.

      45.   I find that the reality of this case is that the appellant, like
      so many, particularly  from  his  country,  has  come  to  the  United
      Kingdom, whilst still a minor, motivated,  I  find,  by  a  number  of
      reasons including  not  only  the  security  situation  but  also  the
      opportunities for education and  employment  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      Very many such young people suffer from symptoms of depression  and/or
      PTSD. As I have observed above, any such symptoms have  not  prevented
      him, either from making the difficult journey to the United Kingdom in
      the first place, or from pursuing numerous  courses  and  obtaining  a
      large number of educational certificates whilst here.   I  accept,  of
      course, that he has not been in  trouble  with  the  police.   I  also
      accept that he is held in high regard by those who  have  worked  with
      him, and not least by Ms Chase-Massey [sic] and Mr Ampofo, who came to
      the hearing. ..."

26.  The  judge  nevertheless  found  that  the  appellant's   removal   was
   proportionate and dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  In so  doing,  he
   made no reference to any country guidance cases on Afghanistan,  nor  did
   he engage in his reasoning  with  the  differences  between  the  matters
   accepted by the respondent in her refusal letter and his own findings.


Leave to appeal to Upper Tribunal [24 April 2015]

27. Permission to  appeal  was  given  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal decision was arguably insufficiently  reasoned  in  relation  to
   findings which  conflicted  with  matters  conceded  by  the  respondent;
   findings as to whether the appellant could return safely to  Afghanistan;
   the medical  evidence;  and  the  consideration  of  irrelevant  evidence
   prejudicial to the appellant's case.  In particular, the Judge noted that
   the First-tier Tribunal had not directed itself by reference to  relevant
   country guidance from the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in  RQ  (Afghan
   National Army - Hizb-i-Islami - risk) Afghanistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00013.

28. On 9 June 2015, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes  gave  leave  to  the
   appellant to expand on his grounds of appeal to include and particularise
   an allegation of bias by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  That  allegation
   is currently being considered in the Upper Tribunal's judicial complaints
   procedure and it is agreed that the Upper Tribunal need not deal with  it
   in this decision.

Error of law [6 October 2015]

29. At the error of law hearing  on  9  October  2015  (before  Lord  Burns,
   sitting as a Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   Gleeson), the Tribunal held, and  the  parties  agreed,  that  there  was
   indeed a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
   and that it could not stand.   The  Tribunal  proposed  that  the  appeal
   decision be remade in the Upper Tribunal  before  either  Lord  Burns  or
   Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson on a date to be fixed, and gave directions.

30. The appellant was present at the hearing and was given  an  opportunity,
   with the assistance of the Court interpreter, to confirm his instructions
   with Ms Head.  He confirmed that he was content  for  the  matter  to  be
   dealt with as proposed by the Tribunal and the representatives.

31. That is the basis on which this appeal came  before  me  to  remake  the
   decision.

Substantive Upper Tribunal hearing [6 January 2016]

32. In accordance with our earlier directions, the  parties  filed  evidence
   and submissions before the hearing.  The  hearing  resumed  before  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Gleeson on 6 January 2016, for substantive remaking of the
   appeal  decision.   I  begin  by  summarising  the  evidence,  oral   and
   documentary, which was before me.

Oral evidence

33. I heard oral evidence from the  appellant,  from  Rebecca  Massey-Chase,
   who was an educational mentor for him, under the auspices of the  Refugee
   Support Network, and from Laura Toal, his allocated  social  worker  both
   when he was a looked-after child and during the period when  he  received
   support services under the Children (Leaving Care) Act 2000.

34. The appellant's partner, who had not previously been mentioned in  these
   proceedings, was present at the Upper Tribunal hearing and had prepared a
   witness statement.  She was not called.  I have had regard to her witness
   statement, giving it such weight as it will bear in the absence of cross-
   examination.

Appellant's evidence

35.  The  appellant  adopted  his  witness  statements  to  date,  which  he
   confirmed as true and correct. He wished me to treat them as his evidence
   in chief.

36. The first witness statement was on 28 January 2015, in response  to  the
   respondent's refusal letter.  In that statement, he stated  that  he  did
   not have the original photographs:  he  had  electronic  copies  which  a
   friend in Austria had helped him download from the internet:   the  first
   photograph showed his brother's funeral,  including  his  uncle  and  his
   paternal grandfather.  The appellant was not in the picture, although  he
   was at the funeral, because he was unwell and went  home  after  a  short
   time.   He noted that the respondent had found the same photograph on the
   internet as part of an article about Kunduz Province: the appellant  said
   there  was  a  journalist  at  the  funeral,  taking  pictures.  In   the
   photographs of his brother with weapons, the appellant was not to be seen
   because he took the pictures.

37. The appellant stated that he must have forgotten to tell  his  solicitor
   that his brother was a member of Al-Qaeda.  He did not know  how  he  had
   missed that, but he had remembered to say it in his asylum interview. His
   understanding was that Al-Qaeda was part of the Taliban, and they did not
   think of the two groups as distinct, because they participated  in  jihad
   together.

38. The appellant asserted a continuing risk from both the Taliban  and  the
   Afghan government if he returned.   That  was  why  the  authorities  had
   arrested the appellant and his father. The family had Taliban  links  and
   the authorities would suspect all  of  them  of  collaborating  with  the
   Taliban.  His father, and his other protector, the  district  chief,  had
   died in the suicide bombing: now, he had  no  one  to  protect  him.  The
   government's grip in Kunduz Province was weak and he did not know whether
   his uncle would be able to help him if he returned there, or even whether
   his uncle was still in Kunduz.  His uncle and aunt,  who  hosted  him  in
   Faryab just before he left Afghanistan, do not live there: his uncle  was
   doing a job in Faryab, and had stayed there for work purposes, for 2 or 3
   months, on several occasions.  The uncle would  then  return  to  Kunduz,
   where he lived: the appellant had not heard from him for a long time  and
   did not know whether he was alive or dead.

39. The appellant asserted that medical treatment  in  Afghanistan  for  him
   would be hard to get and very expensive, which would be a problem as  his
   mental health would deteriorate if he were returned.  He had been  seeing
   a psychologist every 2 or 3 weeks before turning  18:  now  he  had  been
   referred to the  Adult  Mental  Health  Services  and  had  been  to  one
   appointment.  He was waiting for a further appointment. He  had  provided
   medical evidence from Dr Lindsey Wood, describing panic attacks  that  he
   experienced, had authorised the production of his medical notes, and  had
   provided an expert report from Dr Juliet Cohen confirming that  he  still
   had PTSD.

40.  The  appellant  was  concerned  that  on  return,  without  any  family
   protection, he was vulnerable to sexual abuse:  there were  articles  and
   videos on Google suggesting that boys were captured and kept  for  sexual
   purposes by older men. It would be extremely difficult  for  him  to  re-
   establish himself as there were no jobs in the provinces  and  in  Kabul,
   given his lack of experience, the appellant would have  problems  finding
   work.  He had no close family to help him.  In the United Kingdom he  was
   integrated, and had the support of the authorities, which he  would  lose
   if returned to Afghanistan.

41. In his second witness  statement,  prepared  on  15  October  2015,  the
   appellant disclosed for the first time that he had a partner,  with  whom
   he had been in a relationship since some time in  2013.   They  had  been
   friends for longer than  that.  He  did  not  explain  why  she  was  not
   mentioned in his January 2015 statement. His partner was a little  older:
   she had children aged  13  and  9.   His  partner  had  helped  with  the
   appellant's mental health problems, an 'extraordinary  support'  when  he
   had nightmares and was scared; she reassured him and gave him massages to
   relax him.  They stayed at  each  other's  houses  but  were  not  living
   together at present. They planned to marry soon.

42. He still felt the need to self-harm by cutting  himself,  but  had  been
   shown coping mechanisms, and by distracting himself, he managed to  avoid
   it.  There was nowhere on his arm that he could cut  anymore.   He  still
   had nightmares and woke up in the middle of the night, scared.

43. The appellant was continuing to study at Barnet Southgate  College.   He
   had a studio flat to himself,  and  was  studying  ESOL  Entry  Level  3,
   Numeracy Level 1 and ICT. He felt settled in the United Kingdom  and  was
   recovering. However, given the deteriorating  news  in  the  media  about
   Kunduz Province, the appellant was feeling under  pressure  mentally  and
   might need to return to taking anti-depressants, which presently  he  was
   not doing: he was worried about his mother and grandfather.

44. The appellant remained very scared of return to Afghanistan.  He had  no
   means of contacting his family members there and  did  not  know  whether
   they were dead or alive.  He had received an indirect  message  from  his
   mother in 2011/2012 when he was travelling to the  United  Kingdom,  that
   'his family was ok',  but  nothing  since,  and  there  was  now  serious
   fighting in Kunduz Province.  He still feared both the  Taliban  and  the
   Afghan authorities in Kunduz.

45. The appellant had no relations, family or friends who could support  him
   in Kabul; he had travelled through it on his way out of Afghanistan  just
   once, but never stayed there.  Kabul was unsafe and here, too, he  feared
   both the Taliban and the Afghan authorities.  If he gave his family  name
   and said he came from Charderah District in Kunduz Province, the  Taliban
   headquarters, he would automatically be suspected of  Taliban  links  and
   would be at risk of being killed.  People in Afghanistan are shown on the
   news as leaving in droves, to camps in Takhar Province and Kabul.

46. There had been a large influx of people to Kabul. He was uneducated  and
   unable to find employment there, and  he  still  felt  he  risked  sexual
   exploitation.  He would be unable to find accommodation or mental  health
   facilities: he would be forced to live on the street,  without  treatment
   for his depression and PTSD.

47. In answer to supplementary questions from Ms Head, the appellant  stated
   that since October 2015, he had no contact with anyone in Afghanistan and
   that he had no family in Kabul, as far as he was aware. He  was  tendered
   for cross-examination.

48. In reply to questions from Mr Nath for  the  respondent,  the  appellant
   stated that his brother was a member of the Taliban but  he  himself  had
   never been a member or had any Taliban involvement.  The  family's  enemy
   was a leader of the Taliban who had killed the  appellant's  brother  and
   uncle.  His other brother became angry, and  joined  the  Taliban,  along
   with a friend.  They killed the enemy's brother.

49. The appellant said that he had no relatives in Kabul, although he  still
   had relatives in his home area.  The  appellant  comes  from  the  Kunduz
   area, where it was well known that the most  dangerous  Taliban  fighters
   lived.  There were 2 villages with 1000 people, all with the  appellant's
   surname, and all known to be supporters of the Taliban.

50. Altogether, there were 9 cities in North  Afghanistan,  but  there  were
   very few Pashtu speakers there although there were many languages  spoken
   in his city.  Other  people  did  not  want  the  Pashtu-speakers.   They
   thought they were all Taliban, who wanted to kill all normal  people  and
   'finish it off'.

51. A man the appellant knew had tried to go to the city at the peak of  the
   fighting: he was a University student.  As soon as they heard his  family
   name and where he came from, they shot him.

52. A few months earlier, the Taliban had taken over the whole  Kunduz  area
   but the army had travelled from Kabul to Kunduz  to  help  recapture  the
   city.  The government now controlled the cities in Kunduz  province,  but
   not the villages.

53. The appellant had passed through Kabul on the way to the United  Kingdom
   but no, t stayed.  He had been in hiding, with the agent, who knew how to
   take him out of there safely.  If the appellant had felt safe to live  in
   Kabul, he would have stayed. The person who helped him had  been  a  good
   friend of  the  appellant's  father,  and  he  was  lucky  to  have  that
   assistance.

54. If he was returned via Kabul, the  authorities  would  ask  him  at  the
   airport why he had left, and he would have to tell them.  The authorities
   would consider anyone who came from his home area  to  be  Taliban.   The
   appellant's information came from the media.  Every day  he  saw  in  the
   media that Kabul was unsafe.

55. His understanding was that the situation in  Afghanistan  was  very  bad
   now, that the Taliban and ISIS together had made it so.  Two days  before
   he gave his evidence, the appellant said that the  Taliban  had  attacked
   the Indian Embassy in Mazar-e-Sharif, formerly considered a safe city  in
   North Afghanistan, and  that  the  Afghan  Parliament  now  expected  the
   Taliban  to  control  all  Afghan  cities,  especially  in  Helmand   and
   Jalalabad. The British army had been sent to Helmand province, where  the
   Taliban had taken two villages.

56. The appellant had two siblings of each sex, but  one  brother  was  dead
   and the other was with the Taliban: he did not know whether that  brother
   was dead or alive.  One of his sisters had also died.  When the appellant
   came to the United  Kingdom  he  had  his  mother,  his  grandmother  and
   grandfather, and his surviving sister (now aged about  13  or  14)  still
   living in his village.  His grandfather had organised the finance to  get
   the appellant to the United Kingdom: he was a man  somewhere  between  50
   and 60 years old, the appellant thought.

57. The appellant was traumatised when he came to the  United  Kingdom.   He
   used to take medication and the authorities put him in a hotel.  He coped
   poorly: he felt bad at night, thinking about his family, it made him feel
   sick. He was hospitalised for 2 days and they gave him  tablets  and  put
   him in a straitjacket.

58. He had been in a relationship with his British citizen partner for  over
   2 years.  His partner gave  him  a  lot  of  support,  helping  with  his
   English, and comforting him if he woke up scared when  she  was  next  to
   him.  His partner understood him and he was always happy when he was with
   her.  However, he still had nightmares every week or two, thinking  about
   his home, wondering where his family were; many people  had  been  killed
   between Kabul and Kunduz during the Taliban takeover.

59. The appellant had no family in the United Kingdom but he  had  a  social
   worker and a mentor, who gave support by supplying money (�57 a week) and
   housing.  For everything else, he relied on Gemma.  He was feeling  good,
   with no pills and no counselling: it had been like that for a  long  time
   now. He was studying Maths, ICT, ESOL English at college in High  Barnet.
   He had already achieved Level 1 Maths, NT3 in  English  and  NT3  in  IT.
   Next year, he planned to study to be an electrician.

60. If the appellant were to be returned to  Kabul,  he  said  he  would  be
   unable to support himself because he had nowhere to live, no family,  and
   no money for education.  People who found  out  that  he  had  come  from
   London would think he was rich and kidnap and beat him, or think that the
   British had sent him.  Either way, he would have many problems in  Kabul.
    Without finance, how could he study, live, or buy his  clothes?  It  was
   true that he had come to the United Kingdom with nothing and managed, but
   there was support from everybody, giving him a house, college, money  for
   food, and everything.  In Afghanistan, once the government knew where the
   appellant came from, and what had happened to his family, they would  put
   him in jail.

61. In re-examination, the appellant said  that  if  he  were  returned,  he
   would be assailed by  memories  of  everything  he  had  been  trying  to
   suppress about his family. He would have to  think  about  it  then.   At
   least now, the enemy did not know where he was and he had support,  study
   and a partner in the United Kingdom.  Everyone helped  each  other  here,
   but in Afghanistan it was not like that.

Rebecca Massey-Chase

62. Ms Massey-Chase adopted her letters of 26 February 2014 and  20  October
   2015 as her evidence in chief.  She confirmed that the contents were true
   and correct.

63. In her letter of 20 October 2015, written  on  Refugee  Support  Network
   stationery, Ms Massey-Chase said that  she  had  been  working  with  the
   appellant as a volunteer educational mentor since June 2013, meeting  him
   weekly for an hour at Willesden Green Library. The appellant  was  always
   punctual, polite and respectful, giving his full attention to the task in
   hand and never cancelling or being late.   He  was  working  impressively
   hard on his English, which was improving rapidly.   He was keen to  learn
   British culture and traditions, and looking forward to being employed  in
   due course. The appellant's maths and information skills were growing and
   they had discussed the possibility of  an  apprenticeship,  when  he  had
   completed his college course.

64. The letter concludes:

      "Over the time I have spent with [the appellant], I have  also  gained
      an understanding of the ongoing distress  caused  by  the  uncertainty
      surrounding his immigration status.  I have been very impressed by the
      dedication and commitment he has still managed to show to his study."

65. Ms Massey-Chase's letter of 20 October 2015  records  that  she  stopped
   being an educational mentor for the appellant in October  2014  when  she
   relocated to Bristol from London and ceased her  direct  connection  with
   the Refugee Support Network.  However, she  had  remained  in  supportive
   contact with him by telephone, letter, and occasional meetings.  Much  of
   this letter repeats what was in the earlier letter.

66. The new material in this letter relates to the online feedback which  Ms
   Massey-Chase gave about the appellant, and more detail about his fears if
   he is returned to Afghanistan.  In November 2013, Ms Massey-Chase  states
   that she wrote the following  online  feedback  to  the  Refugee  Support
   Network:

      "Yesterday [the appellant] told me that he is very worried  about  his
      immigration status, as someone at his mosque told him he will be  sent
      back when he is 18.  ... [The appellant] said that  he  worries  about
      this a lot and when he is very sad, cuts  his  hand.   He  says  Chris
      [Housing Plus QARA] know about  this  and  he  has  seen/is  seeing  a
      doctor.  He said that if he goes back to Afghanistan he will be killed
      and if he is made to go back he will 'do something very bad'. He  said
      he would rather go to prison than back to Afghanistan."

67. Ms Massey-Chase records that the appellant has often  said  that  return
   to Kabul is unsafe; she believed that he genuinely feared for his  safety
   in the whole of Afghanistan and found it hard to see  any  prospects  for
   him there, with no home, no job, no way  of  supporting  himself  and  no
   support network 'as he will not be able to contact anyone  he  knows  for
   fear that his life would be endangered'. He worried about his safety, but
   also that of his mother and sister.

68. During 2014, the appellant had a 'worrying  and  upsetting  experience':
   he met another young Afghan man at a party and found himself lying  about
   where he was from and his full name, because he was  worried  what  would
   happen if someone in Afghanistan found out where he was.  If  he  had  to
   continue lying in that way in Afghanistan, Ms Massey-Chase feared 'a huge
   impact on his mental health and well-being'.

69. Ms Massey-Chase considered the appellant to be a 'fantastic mentee'  and
   an asset to British society.  She had supported  him  while  he  built  a
   network of friends, had a long-term relationship,  enjoyed  participating
   in the work of different charities, studied hard, and  took  pleasure  in
   his education.  She enclosed a small selection from his written  work  to
   show how much progress the appellant had made.

70. In answer to supplementary questions from Mrs Head, for  the  appellant,
   the witness said that the appellant had previously been supported by CAMS
   and in that context, he had meetings with Ms Massey-Chase as a mentor and
   social worker, offering ongoing support.  She had  continued  to  support
   him informally after that role ended. The appellant had attended lots  of
   voluntary charitable  groups.  The  appellant  was  doing  very  well  at
   present, not self-harming and proactively supporting others,  because  he
   had been helped himself.  All that was down to the support network he had
   in the United Kingdom, which the witness did not believe he would have in
   Afghanistan.

71. She considered that returning the appellant to Afghanistan would have  a
   huge effect on his mental health.  He became distressed and  upset  every
   time the possibility was discussed.  The appellant had told her  that  he
   would rather go to prison.  His  mental  health  would  deteriorate:  the
   appellant would be a risk to himself and she would have a strong  concern
   for his life, or that he would self-harm.  (I observed that at this point
   in her evidence, the appellant was crying quietly at the back of the room
   and holding his partner's hand).

72. The witness said that she remembered the appellant speaking  of  meeting
   a person from Afghanistan and concealing his surname,  because  it  would
   identify where he was from. Her understanding was that on return,  people
   would want to know where the appellant had been  and  what  he  had  been
   doing.  If that was true, and she believed it to be so, then the  witness
   would be very worried about the appellant being returned.

73. In cross-examination, Ms Massey-Chase explained how  she  supported  the
   appellant informally after her role had ended.  They would  talk  on  the
   telephone and exchange text and Facebook messages.  She had had  extended
   telephone calls with the appellant several times in the last few  months.
   When there was a hearing which Ms Massey-Chase was attending, or when she
   visited her sister in London, they would go out for lunch.   The  witness
   felt that  she  had  an  ongoing  role  to  support  the  appellant.   If
   necessary, the Refugee Support Network would give support to her so  that
   she could continue to help the appellant.

74. If the appellant were in Kabul, the witness was unsure whether he  would
   have access to technology; if there were a way  of  sending  messages  to
   him, whether by text, Facebook,  email  or  some  other  way,  she  would
   certainly do so.  However, the witness feared that the appellant  himself
   might be reluctant  because  he  might  be  worried  about  the  risk  of
   contacting people in the United Kingdom.  She  said  he  was  a  friendly
   person, 'really lovely'.

Laura Toal

75. Ms Toal is the appellant's social worker allocated by London Borough  of
   Barnet.  She adopted her letter of 29 October 2015  as  her  evidence  in
   chief.  Ms Toal said that she had worked with the appellant for almost  2
   years, first when he was a looked after child under the  care  of  London
   Borough of Barnet, and then while he received support services under  the
   Children (Leaving Care) Act 2000.  He was extremely pleasant, articulate,
   and bright.

76. The appellant was making good  educational  and  social  progress.   His
   relationship with his partner was a factor: as his social worker, Ms Toal
   believed that the relationship was stable and  mutually  supportive.  The
   appellant was studying Entry Level 3 ICT and English and Level 1 Maths at
   Barnet  and  Southgate  College.   Even  allowing   for   his   reporting
   appointments at the Home Office, he had managed  a  96%  attendance  last
   year, with 98% so far this year.

77. Ms Toal stated that the appellant was consistent in his engagement  with
   support services and responded well to counselling provided by the  Child
   and Adolescent Mental Health Services. There is much in her letter  which
   is positive.  The appellant engaged well with the Refugee Support Network
   and his mentor, Rebecca Massey-Chase.  He  attended  all  events  at  the
   Leaving Care service and assisted in the delivery of its Summer  Barbecue
   event, as well as being involved in many volunteer projects.   He  helped
   other young people frequently, giving up time to  help  friends  to  move
   house and decorate their accommodation. The appellant received  the  Jack
   Petchey Award as the most helpful and inspirational resident  across  all
   the supported housing schemes managed by Housing Plus.  He also spoke  at
   the Houses of Parliament as part of a Young Roots event (Young Roots is a
   youth refugee charity).

78. The following concerns were expressed in Ms Toal's letter:

      "[The appellant] is a particularly vulnerable  young  person,  with  a
      history of panic attacks, self-harm and suicidal ideation.  Due to his
      low mood and anxiety, [the appellant] requires  significant  emotional
      support.  This is reflected by the decision of the local authority  to
      continue to fund [the appellant] in a supported housing placement, for
      11 months after his 18th birthday. The usual expectation is that young
      people move to independent Temporary Accommodation  immediately  after
      their 18th birthday. It was considered necessary to extend the time in
      supported housing in [the appellant's] case, due to the high level  of
      concern around his emotional vulnerability.  ...I  am  firmly  of  the
      belief that if [the appellant] was forced to  return  to  Afghanistan,
      then he would be at serious risk  of  a  major  deterioration  in  his
      mental health.  He has no family in  Kabul  and  I  am  not  aware  of
      appropriate support services in the city that could provide  him  with
      the emotional and psychological support he would need should  he  have
      to return. ..."

79. In answer to supplementary questions from Ms Head,  Ms  Toal  said  that
   the appellant used  to  have  suicidal  ideation,  but  had  been  taught
   strategies over a period of 18 months, and  provided  with  an  extensive
   support network.  Even  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  witness  remained
   concerned that the appellant's mental health might deteriorate if he were
   told he had to return to Afghanistan.  If he did return, her opinion  was
   that he would deteriorate rapidly. He would not cope very well at all and
   had stated that he would kill himself.

80. In cross-examination, Ms  Toal  said  that  unusually,  because  of  his
   fragility, the appellant had been given an extra year  of  supported  and
   housing in specialist, supported accommodation  for  young  unaccompanied
   asylum  seekers.  Since  then,  in  July  2015,  he  had  been  moved  to
   independent accommodation.  He still received support from Ms  Toal,  and
   the accommodation was still paid for.  Ms Toal still gave  the  appellant
   more intensive support than to other young asylum seekers; she was seeing
   him once or twice a month, and they would  deal  together  with  official
   letters.

The appellant's partner

81. The appellant's partner was present during the Upper  Tribunal  hearing.
   She did not give oral evidence. I do not use her name in  this  decision,
   given the anonymity order we have made, and  because  she  is  herself  a
   vulnerable person, who has some mental health problems of her own.

82. The  appellant's  partner  is  an  English  teacher  at  Paiwand  Afghan
   Association (Paiwand), an organisation which is described in more  detail
   below in connection with a letter of support which it provided.   She has
   two children aged 13 and 9, who live in the same street as she does, with
   her parents.  Their father sees the children  monthly.   The  appellant's
   partner said in her statement that she saw her children daily but did not
   live with them.

83. The appellant's partner in her witness statement explained that that  in
   December 2012 some young Afghans  from  Paiwand  introduced  her  to  the
   appellant, and that at first they were just friends. However, she  stated
   that on 15 October  2015  they  began  a  relationship.  That  may  be  a
   typographical error for 15 October 2013, since there is  reference  later
   in her statement to a 2-year anniversary occurring on  15  October  2015.
   The appellant's partner she  understood  what  the  appellant  was  going
   through because of her own mental health difficulties, and she  supported
   him as much as she could.   He would wake in the  night,  and  often  had
   nightmares,  speaking  in   Pashtu   or   Dari,   waking   up   sweating,
   disorientated, and scared.  On one occasion,  he  said  in  Dari,  'I  am
   dying'.

84. The appellant and  his  partner  do  not  live  together,  although  the
   possibility was under discussion. The appellant  had  met  his  partner's
   parents, her sister, and another friend.  His  partner  stated  that  she
   could not go to Afghanistan if the appellant were  removed,  because  she
   had her children, her parents, other family members, and her  work  here.
   She  was  upset  thinking  about  it:  if  the  appellant  went  back  to
   Afghanistan their relationship would end, and his partner  believed  that
   there was a very high risk that the appellant would be killed.

85. The appellant's partner stated that she was  very  concerned  about  the
   appellant's reaction to being returned:

      "...He has told me on more  than  one  occasion  that  he  would  kill
      himself if he were removed back to Afghanistan.   [The  appellant]  is
      very impulsive and I don't know what he would do.  He has told me that
      he would rather kill himself here than going back to  Afghanistan  and
      being tortured and killed in a horrible way by the police or  Taliban.
      This is obviously of great concern and worry for me."

Brent Adolescent Team (CAMHS)

86. The appellant was referred to the Brent Adolescent Community and  Mental
   Health Service (the Brent Adolescent CAMHS) by the Brent  Home  Treatment
   Team, after he presented at Accident and Emergency having had a  loss  of
   consciousness which he  described  as  a  'funny  turn',  brought  on  by
   thinking about his past.  No medical basis was found.  He was referred to
   the  Brent  Adolescent  CAMHS  and  assessed  by   a   locum   consultant
   psychiatrist and a family therapist, in early 2013.  They found  that  he
   met the diagnostic criteria for PTSD.  His individual  therapy  for  PTSD
   with Dr Lindsey Wood, Clinical Psychologist, began on 31 March  2013  and
   Dr Wood saw him approximately every 2 weeks thereafter.

87. On 12 July 2013, Dr Wood wrote an  interim  report  to  the  appellant's
   solicitors, noting that she was  using  Narrative  Exposure  Therapy  and
   strategies to stabilise his PTSD symptoms.  She  was  still  meeting  him
   once a week,  or  once  a  fortnight.   The  appellant  remained  visibly
   distressed about past events in Afghanistan and fearful that he would  be
   killed if returned.  The ongoing fear of  return  made  it  difficult  to
   successfully address the PTSD symptoms. The appellant had  described  2-3
   'funny turns' in which he had fallen down and lost consciousness, as well
   as a number of episodes of fast heartbeat, pins and needles, where he did
   not lose consciousness.  A number of medical investigations had found  no
   organic cause for these episodes.

88. The appellant had self-harmed on one occasion  in  the  United  Kingdom,
   and once on his journey here, as 'he did not know how else to  cope  with
   his symptoms' but he reported that it had not helped. The  appellant  had
   threatened to kill himself if his asylum application failed, since if  he
   did so in the United Kingdom, his mother would not know and would not  be
   distressed by his death, whereas if he returned home, 'the enemies'  were
   likely to kill him in front of his family  or  return  his  body  to  the
   family, causing them distress.

89. On 17 March 2014, Dr Wood wrote to the appellant's GP to report  on  the
   appellant's progress, before going on maternity leave. His care would  be
   taken forward by Dr Anna Whitton, who would meet the  appellant  3-weekly
   in future.

90. Dr Wood reported that she had explored with the  appellant  his  history
   of 'funny turns', which involved fast heartbeat, pins  and  needles,  and
   sometimes falling down and losing consciousness.  No  organic  cause  had
   been found, but they seemed to be triggered by thoughts of  the  past  or
   his family.  The other presenting problem was  self-harm,  for  which  Dr
   Wood helped the appellant develop  strategies.   Dr  Sofia  Manolesou,  a
   consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist, had met  the  appellant  to
   see whether medication was appropriate or likely to help.  So far, it had
   not been found to be appropriate.

91. The appellant's emotional wellbeing had improved  with  treatment.   His
   'funny turns' had reduced in frequency, there were fewer  PTSD  symptoms,
   and Dr Wood considered it unlikely now that he would meet the  diagnostic
   criteria.  Self-harm had also reduced, and apart from an episode in early
   March 2014, he had not self-harmed for over 6 months.  He had no  current
   suicidal ideation, continued to attend college daily,  and  was  involved
   with the refugee youth council and other young people  living,  like  the
   appellant, in semi-independent accommodation.  Dr Wood considered that he
   was likely to deteriorate if his asylum claim failed.

92. On 29 July 2014, as the appellant  was  now  almost  18  years  old,  Dr
   Whitton and Dr Manolesou jointly referred him to the  adult  Brent  CAMHS
   Assessment and Brief Treatment Team  for  'ongoing  risk  management  and
   therapeutic support'.  When the appellant turned 18  in  August  2014  he
   would no longer be eligible for CAMHS support from the  Brent  Adolescent
   CAMHS team.  The referral letter  stated  that  the  appellant  had  been
   receiving regular support from Dr Whitton every 3 weeks.   His  mood  had
   become more stable over time, except when he  talked  about  his  family,
   which made him 'very distressed'.  When  preoccupied  with  thoughts  and
   worries about his family, he would become very low  and  think  of  self-
   harm.  He had self-harmed only twice since March 2014.

93. The appellant had recently  learned  that  his  asylum  application  was
   refused.  In  the  past,  he  had  spoken  of  ending  his  life  if  his
   application were refused,  but  had  made  no  plans  nor  expressed  any
   intention to act on those thoughts since  learning  the  outcome  of  his
   application, although he was now very frightened and preoccupied with his
   fear of what might happen to him on return to Afghanistan.  He was  on  a
   summer break from college, which made his distress worse  as  there  were
   fewer distractions and he spent more  time  alone.   Dr  Whitton  and  Dr
   Manolesou considered the appellant to be at high risk  of  self-harm  and
   increased thoughts  of  suicide  and  asked  for  an  urgent  psychiatric
   assessment.  They believed that he would benefit from  ongoing  emotional
   support during 'this period of instability'.

Dr Juliet Cohen

94. Dr Juliet Cohen MA MBBS DipRACOG MRCGP FFFLM is  an  experienced  writer
   of medico-legal reports and has worked with the  Medical  Foundation  for
   the Victims of Torture (now Freedom from Torture) for a number of  years.
   Her report is dated 6 November 2014 and was based on an interview  on  27
   October 2014, by which time the appellant was 18 years old.

95. Dr Cohen has assisted the Upper Tribunal in a number  of  recent  appeal
   decisions, some of them country  guidance  cases.  She  is  the  Head  of
   Doctors for the  Medical  Foundation  Medico-Legal  Report  Service.   Dr
   Cohen's curriculum vitae, attached to  her  report,  cites  two  relevant
   publications:  Errors  of  Recall  and  Credibility-can   omissions   and
   discrepancies in successive statements reasonably be  said  to  undermine
   credibility of testimony?[1] and Safe in our Hands? A  study  of  suicide
   and self-harm in asylum seekers in the United Kingdom in detention and in
   the community[2].  A further paper entitled Intentional burn injury  -  a
   changing pattern of torture in Sri Lanka is described as 'in press'.

96. Dr Cohen's report notes that the appellant had a healthy childhood  with
   no significant illness or injury, during which  he  attended  school  for
   about 5 years. He recalls no significant physical punishment at  home  or
   at school.  The history of the appellant's  traumatisation  is  set  out,
   including the possibility that the appellant hit his head on at least one
   occasion and may have been concussed.

97. The appellant presented as a neatly dressed young man, shaky  at  first,
   anxious and nervous throughout the examination, with low mood and affect,
   sometimes  deeply  distressed   during   the   interview.    He   behaved
   appropriately, using detailed gestures and re-enactment of  posture  when
   describing the index events. He had no abnormalities of thought or speech
   and no evidence of psychosis. He had poor sleep and appetite, but  'fair'
   memory and concentration during the examination.   He  was  self-harming,
   but did not have any specific plans to kill himself.

98. Dr Cohen applied the Istanbul Protocol and noted a number of lesions  on
   the appellant's body, the majority of which did not show signs  of  being
   within 6-12 months of causation. There was  a  head  scar  on  his  right
   temple, which as the appellant had a  history  of  episodes  of  loss  of
   consciousness, might have been caused by falling when unconscious, or  by
   a blow from a gun butt or other blunt object, or being pushed  against  a
   wall.  It might also be purely accidental: it was not  possible  to  give
   relative likelihood for these causes. The report  separates  the  lesions
   not due to assault, those the appellant could not recall, and  those  due
   to self-harm, and records that the appellant 'readily  identified'  which
   was which.

99. Dr Cohen considered the marks which the appellant  identified  as  being
   connected with his torture as highly consistent with the  account  given.
   She did not consider that the appellant had any tendency to exaggerate or
   embellish his account.  The episodes of loss of  consciousness  had  left
   him with some ongoing memory impairment and  difficulty  controlling  his
   temper, which was not an  uncommon  sequel  to  head  injury.   Dr  Cohen
   recommended that the appellant be investigated for possible epilepsy.

100.  The  appellant's  memory  was  further   affected   by   his   general
   psychological condition and his poor sleep.  He tried to  avoid  watching
   news of Afghanistan,  television,  or  cramped  or  crowded  spaces;  the
   appellant self-harmed when distressed, despite  making  some  headway  in
   counselling, and remained generally anxious and  sometimes  tearful.   Dr
   Cohen was satisfied that the appellant met the  diagnostic  criteria  for
   PTSD under ICD-10, based both on his history and her observations of  him
   during the examination, both physical and mental. She had considered, but
   rejected,  the  possibility  that  the  appellant  was  fabricating   his
   psychological symptoms.  He  had  been  repeatedly  assessed  as  needing
   specialist help by clinical professionals involved since  he  arrived  in
   the United Kingdom.

101. Dr Cohen's conclusions are set out at paragraphs 63-65:

      "63.  [The appellant] has made some clear progress since  his  therapy
      in the United Kingdom but  remains  highly  symptomatic.   I  strongly
      recommend that he continue with therapy here.  I have no knowledge  of
      his ability to access such specialist therapy in  Afghanistan  and  in
      addition, it must be considered that returning to the place  where  he
      suffered his traumatic experiences is highly likely  to  trigger  much
      greater frequency of intrusive recall and flashbacks and thus  greatly
      exacerbate his condition and increase his self-harming behaviour.

      64.   I  note  from  the  clinical  records  that  his  symptoms  have
      fluctuated over the course of time, as they are known to  do  in  this
      condition.  I confirm that at the present time he is  still  suffering
      from PTSD and the ref in paragraph 15  of  the  Home  Office  decision
      letter that he is no longer suffering from it is now outdated.

      65.    [The  appellant]  continues  to  self-harm  and  has  done   so
      extensively, as can be seen in the body chart appended to this report.
       Even superficial self-harming injuries raise the risk of  suicide  in
      the future, compared to someone who has never self-harmed and I regard
      [the appellant] therefore as at low risk now only because  he  has  no
      specific plan, but vulnerable to a much greater  risk  in  the  future
      should his situation change and he become overwhelmed with anxiety and
      fear.  He states that he fears both further  arrest  and  torture  and
      being killed by his father's cousin, as was threatened and these fears
      are clearly deeply held and very real to him, being strongly linked to
      the highly traumatic experiences and losses he describes."

Other evidence

102. Letters  of  support  were  provided  from  Barnet  Southgate  College,
   Housing Plus  Limited,  and  Paiwand.  Barnet  Southgate  College  is  an
   educational establishment with 4 London campuses, where the appellant  is
   pursuing additional English  language,  Numeracy,  and  ICT  studies,  on
   Saturday  mornings.   Housing  Plus  Limited  provides  'Quality  Assured
   Refugee Accommodation', according to its stationery,  and  the  appellant
   was referred to it for accommodation on 14 November 2012.

103. Paiwand is an Afghan community  association  in  London,  whose  stated
   aims are:
      "...to unite our refugee community and  improve  the  quality  of  our
      community's  life  in  its  new   homeland,   here   in   the   United
      Kingdom....through the provision of advice and support in  respect  of
      health issues, social services, education, counselling, career advice,
      translation services, welfare support, advocacy and legal  issues  and
      the promotion of Afghan arts, culture and traditions, as well  as  our
      native Pashto and Farsi languages - for people  of  all  ages  in  our
      community - irrespective of  their  creed,  spiritual  and  political
      beliefs or their social background."

104. The letter from Paiwand, written in February 2014, confirmed  that  the
   appellant was attending Elementary Level 1 ESOL on Saturdays  and  as  an
   active member  of  Paiwand's  youth  group,  with  a  'high  interest  in
   history'.  He had made a number of good friends in the  Afghan  community
   and among other refugees, and was working hard on his English.  There  is
   no mention of what was then his new relationship with  his  partner.  The
   letter continued:

      "[The appellant] is from the province  of  Kunduz  in  North  East  of
      Afghanistan: the situation in this area highly unstable and  unsecure,
      hundreds of Taliban, Chechen and Arab insurgents attack  local  people
      and government services, commit crime on daily basis; they extensively
      recruit local young people to fight the local police forces.  There is
      a high risk for [the appellant]  being  forced  to  join  the  Taliban
      groups or killed would he be moved back to Afghanistan."

105. The letter from Housing Plus in March  2014  adds  little  to  what  is
   already known  about  the  appellant,  that  he  is  polite,  respectful,
   consistent in attending meetings regularly and on time, and 'has  emerged
   as  trustworthy  and  reliable'.   He  has   shown   'determination   and
   commitment' to his studies and the issues with which he  struggles.   The
   writer, Mr Ampofo, confirms his  understanding  that  the  appellant  has
   experienced panic attacks but is engaging  well  with  the  professionals
   seeking to support him and give him strategies to  minimise  his  anxiety
   and self-harm.

106. The letter from  Barnet  Southgate  College  confirms  the  appellant's
   current study pattern of basic literacy and numeracy and ICT. The author,
   Oziem Y Olcay, described as 'ESOL Lecturer' assessed the appellant thus:

      "[The appellant] is an asset to the class, he is a  very  hard-working
      student, and even in a short period of time that I have known  him  he
      has made a good progress, and I have formed a favourable impression of
      him.  He is reliable and and able to work well  on  his  own  and  his
      fellow students.

      I believe [the appellant] is very capable of achieving his educational
      and career goals, and he will make a valuable contribution the British
      society."

   It is unclear from that letter how long the writer has  worked  with  the
   appellant.

Country evidence

107. The country information included in the  appellant's  bundle  consisted
   of two expert reports, the first from Dr  Liza  Schuster  on  31  October
   2015, and the second from Dr Antonio Giustozzi on 11  November  2015,  as
   well as 122 pages of generic country  information,  little  of  which  is
   immediately related to the appellant's circumstances.

Dr Liza Schuster [31 October 2015]

108. Dr Schuster is  a  Reader  in  the  Department  of  Sociology  at  City
   University, London, and a former researcher at the University  of  Oxford
   and the London School of Economics.  She spent September  2013-July  2015
   as a guest researcher and lecturer at the  Afghanistan  Centre  at  Kabul
   University.  She has been visiting Afghanistan since July  2011  and  has
   spent in all 28 months in Kabul, 3 months in Baghlan Province, as well as
   visiting Mazar-i-Sharif, Samangan, Herat, Islam Qala, Parwan and  Kapisa.
   During her research she interviewed recently  returned  Afghan  nationals
   and   their   family   members,   Afghan   government   officials,   INGO
   representatives, journalists, members of diplomatic missions, and members
   of the Afghan police and military.

109. Dr Schuster's evidence supports the First-tier Tribunal's finding  that
   there is a risk in the appellant's home province of Kunduz, and  that  it
   is extremely dangerous to travel there. Approximately 20000 families were
   displaced after the Taliban attack  on  Kunduz.  In  February  2015,  the
   Afghan Minister for Refugees and  Repatriations  wrote  to  a  number  of
   European states asking them to suspend forced repatriation.  He  repeated
   this in October 2015 during an interview with Deutsche Welle.

110. In Kabul, there is insecurity caused by the  insurgency.   There  is  a
   culture of impunity (see Human Rights Watch  'Today  we  shall  all  die:
   Afghanistan's strongmen and the legacy of impunity',  published  3  March
   2015).  The UNAMA 2015 Mid-Year Report  on  Protection  of  Civilians  in
   Armed Conflict recorded a decrease in civilian deaths but an increase  in
   civilian injuries in Afghanistan in the first half of 2015.

111. The  report  cites  an  UN  Security  Council  Report  to  the  General
   Assembly:

      "18.  Overall, incident trends remained unchanged, with armed  clashes
      accounting for the majority  of  security  incidents  (53  per  cent),
      followed by improvised explosive devices (26 per  cent).  Attempts  by
      anti-Government  elements  to  exert  influence   through   fear   and
      intimidation resulted in a continued high level of targeted  killings.
      In the reporting period of 1 May to 31 July,  291  assassinations  and
      attempted assassinations were recorded,  an  11.4  per  cent  increase
      compared with the same period in 2014.  Anti-Government elements  also
      continued to undertake high-profile attacks in the  country's  capital
      and in provincial capitals.  Although  they  ostensibly  targeted  the
      Government  and  international  forces,  the  brunt  of  the   attacks
      continued to be borne by civilians.  Significant attacks in the  first
      part of the reporting period included one on the National Assembly  on
      22 June and attacks on international military convoys in Kabul  on  30
      June, 7 July and 22 August, as  well  as  suicide  attacks  on  Afghan
      military and Government targets in the provincial capitals of Kandahar
      (25 May), Jalalabad (31 May), Lashkar Gash  (30  June)  and  Host  (12
      July). Following the announcement of the death  of  Mullah  Omar,  the
      city of Kabul experienced a string of attacks between 7 and 10 August,
      including suicide attacks in the vicinity of an Afghan  National  Army
      base, the police academy, an international  military  base  and  Kabul
      International Airport, which resulted in over  55  individuals  killed
      and over 330 injured."                               [Italics added]

   The words in italics are not included in the paragraph  as  cited  by  Dr
   Schuster.  The reference to 'targeted attacks' is relevant to the overall
   assessment of risk in Kabul.

112. The report notes that the Afghan  President,  Ashraf  Ghani,  has  made
   apparently conflicting statements about the available domestic protection
   in Afghanistan and in particular in Kabul, stating on 21 March 2015  that
   he 'continues to have the utmost confidence in the ability of the  Afghan
   National Security Forces to meet the country's  ongoing  security  issues
   head on' but on World Refugee Day, 20 June 2015, that 'due to the current
   unstable situation of Afghanistan, please stop the forced deportation  of
   Afghans'.  The United Kingdom government is said to have been seeking  to
   put persuade the Afghan government to stop making public statements about
   not deporting Afghans.

113. Dr Schuster's report does not deal with  mental  health  facilities  in
   Kabul.

Dr Antonio Giustozzi [11 November 2015]

114. Dr Giustozzi is a senior visiting research fellow at  the  War  Studies
   Department of Kings College London, and  holds  a  PhD  in  International
   Relations from the London School of Economics.  He has  published  widely
   on Afghanistan and has  assisted  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  a  number  of
   previous appeals, including some country guidance  appeals.   His  report
   also notes the serious deterioration in Kunduz  between  2008  and  2010,
   with Pashtun areas greatly affected by the Taliban insurgency.  Paragraph
   4 of his report sets out the gravity of the situation in Kunduz  in  some
   detail.  He is aware of wide discussion, especially in the German  press,
   about the oil tanker incident.

115. At paragraph 15 and following in his report, Dr Giustozzi sets out  the
   pattern of targeted attacks in the Afghan capital, noting that:

      "15.  There is significant infiltration of insurgents in a  number  of
      southern and western districts of the capital, which are populated  by
      Pashtuns from the  neighbouring  provinces.   Exploiting  the  Pashtun
      traditions of hospitality as codified in the Pashtunwali tribal  code,
      militants obtain hospitality  from  relatives  and  tribesmen  in  the
      settled areas of the capital and are gradually building up  a  network
      there.  Both ISAF and the  Afghan  National  Directorate  of  Security
      (NDS) have information about this but found it difficult to  intervene
      because they feared that mass arrests could unleash  a  backlash  from
      the local population. ..."

116. Dr Giustozzi concludes that in Kabul, the risk to  the  appellant  from
   the Taliban would be limited to those  areas  where  the  Taliban  has  a
   significant presence. He would have been arrested to force  his  fugitive
   brother to reappear and hand himself over: as the  brother  is  still  at
   large, Dr Giustozzi considers that a repetition 'cannot  be  ruled  out'.
   His  report  records  the  climate  of  impunity  also  mentioned  in  Dr
   Schuster's report, and the efforts made by the Afghan government to  slow
   the forced return of Afghan citizens during this period of instability.

117. Relocating to Kabul would not be easy:  Dr Giustozzi says that  without
   family support, the appellant would be unlikely to be able to earn enough
   to provide a home and food for himself. Young  labourers  often  share  a
   flat or house, sometimes 4 to a room.   The  cheap  accommodation  is  in
   unsafe areas infiltrated by the insurgents. More central, safer areas  do
   not offer such accommodation at a reasonable price.

118. There is relatively little labouring work around, and unemployment  was
   56% in 2014, higher than in previous years.  Young men are  being  driven
   to crime in Kabul.   The Afghan currency had been devalued by 200% in the
   18 months before Dr Giustozzi wrote his report.

119. Turning to mental health provision, there is  only  one  mental  health
   hospital, in Kabul, which is in bad condition due to war damage and  lack
   of maintenance and equipment.  In 2011, it had 60 beds.  In  2010,  there
   were only 2 fully trained psychiatrists in the whole  of  Afghanistan,  a
   few psych nurses, and no trained psychologists.   40  more  psychiatrists
   and psychologists had received partial  training.   In  early  2010,  the
   National Health Strategy was revised to give more space to mental  health
   care, focusing on additional mental health care  awareness  training  for
   existing staff and training psychosocial counsellors,  but  this  led  to
   abuse of psychotropic drugs, with an  estimated  30%  of  the  population
   taking them and abusing them. These drugs  (mainly  tranquillisers)  were
   imported from Pakistan, mostly illegally.  Patients were addicted to them
   and paid privately for them.

120. By 2012, there were still 60 places in the Kabul hospital,  and  now  6
   trained psychiatrists and  30  other  doctors  with  some  mental  health
   training. Dr Giustozzi's understanding is that admission to that hospital
   requires a patient to be accompanied by a member of their family  at  all
   times (sourced to the Royal College of Psychiatrists, Network  News  from
   Kabul, and vol. 27 of European Psychiatry). The World Health Organisation
   estimated in 2010 that about  60%  of  Afghans  suffered  various  mental
   health problems.

121. The situation now is marginally better, since  the  European  Union  is
   supporting the rehabilitation of the Kabul mental hospital and  has  paid
   for the construction of a new building. The capacity  has  not  increased
   from 60 beds.  There is counselling available in small clinics around the
   country, but in Kabul they are few and far  between  and  attending  them
   could seriously disrupt attending school or  work.  Kabul  hospital  gets
   $100 worth of medicines a month, for 2,500 mentally  ill  patients  under
   its care: patients have to pay for such medicine as is available to them.
    Up to half of all medicine in Afghanistan consists of counterfeit  drugs
   from Pakistan: pharmacies mostly do not have even one pharmacist,  though
   the law requires it.

122. There are no supervised care hostels  for  mental  health  patients  in
   Afghanistan.  In Kabul and Herat,  there  are  16  psycho-social  centres
   which provide some element of counselling for PTSD  and  depression,  but
   consistent support in these centres is very  difficult.   The  treatments
   the appellant is receiving are unlikely to be available there. There  are
   approximately 2 million mentally ill people in Kabul alone,  40%  of  all
   those living in the city.  If the appellant has no relative to  take  him
   to hospital and accompany him, and no money to live in  Kabul,  even  the
   limited treatment in Kabul will in practice be unavailable to him.

123.  The  appellant  would  not  suffer  discrimination  for   the   common
   experience in Afghanistan of being depressed, but if  his  'funny  turns'
   recurred he might be regarded as possessed by djinns  or  spirits,  since
   Afghan people do not understand epilepsy.  Suicide  attempts  are  poorly
   regarded, as in all Muslim countries: the appellant might be interned  or
   discriminated against as a result.   Dr  Giustozzi  considered  that  the
   appellant's chances of employment would be decreased by his mental health
   difficulties, making it still less likely that he could survive in  Kabul
   and access treatment.

Submissions

124. In submissions for the respondent,  Mr  Nath  relied  on  the  skeleton
   argument filed on her behalf.  The  respondent  accepted,  to  the  lower
   standard appropriate in assessing international protection  claims,  that
   the appellant's uncle and brother were killed  in  a  NATO  airstrike  as
   described; that he had a cousin who was a  Taliban  Commander;  that  his
   father had been killed in a suicide attack at the district chief's office
   in 2011; and that  the  appellant  and  his  brother  were  arrested  and
   tortured by the police as a consequence of that attack.   The  respondent
   did not accept that the appellant or his  brother  were  members  of  the
   Taliban, or that  there  was  a  risk  to  the  appellant  on  return  to
   Afghanistan.

125. The respondent relied on MAB (paragraph  399:  'unduly  harsh')  United
   States [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC) which held  that  the  consequences  for  an
   individual were unduly harsh where they were inordinately or  excessively
   so, taking into account all the circumstances of  the  individual.    The
   same point was made in Naziri & others v Secretary of State for the  Home
   Department (JR - scope - evidence) IJR [2015] UKUT 437 (IAC).

126. The safety of  internal  relocation  to  Kabul  was  considered  in  RQ
   (Afghan National Army, Hizb-i-Islami, Risk) Afghanistan CG  [2008]  UKAIT
   00013 in which the  Tribunal  had  held  that  'the  safety  of  internal
   relocation in Kabul is a question of fact based on the particular history
   of an individual appellant and of the warlord  or  faction  known  to  be
   seeking to harm him'.

127. The appellant's brother had killed a man: the  state  was  entitled  to
   investigate that death, and the appellant had been released  after  being
   questioned.  He had no problems during the 2 months he spent  in  Faryab.
   The respondent accepted that there was a risk from  the  Taliban  in  the
   appellant's home area, but not in Kabul.

128. The  respondent  relied  on  the  report  of  Dr  Schuster  as  to  his
   confidence in the Afghan security forces.  She relied on paragraph  2.3.3
   of the December 2010 UNHCR  'Eligibility  Guidelines  for  Assessing  the
   Internal Protection Needs  of  Asylum  Seekers  from  Afghanistan'  which
   indicated that in certain circumstances, single males  might  subsist  in
   urban and semi-urban areas without family or community support, if  there
   were established infrastructure and effective government control.

129.  In  relation  to  the  appellant's  health,  the  Secretary  of  State
   submitted that the re-diagnosis of PTSD should not be accepted  and  that
   his current condition should not add any additional weight. There  was  a
   specialist psychiatric hospital in  Kabul  and  medical  facilities  were
   available if the appellant suffered a relapse.

130. The appellant could not bring himself within Appendix FM of  the  Rules
   and had only a limited private life interest  eh  United  Kingdom.  There
   were no other exceptional circumstances.

131. In oral submissions, Mr Nath observed that the  appellant's  fear  came
   from  the  media,  rather  than  from  direct  information.   There  were
   psychiatric facilities in Kabul.  The appellant's evidence at the hearing
   that he feared being considered 'rich' and being kidnapped  was  not  the
   basis on which the case had previously been advanced.

132. Section 55 no longer applied to him as he was now  an  adult.   He  had
   been educated in England and had transferrable skills which he could  use
   to begin again in Kabul on return.

133. For the appellant, Mrs Head relied upon  her  skeleton  argument.   The
   risk of harm in the appellant's home area of Kunduz was accepted:  Kunduz
   was a Taliban stronghold and  had  recently  been  the  subject  of  NATO
   intervention.

134. It was unduly harsh to expect this appellant to relocate to Kabul.   He
   had suffered a previous detention, was extremely vulnerable and there was
   a risk of re-detention.  It was likely that enquiries would  be  made  of
   him on his return and there was nothing in the evidence before the  Upper
   Tribunal to indicate that he would not be questioned again, in  the  same
   manner as before.  The  appellant  would  be  unable  to  withstand  such
   questioning. He had ongoing PTSD and a history of previous torture.

135. The appellant would rely  on  the  UNHCR  "Eligibility  Guidelines  for
   Assessing the  Protection  Needs  of  Asylum  Seekers  from  Afghanistan"
   published in  August  2013,  as  set  out  at  [27]-[30]  of  Naziri,  in
   particular at [30].  It was not possible for this  appellant  to  have  a
   'dignified, safe and orderly' return to Afghanistan, as  Minister  Balkhi
   had suggested, and his removal to Kabul on  the  facts  would  be  unduly
   harsh.  She relied on the evidence of Dr Cohen and Dr Giustozzi and asked
   me to find that the asylum claim was made out and allow the appeal.

Discussion

136. There is no suggestion by any of  the  witnesses,  and  the  First-tier
   Tribunal did not find, that  the  appellant  is  an  untruthful  witness,
   although by reason of his mental health problems, his memory is sometimes
   poor.  I approach this appeal on the basis that he is a witness of truth,
   who has been detained and tortured in Afghanistan and who has lost family
   members in the conflict. I accept the  evidence  that  he  has  PTSD  and
   depression; that he has occasional suicidal ideation but no plan to  kill
   himself; that he has self-harmed in the past, and that he is sustained in
   the United Kingdom by a complex network of support, extended  beyond  the
   usual period by reason of his mental fragility.  He does work hard at his
   studies: I accept the appellant's  evidence  that  he  does  so  to  keep
   thoughts of Afghanistan and his family's fate  away,  and  also  that  he
   manages less well in the college holidays. He is not working and  is  not
   presently able to do so, though he looks forward to being employed in due
   course, if he is allowed to stay.

137. The new evidence of the appellant's relationship with  his  partner  is
   supported by all of the agencies working with him.  It should  have  been
   disclosed long ago, but that is no reason to reject it as not genuine.  I
   accept therefore that he is in a relationship which has lasted for over 2
   years with an older British woman, who supports him, but that they do not
   yet live together and are not in a position to marry,  though  they  have
   discussed both possibilities.

138. The respondent accepts the core of  the  appellant's  account,  and  in
   particular, that the appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution for
   a Refugee Convention reason from 'those with Taliban links in your  local
   area'. She does so on the  basis  of  perceived  political  opinion,  but
   perhaps a better analysis  is  that  the  appellant  is  a  member  of  a
   particular social group which is at risk (his family), such that his  own
   political opinion is of no relevance.  As there is a  risk  in  the  home
   area, it is necessary  to  assess  whether  the  appellant  can  relocate
   elsewhere in Afghanistan without it being unduly  harsh  or  unreasonable
   for him to do so.

139. Only Faryab and Kabul were  advanced  by  the  respondent  as  possible
   internal relocation options.  On the evidence, Faryab  is  not  suitable:
   the appellant's aunt does not live  in  Faryab,  as  the  refusal  letter
   states: rather, for a time her husband moved  between  there  and  Kunduz
   province for work.  That is not an internal  relocation  option  for  the
   appellant.

140. The live issue therefore is  whether  the  appellant  can  exercise  an
   internal relocation option to Kabul.  He has no family  there  and  would
   lose the support  he  has  in  the  United  Kingdom,  both  personal  and
   institutional.

141. The appellant is a vulnerable person:  he has suffered torture  by  the
   Afghan authorities in the past and  I  remind  myself  that  pursuant  to
   paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules:

      "339K The fact that a person has already been subject  to  persecution
      or serious harm or to direct threats of such persecution or such harm,
      will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's  well-founded
      fear of persecution or real risk of  suffering  serious  harm,  unless
      there are good reasons to consider that such  persecution  or  serious
      harm will not be repeated."

142.  In  this  case,  the  appellant  has  suffered  torture.   Torture  is
   persecution; serious harm was caused to  him.   The  evidence  before  me
   indicates that the situation in  Kabul  remains  unstable  and  that  the
   appellant remains very vulnerable and certainly unable to  withstand  any
   questioning should he be challenged on return.   I am do  not  find  that
   there are good reasons to consider that the persecution or  serious  harm
   will not recur: the appellant remains a member  of  his  family  and  his
   brother remains at large.

143. As regards the health  issue,  the  evidence  is  that  there  is  some
   limited mental health care  in  Kabul,  with  60  beds  in  Kabul  Mental
   Hospital and some 2500 individuals being  cared  for  in  the  community,
   including some limited counselling services available.   Given  the  high
   level of care which the appellant has needed in  the  United  Kingdom  to
   prevent him from self-harming, that is not  sufficient  to  protect  him,
   particularly given the instability in the city, and  his  origin  from  a
   Taliban stronghold (as well as his identifying family name).

144. The country evidence indicates that young men with  no  family  support
   will have difficulty in securing housing, employment and so on in  Kabul.
   The personal evidence is clear that the appellant is not a man  who  will
   be able to withstand such pressures: he remains fragile, and  has  little
   or no experience of looking after himself.

145. I note that when assessing the position of vulnerable people under  the
   Memorandum of Understanding in Naziri, Mr Justice McCloskey said this:

      "86.               The open textured language and  inexhaustive  terms
      of the definition of  vulnerable  people  contained  in  the  MOU  and
      supplementing NVs  has  the  potential  to  give  rise  to  debate  in
      individual  cases.  Thus,  for  example,  a  physically  or   mentally
      handicapped adult would be expected to contend that they are  exempted
      from repatriation on account of their specific vulnerability. .. These
      reflections serve to highlight that every case will be unavoidably and
      intensively fact sensitive. ...."

146. This appellant has  significant,  albeit  intermittent,  mental  health
   difficulties.  I am satisfied, on the facts of this appeal, that it would
   be unduly harsh for this appellant to return to Afghanistan and  exercise
   an internal relocation option in Kabul.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law.
I set aside the decision and remake it by allowing the appeal on asylum  and
human rights grounds.
|                                      |                                     |
|Date:  6 May 2016                     |Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson        |
|                                      |Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson         |
|                                      |                                     |







-----------------------
[1] Medico-Legal Journal 2000, Vol 69(1), International Journal of Refugee
Law 2001 (reprinted)
[2] Journal of Forensic and Legal Medicine Vol 15 Issue 4, May 2008

