
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05461/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17-18 June and 9 October 2014              |    On 7 November 2014       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE SIMLER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    "AA"
                                                                  Respondent
                           (Anonymity Order Made)



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Hopkin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Seddon and Mr T Lay instructed by
Lawrence Lupin Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  against  a
         decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  AA's  appeal  on
         humanitarian protection grounds, for convenience we refer to AA as
         "the Appellant" and the Secretary of State as "the Respondent"  as
         the parties were originally.


      2. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made under rule 14(1)
         of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008   (SI
         2008/2698)  that  no  report  or  other   publication   of   these
         proceedings or any part or parts of them shall name or directly or
         indirectly identify the Appellant.  Reference to the Appellant may
         be by use of the initials "AA" but not  by  name.   References  in
         this Determination to certain other  individuals  and  to  certain
         events  has  also  been  anonymised  in  order  to  preserve  AA's
         anonymity. Failure by any  person,  body  or  institution  whether
         corporate or incorporate (for the avoidance of  doubt  to  include
         either party to this appeal) to comply with this order may lead to
         a Contempt of Court.   This order shall continue  in  force  until
         the Upper Tribunal (IAC) or an appropriate Court lifts  or  varies
         it.

      3. This is the determination of the  Upper  Tribunal  to  which  both
         members of the Panel have contributed.

I. INTRODUCTION

      4. The Appellant is a Rwandan national seeking asylum in  the  United
         Kingdom. This appeal arises out of a decision by the Respondent by
         letter dated 15 March 2010 refusing to grant the Appellant  asylum
         or humanitarian protection but granting him  discretionary  leave.
         The Appellant appeals against the  refusal  to  grant  him  asylum
         under s.83 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


      5. The appeal has had a chequered history. The Appellant  arrived  in
         the United Kingdom on 27 October 1999 and claimed asylum. This was
         refused in 2000 but following appeals to an  Adjudicator  and  the
         IAT his case was remitted for re-hearing. Before the case was  re-
         heard, in February 2002 the Respondent granted  exceptional  leave
         to remain for 4 years until January 2006.  On  31  December  2005,
         the Appellant applied for indefinite leave once again.  By  letter
         dated 6 April 2009, the Respondent rejected that  application  and
         invoked exclusion from the protection of the Refugee Convention by
         virtue of Article 1F(a) of that Convention,  in  that  there  were
         serious reasons for considering  that  he  had  been  involved  or
         complicit in genocide in Rwanda. The  Appellant  appealed  but  in
         June 2009 (just before the appeal hearing) the Respondent withdrew
         the decision.

      6. Subsequently, by letter dated 15 March  2010  the  decision  under
         challenge was made. The Respondent issued a certificate under s.55
         of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 on  the  basis
         that Article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention applied as there were
         serious reasons for considering that the Appellant was part  of  a
         joint criminal enterprise to perpetrate genocide or crimes against
         humanity; and/or that he had aided such acts or otherwise assisted
         the common plan  to  persecute  and  exterminate  the  Tutsi.  She
         refused to grant the Appellant indefinite leave  to  remain  under
         her policy relating to suspected war criminals and under paragraph
         322(5) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended, referred to as
         the "IR"). She rejected the claim for asylum under  paragraph  336
         IR; and humanitarian protection under paragraph 339F IR.  However,
         she granted limited leave to remain in the exercise of  discretion
         having regard to the decision in Brown & Ors v Govt Rwanda  [2009]
         EWHC 770 (Admin) (subsequently upheld on appeal) which  held  that
         those extradited to Rwanda would face a real risk  of  a  flagrant
         denial of justice in breach of Article 6 rights.

      7. The Appellant appealed against those decisions to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (the "FTT").  In a determination sent  on  7  July  2010,
         Judge Billingham allowed the Appellant's appeal. He  rejected  the
         Respondent's case  on  exclusion  on  the  basis  that  there  was
         insufficient evidence that the Appellant  was  in  a  position  to
         influence or encourage the commission of genocide and accepted the
         Appellant's case based on humanitarian protection under  paragraph
         339C (albeit  dismissing  his  appeal  on  asylum  grounds).   The
         Respondent appealed to the Upper Tribunal  ("the  UT")  which  set
         aside the FTT determination on the basis that the FTT  had  failed
         to determine whether (on the wider basis contemplated by  JS  (Sri
         Lanka) v Respondent [2010] UKSC 15) the Appellant contributed in a
         significant way to the ability of  the  Mouvement  Revolutionnaire
         Nationale pour le Developpement ("MRND") to pursue its purpose  of
         committing war crimes.

      8. By a determination sent to the parties on 17  March  2012  the  UT
         allowed the Respondent's appeal. The UT found that  the  Appellant
         was excluded from the protection of the Refugee  Convention  under
         Art 1F(a) on the basis of his involvement with the MRND long after
         he was aware that massacres had occurred  preceding  the  genocide
         and that the extermination of Tutsis in Rwanda was planned. Having
         done so, applying s.55 of the 2006 Act, the UT made no decision on
         asylum/humanitarian protection. The Appellant sought permission to
         appeal to the Court of Appeal on the basis that the UT  had  erred
         in law in finding that he was excluded  and  in  failing  to  make
         findings in relation to asylum and/or humanitarian protection.

      9. Permission to appeal was granted by the Court at an  oral  hearing
         on 20 December 2012. At paragraphs [7] to  [10]  of  his  judgment
         giving permission, Richards LJ held:


             "7. The first main  ground  of  challenge  is  that  the  Upper
            Tribunal's  conclusions  to  the  effect  that   the   applicant
            contributed to the genocide were reached without regard  to  the
            conclusions reached by the International Criminal  Tribunal  for
            Rwanda ("the ICTR"), notably in its  judgment  in  the  Bagosora
            case.  Mr Seddon submits that in that judgment, reached  on  the
            basis of a very large amount of documentary evidence and witness
            testimony over an extremely long trial, the  ICTR  rejected  the
            proposition that the genocide was the result of lengthy planning
            and preparation prior to 7 April 1994, and did so in the context
            of a conspiracy charge which was found not proved  against  very
            senior people within the MRND.  That, it is  said,  is  directly
            inconsistent with the Secretary  of  State's  case,  effectively
            accepted by the Upper Tribunal  that  the  applicant's  criminal
            responsibility for the genocide lay in his  involvement  in  the
            planning and preparation for it.


            8. The fact that Mr Seddon was advancing that line  of  argument
            by reference to the Bagosora case was plainly understood by  the
            Upper Tribunal.  Reference is made to it at  paragraphs  46,  61
            and 65 to 66; albeit at the end of  paragraph  65  the  tribunal
            referred to the appeal judgment which came out after the hearing
            and said that it would deal with it below, but did  not  in  the
            event, as it would seem, deal with it, at least expressly.

            9. What troubles me about this issue is that, although the Upper
            Tribunal was plainly aware of the submission and  its  potential
            significance, it did not engage at all with the ICTR's  findings
            when it came to its analysis and when it  reached  a  conclusion
            seemingly inconsistent with the ICTR's conclusion that  planning
            had not been proved.  All the more troubling is that it was able
            to reach that conclusion in relation to the applicant, who  was,
            on any reasonable view, a  very  much  lesser  player  than  the
            senior figures who were  the  subject  of  the  charges  in  the
            Bagasora case.  In the absence of reasoned explanation as to why
            a different conclusion than that of the ICTR was reached by  the
            Upper Tribunal, one is left with  an  uneasy  feeling  that  the
            tribunal may after all have failed to have proper regard to this
            aspect of the evidence when reaching its conclusion.

            10. That is reinforced by a related ground of appeal  concerning
            the position of the expert evidence adduced on  the  applicant's
            behalf.  There was a report of an expert, Mr Nsengiyumva,  which
            dealt in part with the ICTR material but  also  covered  various
            other  matters  including   issues   concerning   the   academic
            environment and political  involvement  at  Butare.   The  Upper
            Tribunal made no explicit reference to that expert evidence."



     10. On 3 July 2012 the appeal was allowed by consent and remitted  for
         a full re-hearing in the UT, retaining the facts previously agreed
         before the first UT hearing.

     11. Thus, the matter came before us to determine both the question  of
         exclusion under Art 1F(a) and whether the  Appellant  is  at  real
         risk of persecution for Refugee Convention reasons  on  return  to
         Rwanda or alternatively, is entitled to  humanitarian  protection.
         The appeal being under s.83 of the 2002 Act, is limited  to  those
         two grounds (see s.84(3) of the  2002  Act  and  FA(Iraq)  v  SSHD
         [2010] 1 WLR 2545).

     12. The Appellant was represented at the hearing by Mr Seddon and  the
         Respondent by Mr Hopkin.  We are grateful to both of them for  the
         assistance they provided.  The hearing was originally  listed  for
         two days only which proved insufficient.  The Tribunal  reconvened
         to hear submissions limited to the inclusion issue  on  9  October
         2014, with exchange of written arguments before that date.  At the
         end of that hearing, having advanced arguments on the Respondent's
         behalf, Mr Hopkin applied to adjourn the  case  on  the  inclusion
         issue.  In the absence of any  justifiable  basis  to  do  so,  we
         refused that application.

II. EXCLUSION

    The parties' positions in summary


     13. The Respondent's case on exclusion has changed over the course  of
         these proceedings.  Originally, her central allegation against the
         Appellant (as set out in the letter of 15 March 2010) was that  as
         the MRND leader of students for his  year  at  Butare  University,
         there were serious reasons for thinking that  he  participated  in
         the planning and preparation of the genocide in Rwanda, which  was
         meticulously organised in the months and years before April  1994.
         It was also alleged that he had returned to Butare  University  in
         April 1994 and actively participated in the genocide  there.   The
         Respondent relied on a series of reports produced by the UKBA  War
         Crimes Unit setting out material that was said to demonstrate that
         pre-planning.  Reliance was also placed by the Respondent  in  the
         15 March 2010 letter on the fact that the Appellant spent time  at
         a particular Refugee  Camp  in  a  leadership  role  there,  after
         fleeing Rwanda in 1994.  The Camp was said by  the  Respondent  to
         have been a focal point of Hutu extremists fleeing Rwanda, many of
         them genocide perpetrators.  This allegation was dealt with by the
         FTT at paragraph 40.  The FTT accepted as  credible,  evidence  of
         other witnesses called by the Appellant at that  hearing  (all  of
         whom were MRND members) who had been at the Camp and said that the
         Appellant was not politically active  at  the  Camp  and  did  not
         associate with extremists.  This is no longer  relied  on  by  the
         Respondent.


     14. The Respondent's position before us was advanced on the  basis  of
         three principal grounds justifying the Appellant's exclusion  from
         international protection. In particular, Mr Hopkin contended  that
         there are serious grounds for considering that:
             (i)  the Appellant was a participant in acts  of  genocide  in
             Rwanda (by killing and assaulting Tutsis and  moderate  Hutus)
             between 6 and 9 April 1994 in Gisenyi, and  during  the  first
             week in May 1994 at the University of Butare; and/or


             (ii) as a member of the student leadership  structure  of  the
             MRND at Butare  University  between  1992  and  1994,  by  his
             extensive activities on behalf of the MRND during this  period
             the Appellant knowingly and  intentionally  contributed  in  a
             significant way to a joint criminal enterprise of  persecuting
             Tutsis in Rwanda before April 1994; and/or


             (iii) the Appellant aided and abetted international crimes  of
             murder or  genocide  after  6  April  1994,  by  acting  as  a
             supporter and defender of the MRND and  its  policies  between
             1992 and 1994 and by providing acts of assistance by words  or
             actions that lent encouragement or support, knowing that these
             acts  and  support  encouraged  violence  and   discrimination
             towards Tutsis at the time and knowing they  would  assist  in
             any subsequent acts of murder or genocide.

     15. The Appellant denies these allegations in their entirety.  On  his
         behalf,  Mr  Seddon  contends  that  a  central  edifice  of   the
         Respondent's case (both as originally  advanced  and  as  advanced
         before us) has been undermined, namely the idea or theory that the
         Rwandan genocide was pre-planned in the months and years prior  to
         April 1994. The suggestion  of  pre-planning  was  comprehensively
         rejected by the International Criminal Tribunal  of  Rwanda  ("the
         ICTR") in a number of cases, including Bagosora  &  Ors  Case  No.
         ICTR-98-41-T and Prosecutor v Karemera & Ors Case No.  ICTR-98-44-
         T. Although convicted of genocide offences after 6 April 1994, all
         individuals prosecuted were acquitted of the conspiracy charge  in
         the period prior to 6 April 1994.


     16. Mr Seddon further contends:

             (i) If there was no preparation and planning for the  genocide
             by those who orchestrated it ultimately,  it  cannot  be  said
             that the  Appellant  was  involved  or  participated  in  such
             preparation and planning.


             (ii) It was neither the purpose nor the policy of the MRND  to
             commit human rights abuses or international crimes.


             (iii) In  any  event  the  Appellant  had  no  knowledge  that
             international crimes were being committed in the name of or by
             the MRND. The Appellant did  not  by  his  actions  contribute
             significantly to the commission of  international  crimes  and
             moreover, there is no evidence that international crimes  were
             committed in the period 1990 to 1993.

             (iv) There is not a  scrap  of  evidence  that  the  Appellant
             participated in the genocide from 7 April 1994.

The principles relating to exclusion

     17. Art 1F of the Refugee Convention sets  out  the  circumstances  in
         which an individual  will  be  excluded  from  protection  of  the
         Refugee Convention.  So far as relevant to  this  appeal,  Art  1F
         provides:

             "The provisions of this Convention  shall  not  apply  to  any
             person with respect to whom  there  are  serious  reasons  for
             considering that:


             (a) he has committed ... a crime against humanity, as  defined
             in the international instruments drawn up to make provision in
             respect of such crimes; ..."




     18. It is common ground in this appeal that the burden lies  upon  the
         Respondent to establish that Art 1F applies; in other words,  that
         there are "serious reasons for considering" that the Appellant has
         committed a crime against humanity. Moreover, as an exclusion from
         the protection of fundamental rights, the clause must be  narrowly
         interpreted and cautiously applied. In   Al-Sirri  v  SSHD  [2012]
         UKSC 54 at [75] the Supreme Court held:


             "We are, it is clear, attempting  to  discern  the  autonomous
             meaning of the words "serious reasons for considering". We  do
             so in the light of the UNHCR view, with which we  agree,  that
             the exclusion  clauses  in  the  Refugee  Convention  must  be
             restrictively interpreted and cautiously applied.  This  leads
             us to draw the following conclusions:

             (1) "Serious reasons" is stronger than "reasonable grounds".


             (2) The evidence from which those reasons are derived must  be
             "clear and credible" or "strong".


             (3) "Considering" is stronger than "suspecting". In  our  view
             it is also  stronger  than  "believing".  It     requires  the
             considered judgment of the decision-maker.


             (4) The decision-maker need not be satisfied beyond reasonable
             doubt or to the standard required  in criminal law.


             (5) It is unnecessary to  import  our  domestic  standards  of
             proof into the question. The circumstances of refugee  claims,
             and the nature of the evidence  available,  are  so  variable.
             However, if the decision-maker is satisfied that  it  is  more
             likely than not that  the  applicant  has  not  committed  the
             crimes in question or has not been guilty of acts contrary  to
             the purposes and principles  of  the  United  Nations,  it  is
             difficult to see  how  there  could  be  serious  reasons  for
             considering that he had done so. The reality is that there are
             unlikely to be sufficiently serious  reasons  for  considering
             the applicant to be guilty unless the  decision-maker  can  be
             satisfied on the balance of probabilities that he is. But  the
             task of the decision-maker  is  to  apply  the  words  of  the
             Convention (and the Directive) in the particular case."


     19. In determining what amounts to  a  "crime  against  humanity"  the
         Supreme Court  in  JS  accepted  that  the  Rome  Statute  of  the
         International Criminal Court ("the ICC") was the "starting  point"
         (at [8]).  The international crimes  are  defined  by  Articles  7
         (crimes against humanity) and 8 (war crimes) of the ICC.  Articles
         25 (individual responsibility) and 30 (mental  element)  are  also
         important.


     20. Article 7 of the ICC defines a "crime against humanity"  in  terms
         of a series of criminal acts from murder at (a) to "other inhumane
         acts" at (k) which constitute a crime against humanity

             "when committed as part of a widespread or  systematic  attack
             directed against any civilian population,  with  knowledge  of
             the attack"


             Where 'attack directed against any civilian population' means


                "a course of conduct involving the multiple  commission  of
             acts  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  against   any   civilian
             population, pursuant to  or  in  furtherance  of  a  State  or
             organizational policy to commit such attack; ..."

     21. Article 8 defines war crimes by reference to  a  further  list  of
         wrongful acts when "committed as part of the plan or policy or  as
         part of a large-scale commission of such crimes".


     22. Article 25 addresses the circumstances in which an individual  may
         be "criminally responsible" for a crime against  humanity  falling
         within Article 7 and imposes individual  responsibility  on  those
         who  commit  such  crimes   individually   or   jointly   (Article
         25(3)(a)).  Article 25(3) also imposes  individual  responsibility
         for those with less than direct involvement in the  commission  of
         the crime where a person:

             "(c) For the purpose of facilitating the commission of such  a
             crime, aids, abets or otherwise assists in its  commission  or
             its attempted commission, including providing  the  means  for
             its commission;


             (d)  In  any  other  way  contributes  to  the  commission  or
             attempted commission of such a crime by  a  group  of  persons
             acting with a common  purpose.   Such  contribution  shall  be
             intentional and shall either:


             i) Be made with the aim of furthering the criminal activity or
             criminal purpose of the group, where such activity or  purpose
             involves the commission of a crime within the jurisdiction  of
             the Court; or


             ii) Be made in the knowledge of the intention of the group  to
             commit the crime ..."


     23. The necessary mental element required for criminal  responsibility
         is dealt with by Art 30 which provides at (1)  that  the  material
         elements must be committed with intent and knowledge, and that:


             "2. For the purposes of this  article,  a  person  has  intent
         where


             (a) In relation to conduct, that person means to engage in the
             conduct;
             (b) In relation to a consequence, that person means  to  cause
             that consequence or  is  aware  that  it  will  occur  in  the
             ordinary course of events.

             3.  For  the  purposes  of  this  article,  'knowledge'  means
             awareness that a circumstance exists  or  a  consequence  will
             occur in the ordinary course of events. 'Know' and 'knowingly'
             shall be construed accordingly."


     24. In JS, the Supreme  Court  dealt  with  the  correct  approach  to
         Article 1F, recognising that   criminal  responsibility is engaged
         by persons other than the person actually  committing  the  crime;
         encompassing those who order, solicit or induce;  those  who  aid,
         abet, or  otherwise  assist;  and  those  who  in  any  other  way
         intentionally contribute to its  commission.  Where  a  person  is
         alleged to  possess  individual  criminal  responsibility  not  by
         reason of any personal commission but by complicity,  there  is  a
         requirement that that person has  "contributed  in  a  significant
         way" to the commission of the act in the knowledge that his act or
         omission would facilitate the criminal conduct. At paragraph  [38]
         of JS Lord Brown held that the Court of Appeal had been  wrong  to
         restrict the scope of  Art  25(3)  only  to  those  who  would  be
         criminally liable (whether as perpetrators or  accessories)  under
         domestic criminal law, stating


             "Put simply,  I  would  hold  an  accused  disqualified  under
             article 1F if there are serious reasons  for  considering  him
             voluntarily to have contributed in a significant  way  to  the
             organisation's ability to pursue its purpose of committing war
             crimes, aware that his assistance will in  fact  further  that
             purpose"


     25. The Supreme Court considered the question "what more is  required
         beyond mere   membership of  an  organisation  which  commits  war
         crimes for a person to be excluded  from  the  protection  of  the
         refugee convention". The Court held that even in the  case  of  an
         extremist organisation, joining it will not be enough  to  suggest
         complicity; the critical  question  must  always  be  whether  the
         evidence provides serious reasons for considering  the  individual
         to have committed the actus reus of an  international  crime  with
         the requisite mens rea. The Supreme Court identified a  number  of
         factors that are likely to be relevant to the necessary evaluation
         of the individual's role in the organisation and the nature of his
         participation:

             "30.     .... (in no particular  order)  (i)  the  nature  and
             (potentially of some importance) the size of the  organisation
             and particularly that part of it with which the  asylum-seeker
             was himself most directly concerned, (ii) whether and, if  so,
             by whom the organisation was proscribed, (iii) how the asylum-
             seeker came to be  recruited,  (iv)  the  length  of  time  he
             remained in the organisation and what, if  any,  opportunities
             he had to leave it,  (v)  his  position,  rank,  standing  and
             influence in the  organisation,  (vi)  his  knowledge  of  the
             organisation's  war  crimes  activities,  and  (vii)  his  own
             personal involvement and role in  the  organisation  including
             particularly  whatever  contribution  he  made   towards   the
             commission of war crimes."


     26. Other members of the Court agreed with the factors set out by Lord
         Brown at [30] but Lord Kerr (with whom other members of the  Court
         agreed) cautioned against that list becoming prescriptive:


             "55. I would be reluctant to accept that this list of  factors
             provides the invariable and infallible prescription  by  which
             what I have described  as  the  critical  question  is  to  be
             answered.  What must be shown is that the person concerned was
             a knowing participant or accomplice in the commission  of  war
             crimes etc.  The evaluation of his role  in  the  organisation
             has as its purpose either the identification of  a  sufficient
             level of participation on the part of the  individual  to  fix
             him with the relevant liability or a determination  that  this
             is not present.  While the six factors that Counsel identified
             will frequently be relevant to that evaluation, it seems to me
             that they are not necessarily exhaustive of the matters to  be
             taken into account, nor will each of the factors be inevitably
             significant  in  every  case.   One  needs,  I   believe,   to
             concentrate on  the  actual  role  played  by  the  particular
             person, taking all material aspects of that role into  account
             so as to decide whether the required degree  of  participation
             is established."


     27. Lord Kerr emphasised that the assessment required  an  examination
         of the individual's actual involvement in the  organisation  which
         committed crimes against humanity.


    Agreed factual background


     28. The Appellant is a Hutu from the village of Rambura,  Karango,  in
         the province of Gisenyi in Rwanda. He was an able student, scoring
         high marks at school and in 1992, having  graduated  from  Rambura
         College, he was admitted to the  University  of  Butare  to  study
         biology and chemistry.


     29. At this time,  the  president  of  Rwanda  was  President  Juvenal
         Habyarimana, whose home village  was  also  Rambura.  He  was  the
         leader of the MRND which had been in power since  1973.  The  MRND
         was largely  Hutu.  There  had  been  fighting  between  the  MRND
         Government and the  Rwandan  Patriotic  Front  ("the  RPF")  since
         October 1990. The RPF was largely Tutsi. The Appellant's  brother,
         BB, had a significant role in President Habyarimana's staff.

     30. At the University of Butare the Appellant joined the MRND and  was
         elected student leader for his year group in 1992  and  1993.  The
         organisation invited politicians to speak at  the  University  and
         the Appellant spoke at student meetings.

     31. On 6 April 1994 President Habyarimana was returning from Arusha in
         Tanzania, from discussions concerning the  implementation  of  the
         Arusha peace accords relating to the armed  conflict  between  the
         RPF and the MRND. The  Appellant's  brother  BB,  was  aboard  the
         President's aircraft when it was shot down, and both were  killed.
         At the time of the shooting down of the  aircraft,  the  Appellant
         was at home in Rambura during the Easter holidays.  Following  the
         shooting, he went to Kigali with another  brother  and  sister  to
         find BB's family. Having found them, they all returned to Rambura.
         At some point between then and his departure from Rwanda in August
         1994, the Appellant returned to the University campus.

     32. The Appellant escaped to  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  in
         August 1994 but returned to Rwanda in 1997 with his  family  where
         he remained until he left for the UK  in  1999.  He  suffers  from
         anxiety and stress.

     33. His family are pursuing claims against the Rwandan Government  for
         compensation in relation to BB's death and  are  seeking  criminal
         convictions for  unlawful  killings  against  the  RPF  Government
         headed by President Kagame. The Appellant considers  that  members
         of his own family have been victims of unlawful killing and  seeks
         justice for them.


    Further findings of fact


     34. We heard oral evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  considered  the
         various accounts given by him over the 15 year period he has spent
         in the United Kingdom. In evidence he adopted his earliest witness
         statement dated  December  1999  subject  to  amendments  made  to
         correct certain aspects of it in a later statement; the statements
         dated 10 May  and  4  June  2010;  and  his  most  recent  witness
         statement, all of which he confirmed as true. In addition we  were
         referred to answers to questions he gave  when  interviewed  on  a
         number of occasions by the UKBA. We also had a considerable volume
         of documentation including  a  series  of  War  Crimes  Unit  Case
         Reports,  a   report   of   "the   International   Commission   of
         Investigation on Human Rights Violations in Rwanda" dated  January
         1993, a report entitled "Beyond  the  Rhetoric,  Continuing  Human
         Rights Abuses in Rwanda" dated June 1993 and a "Human Rights Watch
         Africa" report dated May 1994.


     35. When assessing  the  Appellant's  evidence  it  is,  we  consider,
         important to recognise two things. First, English is not his first
         language and on arrival here, he could not speak or understand it.
         Secondly, he has been asked to recall events that took place  some
         time ago (now more than 20 years ago). Over the period  since  his
         arrival in the UK, he has  read  and  become  familiar  with  many
         reports  and  publications  concerning   the   Rwandan   genocide,
         accumulating a knowledge and understanding of events  he  may  not
         have had when he left Rwanda. It is clear to us from what he  said
         that  these  have  influenced,  to  some  extent  at  least,   his
         recollection and account of what happened at the time. We consider
         that he has  found  it  difficult  when  answering  questions,  to
         separate  what  he  now  knows  occurred  from  what  he  actually
         remembers about the material period and what actually happened  at
         the time. This may explain some conflict or inconsistency  in  the
         detail of some of the answers he has given  in  interview  to  the
         UKBA,  though  his  account  on  essential  matters  has  remained
         consistent.

     36. Even recognising these features and making allowances for them, we
         have  not  been  able  to  conclude  that  he   is   an   entirely
         straightforward witness. He appeared unable or unwilling to give a
         straight answer to some direct  questions.  On  occasions  he  was
         belligerent or sarcastic in his response to questions.  There  are
         also some changes in the detail  of  his  evidence,  when  earlier
         statements are compared with  later  statements,  that  cannot  be
         explained by his increasing level of knowledge  or  understanding,
         or not having English as a first language, and are  not  otherwise
         satisfactorily explained.

     37.  We  approach  the  Appellant's  evidence  with  caution  in   the
         circumstances and because we are not altogether persuaded  of  its
         reliability. We regard it as particularly important  in  light  of
         the Respondent's position, to consider his evidence in the context
         of other objective material about what was happening in Rwanda  at
         the relevant time, and about the nature of the MRND and  the  role
         played by the MRND both  before  and  after  6  April  1994.   Our
         approach accordingly is first to  make  findings  about  what  the
         Appellant  did  at  the  material  times;  then  to  consider  the
         objective material; and then to draw inferences and conclusions in
         relation to the three grounds for exclusion advanced.

     38. Although in later statements and in evidence, the Appellant sought
         to distance himself  from  President  Habyarimana,  we  are  quite
         satisfied that the Appellant and his family were strong supporters
         of the President. They lived in the same small village of Rambura,
         also the President's village, and he describes the two families as
         very close in his 1999 statement. The whole region of Gisenyi, but
         in particular the village of Rambura, were very much  favoured  by
         the President in terms  of  development  projects  and  the  money
         invested in them - the village had the benefit of  infrastructure,
         roads  and  electricity  not  found  elsewhere.  The   Appellant's
         brother, BB, was sponsored through higher level training for  four
         years by  the  government.  According  to  the  Appellant's  first
         statement, BB was only able to gain a place there because  of  his
         strong links with the President and was sponsored  to  finish  his
         studies at a college  abroad.  Having  done  so  he  rose  through
         promotions to his  significant  role  in  the  President's  staff.
         Further, in interview on  1  May  2009  the  Appellant  was  asked
         whether  his  connection  to  the  President  helped  him  get   a
         scholarship. His answer was

             "I would say yes. Yes my performance was good but  competition
             was very high and we only had two universities. If it were not
             for my brother I am not too sure  whether  I  would  have  got
             place or not."


     39. In his school graduation photograph the Appellant was photographed
         wearing a badge with the face  of  President  Habyarimana  on  it.
         Although he sought to downplay the significance of  this,  we  are
         satisfied that he was expressing support for President Habyarimana
         by wearing the badge.


     40. As a student at school in Rambura, the Appellant told us  that  he
         had no  involvement  with  the  MRND.  In  particular,  he  denies
         attending MRND meetings in Rambura whilst still a school-boy,  and
         maintains that there were no such meetings in his village, and his
         first involvement with  MRND  was  when  he  went  to  University.
         However, a letter from his then solicitors, Gill and Co, dated  22
         December 1999 provided the Immigration office  with  a  number  of
         photographs in support of his asylum claim and one such photograph
         is described as showing the Appellant "standing in an MRND meeting
         in Rambura". The Appellant  maintained  that  this  was  a  simple
         mistake that had not been noticed.  This  inconsistency  was  much
         relied on by the Respondent, and Mr  Hopkin  suggested  in  effect
         that it was an attempt to re-write the past to  obscure  his  much
         earlier involvement with the MRND.

     41. We are puzzled by the Solicitors' reference  but  given  the  fact
         that the Appellant volunteered in  the  same  1999  statement  his
         voluntary membership of the MRND as soon as he started University,
         and the fact that his whole family were members of  the  MRND  and
         his brother held a high position  in  the  President's  staff,  we
         cannot see why he would lie about any MRND involvement before this
         time. Further, having looked carefully at the photographs (and the
         colour prints provided after the hearing) we  are  satisfied  that
         the photograph relied on in this regard, shows  the  Appellant  at
         his graduation, and not standing in an MRND  meeting  in  Rambura.
         Accordingly, we are satisfied that his  first  active  involvement
         with the MRND was at University.

     42. The Appellant became a  voluntary  member  of  the  MRND  and  was
         elected as  the  MRND  student  leader  for  his  year  at  Butare
         University within a short time of joining the University in autumn
         1992. He represented the MRND for his year in 1992 and 1993 and in
         his 1999 statement (at paragraph 6) he volunteered  the  following
         information about his activities on behalf of the  MRND  of  which
         there would otherwise have been no evidence:

             "as leader (of the MRND) for my year,  I  would  organise  the
             buses to go to meetings, I  would  organise  contributions  if
             there was some kind of collection going on, I would  give  out
             badges, I would invite government politicians to talk of  what
             the government would  do  about  the  war,  for  example;  and
             Rwanda's problems. When the MRND  had  important  meetings,  I
             would always be sent along as delegate, as  a  representative.
             University meetings will take place about every month. I would
             speak at meetings, to defend the MRND actions and  talk  about
             the opposition. We were there to give  different  examples  to
             show that the MRND were working for everyone."

         There is no  other  evidence  of  anything  said  or  done  by  the
         Appellant while at Butare University.


     43. The reference to defending MRND  actions  was  seized  on  by  the
         Respondent and  interpreted  as  defending  actions  such  as  the
         Bagogwe and Kibilira massacres between 1990 and 1994 in  which  it
         was said the MRND leadership, its supporters  and  their  militia,
         undertook targeted and sustained violence against the Tutsis.


     44. The Appellant was  accordingly  pressed  in  interview  about  the
         reference to defending MRND actions and has maintained throughout,
         that he had no knowledge of violence or abuse carried out  by  the
         MRND at the time  he  joined  the  organisation  or  at  any  time
         afterwards. He has said throughout that he believed that the  MRND
         was a moderate party; not a party of extremist Hutus. By  contrast
         he regarded the RPF as an extremist Tutsi party and the CDR as  an
         extremist Hutu party. He has maintained that at the time, that  is
         between autumn 1992 and 6 April 1994 he was not aware of  militias
         being involved  in  killings.  There  is  no  direct  evidence  to
         contradict the Appellant's statements that he  did  not  make  any
         anti-Tutsi speeches at any time nor did he  arrange  meetings  the
         purpose of which was to give a platform for  anti-Tutsi  sentiment
         to be expressed.

     45. In interview in May 2009 the Appellant was asked what he  said  at
         the meetings at which he was a 'delegate' and stated:

             "it was my duty to show at these national  meetings  what  was
             discussed at student meetings and represent  them.  And  prove
             why we joined the MRND  over  other  parties,  appeal  to  the
             public."

     46. Later he stated:


             "I could probably take against any other party  and  show  how
             their policy would not be in the  interest  of  Rwandans.  Two
             extremist parties are PL - Tutsi party - and CDR  -  extremist
             Hutus. So it was my duty to tell that MRND  was  moderate.  We
             were in between so easy to pick up on PL - if  general  public
             vote for PL then this is how our  country  will  be.  We  have
             tomorrow for their politics. PL and CDR are racist and I would
             tell voters not to vote for them because they are  extremists.
             I have the right to do so as a Rwandan".

     47. The Appellant was cross-examined about becoming a  student  leader
         and defending the party, and responded:


             'MRND, as I have  explained,  there  were  different  parties,
             others  were  extremist.   I   was   defending   against   the
             extremists.  It was the party that could play a  key  role  in
             having peace.  The war could have  ended  and  there  been  no
             genocide. But with extremists, they made the Rwandans  suffer.
             There were problems within the MRND.  I wanted  to  make  sure
             the Habyarimana group...hand over party  to  ordinary  people.
             The peace agreement was an achievement.  On 6 April  1994  the
             peace agreement was signed, they shot down  the  aircraft  and
             genocide started - extremists.  If  the  peace  agreement  had
             been implemented, it wouldn't have happened."

     48. In his May 2010 statement, the Appellant states that  he  saw  the
         MRND as the most easily reformed party  that  could  bring  Rwanda
         into the modern world; but he was not  uncritical  of  the  party.
         There were specific ministers whose policies he criticised; and he
         stated that he even considered that President Habyarimana  himself
         did not sufficiently promote a culture of equal opportunities.


     49. There is no evidence that the Appellant had links  with  extremist
         groups or organisations. He has  said  that  he  was  against  the
         'Inkandagirabitabo' (those who 'march  over  the  books')  element
         within the MRND, including people such as  Bagosora.  Overall  the
         policies he says he espoused (and believed the MRND espoused) were
         seeking a resolution of the civil war and achieving power sharing.
         He denies that the  MRND  espoused  extremist  Hutu  ideology  and
         maintains that the Hutu extremist party was CDR, which he did  not
         join.

     50. The Respondent points to conflicts in the evidence  the  Appellant
         has  given  about  Hutu/Tutsi   sectarian   tensions   at   Butare
         University, as a basis for concluding that he is covering  up  his
         real role and actions at  the  time.  A  careful  reading  of  the
         interviews and statements suggests that  this  conflict  is  over-
         stated:

           i) In his third interview,  the  Appellant  said  there  was  no
              tension at University (Q22-24) as far as he was aware because
              "...they were signing peace agreements if you remember so  we
              were all happy as far as I knew".
          ii) In his second interview (Q30-32), he was  being  asked  about
              his professors and he agreed that  some  supported  the  MRND
              "for their own safety".

          In his oral evidence, the Appellant confirmed that they may  have
          done this for protection because of the attitudes of certain Hutu
          extremists in a time of war.  This was not, as we understood  it,
          an agreement that there were ethnic  tensions  on  campus.   That
          professors, in a significant or exposed  position,  may  consider
          that they needed to align themselves clearly with the state at  a
          time of war does not  of  itself  mean  that  there  were  ethnic
          tensions on campus.

     51. The  Respondent  also  relies  on  conflicts  in  the  Appellant's
         evidence  as  to  the  precise  ethnic   composition   of   Butare
         University.  The reality,  as  it  appears  to  us,  is  that  the
         Appellant does not  know  the  precise  ethnic  make-up,  and  has
         hazarded a guess at different times based on a different knowledge-
         base and understanding.  We do not regard this as sinister. As  he
         explained and  seems  rational,  his  first  assumption  was  that
         because the University is located in the south of Rwanda where the
         majority are Tutsi, this would suggest greater numbers of  Tutsis.
         Later he thought that because the Hutu were the  majority  in  the
         whole country, it may mean that the majority was Hutu.

     52. The Respondent also relies on conflicting evidence  given  by  the
         Appellant  about  the  role  of  the  lecturers'  branch  at   the
         University. Once again, we consider that too much is made of  this
         so-called conflict. In the fourth UKBA  interview,  the  Appellant
         stated that members of the University staff did not attend student
         MRND meetings at Butare (Q29),  whereas  in  his  first  statement
         (paragraph 7) he says that the lecturers helped "organise  student
         wing". Yet, the Appellant's own Solicitors' record of  the  fourth
         interview  was  that  the  "Professors  probably  had  their   own
         meetings.  There were meetings as  overall  nationwide  meetings."
         The answer does not in fact address whether the lecturers attended
         or not.

     53. The Appellant has explained (and this evidence is supported by his
         expert) that local and national news was limited in Rwanda  during
         the period 1990 to 1994. We  accept  (by  reference  to  objective
         material referred to below) that this was a period of civil war in
         which serious violence between the government  side  and  the  RPF
         took place, with allegations and counter allegations of abuse made
         on both sides, and limited independent  or  objective  information
         available. There was no internet  available  during  this  period.
         There were three radio stations: Radio Rwanda and  RTLM,  both  of
         which were pro the Habyarimana administration; and Radio  Muhabura
         which favoured Paul Kagame and the RPF side. The Appellant  states
         that the pro-government media would claim  that  RPF  soldiers  or
         supporters  had  attacked  and  committed   abuses   causing   the
         government to fight them; whilst on the other side, the RPF  media
         would claim that innocent civilians had been abused by the Rwandan
         army; and  that  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to  verify  the
         conflicting  claims.  Further  he  states  that  where  there  was
         acceptance by the Habyarimana administration that abuses had  been
         carried out by its side, such  abuses  were  put  down  to  people
         acting on their own and  outside  the  authority  or  instructions
         given by the army or the government itself.  We  return  to  these
         assertions having reviewed the objective material below.


     54. It is common ground that, on 6 April 1994, the  Appellant  was  at
         home for the Easter vacation, and that he  and  his  family  heard
         about the President's plane being shot down that evening.  He  and
         his family knew that the Appellant's brother,  BB,  was  on  board
         that plane, and we have no reason to doubt that  the  family  were
         upset and concerned when they heard the news  at  about  8pm  that
         evening.

     55. The Respondent has relied on evidence of Tutsi killings at Rambura
         College on the night of 6 April deriving from a  sentence  in  the
         UKBA  Case  Research  and  Analysis  report  (manuscript  date  27
         November 2011):  "It  is  considered  significant  that  when  the
         genocide began the first Tutsis to die were  those  living  within
         walking distance of Rambura College". The source of this statement
         is said (in a footnote) to be The Globe and Mail Canada, 11  April
         1995. However, we have  not  been  provided  with  this  newspaper
         article, and it has not been shown to the Appellant.

     56. The Appellant volunteered in evidence that he and his family  left
         their house in Rambura that evening to use a public  telephone  in
         the village in circumstances where there was otherwise no evidence
         to show that he had left the family house. The public phone was at
         a post office some minutes' walk from  his  house.  He  maintained
         that he saw nothing sinister and was not aware of any killings  in
         Rambura (or Rambura  College)  that  evening.  Nor  is  there  any
         evidence that he went to Rambura College that evening.

     57. It is accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant left home  the
         following morning, 7 April, with other family  members  to  go  to
         Kigali to collect BB's wife and children, and did  not  return  to
         Rambura until 10 April 1994. There is no evidence that he  did  or
         said anything  on  the  journey  or  once  in  Kigali,  suggesting
         complicity in acts of  genocide  that  were  by  then  undoubtedly
         taking place.

     58. Once back in  Rambura,  the  Appellant  and  his  family  were  in
         mourning for BB (regarded by the Appellant as a father figure). He
         stated (and we accept)  that  friends  and  wider  family  members
         visited the house to mourn with them. He recalls  still  being  in
         mourning on a date in early May 1994,  as  this  would  have  been
         BB's birthday, and accordingly a memorable date.

     59. The account given by  the  Appellant  about  returning  to  Butare
         University a few  days  after  1  May  1994  has  been  reasonably
         consistent. In his statement dated 10 May 2010, he explained  that
         he returned about three or four weeks after  the  plane  was  shot
         down and that he was unable to remember the exact  date  but  knew
         that it would have been after 1 May 1994. The date is  significant
         because acts of genocide are now known to have been  committed  at
         Butare University on about 21 April 1994 and the Respondent's case
         was (originally) that the Appellant was present in Butare at  that
         time. It is now accepted that he was not.

     60. The Respondent challenges  as  irrational  and  inexplicable,  the
         Appellant's decision to return to the campus  given  the  genocide
         that was taking place, and the risk such a journey would hold  for
         an innocent person not party to it. The Appellant states  that  he
         expected to be at home only for the Easter holidays and  had  left
         most of his possessions at the University. He was  concerned  that
         if he did not retrieve his study materials and exams went ahead in
         June he  would  not  be  prepared.  There  had  been  no  official
         announcements concerning the University  and  whether  or  not  it
         would resume, and if so when.

     61. Moreover, it is submitted  on  the  Appellant's  behalf  that  his
         decision to go to  Butare  University  should  be  viewed  in  the
         context of the fact that he did not consider himself to be at risk
         in returning to Butare.  From Rambura there  were  two  routes  to
         Butare. One was  through  Kigali  in  the  north  and  would  have
         involved  travelling  through  territory  that  was  by  then  RPF
         controlled, so dangerous for him. The other was  through  Gitarama
         in the south, where the Hutu  government  had  re-established  its
         seat, so was government-controlled and understood to be  safe  for
         him. He took the latter  route  via  minibus  travelling  entirely
         through government controlled territory.  He  understood  that  he
         was not therefore at risk from the fighting between  the  RPF  and
         the government while on his way to Butare. There is no evidence to
         contradict this account of the Appellant's journey, and Mr Leopold
         Nsengiyumva's evidence supports it, stating that it was  safe  for
         the  Appellant  to  travel  to  Butare  through   the   government
         controlled zone.

     62. Although there is no evidence that the Appellant saw anyone  taken
         off the minibus on which he travelled to Butare and abused  during
         the journey, his assertion  that  he  did  not  see  people  being
         killed,  or  led  away,  is  challenged  as  implausible  by   the
         Respondent.  It is an acknowledged fact that genocide  took  place
         in Rwanda at this time, and the Appellant has not  disputed  this.
         Being a witness to such acts does not however implicate  a  person
         in those acts. Having volunteered the evidence that  he  travelled
         to Butare, we find it difficult to see why, if  he  had  witnessed
         atrocities or abuse, he would have lied about it when it would not
         harm his case to say so.   Moreover,  from  what  is  known  about
         deaths at the Butare campus, students were led away and  taken  to
         woods close to the campus where they were killed;  they  were  not
         slaughtered in plain sight  on  the  campus  (March  2010  refusal
         letter, paragraph 22).

     63. There is no evidence to contradict the Appellant's account that on
         arrival at the University there were  soldiers  checking  identity
         documents. There were also  soldiers  throughout  the  campus.  He
         states  that  he  went  straight  to  his  room  to  collect   his
         possessions. The atmosphere had changed and was tense but  he  saw
         no sign of murder or injury. The only person he  says  he  saw  on
         this trip, whom he knew, was CC. He says he met her first  on  his
         way to the University and then again when he was returning to  get
         the bus. On his account, it took him about an hour to  go  to  his
         room after first seeing CC, collect his belongings and  return  to
         the bus stop.

     64. A witness statement from  CC,  who  was  among  the  students  who
         remained on campus during the period  April  1994  to  July  1994,
         confirms that she saw him as he was  walking  towards  the  campus
         from the city of Butare around 6 May 1994. He told her that he was
         coming to collect his belongings and they spoke for a few minutes.
         She states that he made his way to the campus and she made her way
         to the bus station. She says a few minutes later she  met  him  in
         the bus station as she was still there waiting for  her  bus-taxi.
         They spoke  for  a  few  minutes  and  he  left  before  her.  The
         discrepancy in timing was relied on by  Mr  Hopkin  as  indicating
         that the Appellant's evidence could not be relied upon. We do  not
         regard this discrepancy as sufficiently significant  to  undermine
         his evidence about his  trip  to  Butare  University,  still  less
         sufficient to give rise to an inference that he was  participating
         in acts of genocide  during  this  visit.  The  Appellant  himself
         volunteered the information that he returned to the University  to
         collect his belongings. He could quite easily  have  said  nothing
         about this journey, maintaining that he was  at  home  in  Rambura
         throughout, without fear of contradiction.  We  cannot  understand
         why he would have volunteered this information if the real  reason
         for his visit to Butare campus was to participate in the  genocide
         in some way.


     65. More generally, CC states in her witness statement  that  she  saw
         the Appellant regularly once she joined the University in 1993 and
         that she saw him in his capacity as an MRND  member/representative
         assisting  several  students  from  different  tribes,   political
         parties and regions. She states that the Appellant was not at  the
         University when the killing and trouble was taking  place  on  the
         campus around 18 to 21 April 1994.

     66. The Respondent's original case relied on the Appellant's stay at a
         named refugee camp and involvement with food distribution there as
         indicating that he must have been part of the  leadership  of  the
         refugee camp and therefore  associated  with  others  involved  in
         leading the genocide. More than a million refugees fled to Eastern
         DRC, with a high percentage from  north-west  Rwanda  (March  2010
         refusal letter,  paras  45,  47)  and  the  Appellant  has  always
         maintained that there is no basis for the Respondent's  inference.
         At the first hearing of  this  appeal  (before  Judge  Billingham)
         three witnesses were called to give evidence  for  the  Appellant.
         They were at the camp, saw him there, and stated that he  was  not
         involved in speaking to or dealing with any extremists  throughout
         the years he was at the refugee camp in  question,  or  in  taking
         part in political activities. Their  evidence  was  accepted,  and
         this allegation has not  been  pursued  since.  The  Appellant  is
         entitled to  rely  on  the  fact  that  he  was  not  involved  or
         associating with  Hutu  extremists  at  the  camp,  despite  their
         asserted presence there, and not taking part in political activity
         with them, as supportive of his case that he was not involved with
         them during the genocide either.


    Other evidence


     67. We turn to consider the reports relied on by the  Respondent,  the
         expert reports from Leopold Nsengiyumva, served on behalf  of  the
         Appellant, and other objective material. Although Mr Nsengiyumva's
         evidence was not agreed by the Respondent, there  was  no  serious
         challenge to it, (save perhaps by reference to independent reports
         - if any - that might contradict it).

     68. Mr Nsengiyumva makes clear that in preparing his  reports  he  has
         relied heavily on the  judgments  of  the  International  Criminal
         Tribunal for Rwanda (the "ICTR") in Bagosora and Karamera to which
         reference is made below.

     69. A significant part of the case against the Appellant is  based  on
         his involvement with the MRND. The Respondent's  War  Crimes  Unit
         reports draw  heavily  on  the  indictments  (as  opposed  to  the
         judgments) of the  ICTR  against  Karamera  and  Ngirumpatse  (and
         others) in support of this part  of  the  case;  in  other  words,
         relying on the case for the prosecution. For  example,  the  first
         report contains the following passages, nearly  all  of  it  drawn
         from the ICTR indictment:

             "From 1990, Rwanda's President Habyarimana and several of  his
             close associates devised the strategy of inciting  hatred  and
             fear of the Tutsi minority as a way of  rebuilding  solidarity
             among Hutu and keeping themselves in power[1].  They  strongly
             opposed any form of power sharing, including the one envisaged
             by the Arusha Accords.  The  strategy  adopted  in  the  early
             1990's which culminated in the widespread massacres  of  April
             1994,  comprised  several  components,  which  were  carefully
             worked out by the various prominent  figures  who  shared  the
             extremist Hutu ideology.  In the  addition  to  incitement  to
             ethnic violence the extermination of the Tutsi there  was  the
             organisation and military training of the youth wings  of  the
             political  parties,  notably  the  Interahamwe   (MRND),   the
             preparation  of  lists  of  people  to  be   eliminated,   the
             distribution of weapons to  civilians,  the  assassination  of
             certain political opponents and the massacre of many Tutsi  in
             various parts of Rwanda between October 1990 and April 1994.

             Formed in 1991 the Interahamwe militia originally served as  a
             nation force aimed to help protect the country from attacks by
             the Tutsi-dominated Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF).23

             The Interahamwe were highly structured, along the  same  lines
             as the MRND party.  At national level, they  had  a  chairman,
             two vice-chairmen, a secretary general and  a  treasurer.   In
             June  1993,  to  ensure  better   territorial   coverage   and
             effectiveness, the MRND central committee  decided  to  create
             Interahamwe  branches  in  the  various  prefectures  in   the
             country[2].  By 1992/93 the Interahamwe  was  a  fully-fledged
             mechanism for killing civilians that  would  eventually  carry
             out most of the genocide."


     70. The Karamera trial (which lasted hundreds of days with hundreds of
         witnesses, and thousands of pages of  transcripts  and  documents)
         concerned the two highest-ranking leaders of  the  MRND:  Karamera
         was the Vice President  of  the  MRND,  and  Ngirumpatse  was  the
         National Party Chairman of the MRND. They continued to hold  these
         positions until they left Rwanda in July 1994. They  were  charged
         with conspiracy to commit genocide in the period prior to 8  April
         1994. They were also  charged  with  genocide  and  other  serious
         crimes against humanity in the period immediately afterwards  from
         8 April to mid July 1994. All charges were denied. So far  as  the
         conspiracy  charges  were  concerned,  they  contended  that   the
         genocide  was  a  spontaneous   public   reaction   to   President
         Habyarimana's assassination. They maintained  that  they  did  not
         plan genocide in advance and lacked the  ability  to  prevent  the
         killings once the genocide began. They argued that  they  did  not
         encourage people to attack and kill Tutsis and Hutu opponents.


     71. The prosecution case relating to the period before  8  April  1994
         was  that  they  conspired  with  others  to  destroy  the   Tutsi
         population of Rwanda in whole or in  part  by  forming,  training,
         arming and financing the Interahamwe militia, widely considered to
         be  the  main  group  of  civilian  perpetrators  of  the  Rwandan
         genocide.  Significantly,  the  prosecution  alleged   that   they
         participated in MRND national meetings and rallies  that  fostered
         the Hutu Power movement and anti-Tutsi extremism as  part  of  the
         conspiracy.

     72. In a judgment  dated  2  February  2012,  the  ICTR  rejected  the
         conspiracy charges. It found that during 1992 the MRND established
         a youth wing, later called the Interahamwe. In  1993  it  received
         military training and the MRND Executive Bureau  agreed  with  the
         military  authorities  to  distribute  arms  to  the  Interahamwe,
         stockpiling additional arms for later distribution.  However,  the
         ICTR was not satisfied that the military training or  distribution
         and stockpiling of arms were intended to facilitate the killing of
         Tutsis. In light of the ongoing  conflicts  with  other  political
         parties and the RPF, the ICTR considered it  reasonable  to  infer
         that the accused, along  with  other  MRND  leaders,  were  merely
         seeking to protect themselves and their  supporters  from  attacks
         from other opposition political parties or  the  RPF  by  forming,
         expanding training and arming the Interahamwe  prior  to  8  April
         1994.

     73. As to national MRND meetings, the ICTR was not satisfied that  the
         accused had chaired meetings of  the  National  Committee  of  the
         Interahamwe where they and other leaders prepared lists of  people
         to be killed and planned a killing  campaign  against  Tutsis  and
         moderate Hutus. So far as large  public  rallies  were  concerned,
         four large rallies were held during 1993 and 1994 and  these  were
         attended by leaders of the MRND along with Interahamwe.  Three  of
         these promoted the cause of Hutu Power and espoused opposition  to
         the Arusha peace accords. The MRND Executive Bureau  condoned  the
         three rallies which were addressed by  the  accused.  Nevertheless
         the ICTR was not satisfied that the rallies called for the killing
         of Tutsi civilians and considered, in light  of  the  evidence  of
         ongoing conflicts with other political parties and the  RPF,  that
         the rallies were held to galvanise support for  the  MRND  and  to
         speak out against opposition parties and the RPF.

     74. As a result of these conclusions the ICTR did  not  consider  that
         the participation of Karamera and Ngirumpatse in a  conspiracy  to
         commit genocide was the only reasonable inference  that  could  be
         drawn from the circumstantial evidence concerning the period prior
         to 8 April 1994. These conclusions undermine those  parts  of  the
         reports relied on by the Respondent, that were based on  the  case
         for the prosecution in these trials.

     75. The other significant ICTR trial (Bagosora and  Others)  concerned
         senior military figures also charged  with  conspiracy  to  commit
         genocide, together with crimes of  genocide  and  war  crimes  and
         crimes against humanity in Rwanda in 1994. On the Respondent's own
         case, as reflected by her March 2010 letter, Col Bagosora was  the
         mastermind and the "perceived architect" of the genocide.  In  her
         letter of 15 March 2010,  the  Respondent  relies  on  an  earlier
         decision of  the  ICTR,  Akeyusa,  confirming  that  Col  Bagosora
         established his own self-proclaimed Hutu Power interim  government
         shortly  after  the  President's  aircraft  was  shot  down   (see
         paragraph 7, March 2010 letter).

     76.  The  prosecution  in  the  Bagosora  trial  relied  (largely)  on
         circumstantial evidence said to form links in a  chain  from  late
         1990 through to  7  April  1994,  amounting  to  a  conspiracy  to
         exterminate the Tutsi population. The defence disputed that  there
         was a conspiracy, arguing a number of alternative explanations for
         the events which unfolded after 6 April. One argument was based on
         the  view  that  it  was  the  RPF  which  shot   down   President
         Habyarimana's plane on 6 April and that this event  together  with
         other  factors,  triggered  spontaneous   rather   than   planned,
         killings.

     77. The ICTR judgment in Bagosora was delivered on 18  December  2008.
         It found that some of the accused played a role in  the  creation,
         arming and training of civilian militia as well as the maintenance
         of lists of suspected accomplices of the RPF or others opposed  to
         the ruling regime. The ICTR was not satisfied however  that  these
         actions  were  directed  at  killing  Tutsi  civilians  with   the
         intention to  commit  genocide.  It  held  that  several  elements
         underpinning the prosecution case of conspiracy were not supported
         by sufficiently reliable evidence:  for  instance  Col  Bagosora's
         reference to preparing for  the  "apocalypse"  and  the  accused's
         alleged role  in  certain  clandestinely  criminal  organisations.
         Other evidence concerning the drawing up of lists of Tutsis to  be
         killed was not considered credible. Whilst  accepting  that  there
         were indications which could be construed as evidence of a plan to
         commit genocide,  in  particular  when  viewed  in  light  of  the
         subsequent targeted and  speedy  killings  immediately  after  the
         shooting down of the President's plane, the evidence was  regarded
         as also consistent with preparations for a political  or  military
         power struggle and measures adopted in the context of  an  ongoing
         war with the RPF that were used for other purposes  from  6  April
         1994. In the circumstances, the ICTR was not  satisfied  that  the
         prosecution had proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the  accused
         conspired amongst themselves or with  others  to  commit  genocide
         before it. Each was acquitted on the counts of conspiracy  charged
         in their indictment; but all were convicted of genocide.


     78. The Respondent advances the case against the Appellant that it was
         the Hutu planners of the genocide that shot down  the  President's
         plane (paragraph 95, March 2010 letter).  However,  if  those  who
         were centrally responsible  for  the  genocide  brought  down  the
         aircraft, as a means of creating a trigger for the genocide,  that
         is  inconsistent  with  the  suggestion  that  the  genocide   was
         instigated by those closely associated with President Habyarimana.
         In the Appellant's case,  since  his  brother  was  on  board  the
         aircraft, it makes it less likely  that  he  (and  his  family  of
         Rambura-based MRND members and President  Habyarimana  supporters)
         would have supported this  action.  Rather,  logic  suggests  that
         another extremist group, perhaps including those  associated  with
         Col Bagosora, was responsible.

     79.  So  far  as  objective  evidence  concerning  the  MRND  and  its
         membership are concerned, there is no dispute that  the  MRND  was
         created in 1975 when Rwanda  was  a  one-party  state,  and  every
         Rwandan was treated as a member, no matter what his or her  ethnic
         background. The reports relied on by the Respondent  suggest  that
         President   Haybarimana   adopted   a   policy    of    systematic
         discrimination in favour in particular of  Hutu  from  his  native
         region.  This  weakened  his  power  base  and   radicalised   the
         opposition RPF. An RPF attack in October 1990 led to thousands  of
         opposition members in Rwanda (considered supporters  of  the  RPF)
         being arrested and to growing criticism of his management  of  the
         country. This compelled President Habyarimana to accept  a  multi-
         party system. Talks with the RPF  and  the  Democratic  Republican
         Movement (or MDR) started and led to  a  ceasefire  in  July  1992
         which recognised RPF control over a portion of  Rwandan  territory
         in the north east.  Meanwhile  in  March  1992  a  group  of  Hutu
         extremists founded a new radical political party, the  CDR,  which
         was  more  extremist  than  the   MRND   and   opposed   President
         Habyarimana.


     80.  There  is  objective  evidence  of  propaganda  campaigns   which
         consisted of  fabrication  by  the  Habyarimana  government  about
         violent events that had  occurred:  for  example,  in  March  1992
         killings in Bugasera began a week after a propaganda agent working
         for the Habyarimana government distributed a tract  claiming  that
         the Tutsi of that region were preparing to kill  many  Hutu.  Both
         MRND militia and  CDR  militia  participated  in  the  March  1992
         killings. In Kibilira the  population  was  goaded  on  to  defend
         itself  against  fabricated  attacks   supposed   to   have   been
         perpetrated by RPF infiltrators and to attack and kill their Tutsi
         neighbours. Radio Rwanda played a part in anti-Tutsi propaganda.

     81. In his report Mr Nsengiyumva refers to the fact that a  number  of
         Tutsi members of the MRND  were  elected  to  committees  at  both
         prefecture and national level. He states that no  single  case  of
         violence against Tutsis was reported to his knowledge between 1975
         and 1990.  Moreover,  intermarriage  was  encouraged  during  this
         period. Even in April 1994, Mr Nsengiyumva states  that  the  MRND
         had Tutsis in its ranks, and he identifies a number  of  those  in
         prominent positions. Mr Nsengiyumva expresses the  view  that  the
         violence witnessed before April 1994 was not ethnic in nature even
         though Tutsi deaths were recorded, but maintains that the violence
         was mainly political.

     82. Mr Nsengiyumva explains the difference between the Interahamwe  of
         the MRND and the Interahamwe killings after 6 April 1994, which he
         maintains  are  distinguishable  and  should   be   distinguished.
         According  to  Mr  Nsengiyumva,  before  April  1994,   the   MRND
         Interahamwe was a name for a  broad-based  youth  wing  comprising
         both Hutu and Tutsi. It was only later that the name was  extended
         to refer to those found killing civilians in the Rwandan genocide.
         His evidence is supported by the fact that so far  as  the  ethnic
         composition of the MRND Interahamwe is concerned, the president of
         the Interahamwe, Mr Kajuga Robert, was a Tutsi who campaigned  for
         the  MRND.  Further,  the  national  interim  committee   of   the
         Interahamwe elected in November 1991 comprised a Tutsi  president,
         a vice president married to a Tutsi woman and fathered by a  Tutsi
         mother, and a treasurer from Butare, who had a Tutsi mother

     83. The Respondent relies in particular, on reports of  three  serious
         massacres at Kibilira between October 1990  and  January  1993  to
         support her case on the activities of the MRND during this period.
         Kibilira is a commune halfway between Kigali and  the  capital  of
         Gisenyi. The material relied upon by the Respondent states:


              i. That the first attack began on October  11,  1990  and  was
                 directed by the burgomaster and the assistant  prefect.  At
                 least 348 people were killed, more  than  550  houses  were
                 burned and farm animals and household goods were  destroyed
                 pillaged in the time taken by the authorities  to  respond.
                 The report continues:


                      "the  role  of  the  burgomaster  and  the  assistant
                      prefect was so apparent that both were  removed  from
                      their positions and imprisoned immediately after  the
                      attacks  ended.  According   to   one   witness   the
                      burgomaster upon being taken to jail asked  residents
                      to continue their work. The  two  spent  only  a  few
                      weeks in prison  and  then  released.  The  assistant
                      prefect died soon after in mysterious  circumstances.
                      The burgomaster was named to a  position  as  medical
                      assistant... and serves as the local  vice  president
                      of the MRND."

             ii. The second attack took place in about March 1992. This time
                 authorities reacted  more  quickly  and  five  people  were
                 killed, dozens wounded and 74 houses were  destroyed.  Once
                 again those accused  in  the  attacks  were  detained  only
                 briefly and once again the victims themselves were  blamed.
                 Nobody is identified  as  responsible  for  directing  that
                 attack.


            iii. The third attack occurred at the end of December 1992.  One
                 person was killed and several injured.  The  report  states
                 without identifying with particulars or by reference to any
                 particular document that,  once  again,  local  authorities
                 including councillors and responsible  officials  organised
                 and participated in the attacks and  those  detained  after
                 the attacks were released soon afterwards. The third attack
                 is said to be significantly different from the first two in
                 that  the  assailants  also  attacked   Hutu   members   of
                 opposition parties, accusing them  of  betraying  President
                 Habyarimana.


     84. Mr Nsengiyumva addresses the fact that human  rights  abuses  were
         undoubtedly committed during the period 1990 to 6  April  1994  in
         Rwanda. On this point there is common ground. The question for  us
         in the context of the Appellant's case is  whether  the  incidents
         referred  to  in  the  reports  relied  on   by   the   Respondent
         (particularly those at Kibilira) were carried out (and known to be
         carried out) by the MRND or as part of MRND policy, such that  the
         Appellant can be taken to have known and condoned  these  acts  by
         representing and defending the MRND once he joined.


     85. The reports relied on by the Respondent do not answer  this  point
         directly. They appear  to  indicate  that  these  were  individual
         incidents directed by individuals or a group.  Some  reports  make
         reference to a particular official involved in directing an attack
         (a burgomaster, prefect, sub-prefect, or  committee  member),  but
         that cannot by itself justify the conclusion  that  the  MRND  was
         driving or responsible for this agenda; or even that the MRND  was
         a political  party  at  ease  with  violence  against  Tutsis  and
         acquiescent in such violence. To the  contrary,  the  reports  are
         equally consistent with isolated officials or members of the  MRND
         who held extremist views and acted on those views but  without  it
         being MRND policy to do so. To this must be added  the  persistent
         propaganda  and  misinformation  broadcast  by   the   conflicting
         political parties and their media outlets when assessing what  the
         Appellant knew and condoned.

     86. The Respondent also relies particularly on a speech given by  Leon
         Mugusera who was at the time Vice-President of the  MRND  for  the
         prefecture of Gisenyi and known to have close  ties  to  President
         Habyarimana. His speech given on 22 November 1992, at a  rally  of
         the MRND, is widely regarded as having played an important role in
         inciting attacks against Tutsis and fomenting hatred against  them
         and is relied upon by  the  Respondent  as  indicating  that  this
         represented MRND policy. The report relied on  by  the  Respondent
         states that the speech became widely known throughout  Rwanda  and
         that President Habyarimana never disavowed the  violent  words  he
         used. A link is made between this speech and the  violent  attacks
         committed within a month at Kibilira.

     87. Mr Nsengiyumva challenges this view. He deals in detail  with  the
         speech of Leon Mugesera in November  1992.  He  explains  how  the
         speech came to be disseminated in Rwanda. According  to  testimony
         from Higiro Jean Marie Vianney, Director of the Rwandan Office  of
         Information (which ran the state radio, Radio Rwanda), and who was
         a member of the MDR (not the MRND), Radio Rwanda  did  not  report
         the  inflammatory  remarks  made  by  Mugusera  about  Tutsis.  It
         reported an edited version of the speech omitting the inflammatory
         material.  That  material  was  only  subsequently  published  and
         disseminated by the opposition MDR party.

     88. More significant however is the  reaction  of  the  MRND  to  this
         speech (also dealt with by  Mr  Nsengiyumva  in  his  most  recent
         report). On 28 November 1992 (within  days  of  the  speech  being
         broadcast) the Minister of Justice issued  an  arrest  warrant  in
         respect of Mugusera so that he could be prosecuted for  delivering
         an inflammatory speech inciting the Hutu population. This was done
         quickly. Mugusera was arrested and tried, and left Rwanda, without
         the help of the MRND according to Mr Nsengiyumva.  Mr  Nsengiyumva
         also refers to the fact that on 7  December  1992,  the  political
         bureau of MRND met and there is a handwritten  note  to  President
         Habyarimana reflecting condemnation of the speech of Mugusera; and
         to the fact that later MRND meetings condemned the speech and  its
         content.

     89. Mr Nsengiyumva has analysed all the available MRND  speeches  from
         this period, including that of  Mugusera  and  concludes  that  it
         would be easy to be a member and activist of the MRND  without  in
         any way espousing any  of  the  inflammatory  views  expressed  by
         Mugusera. In his view, most MRND members  and  activists  did  not
         support this extremist view and apart from the Mugusera speech, he
         has identified no other recorded, available speech of the MRND  of
         a similar nature.

     90. So far as the atmosphere and environment at Butare  University  in
         the period before April 1994 is concerned, the Respondent suggests
         that  it  was  a  hot-bed  of  extremism.  In  support  of   that,
         allegations are made about actions of Pauline Nyiramasuhuko,  wife
         of the Rector of Butare University and  Minister  for  Family  and
         Women Affairs, as demonstrating ethnic tension between Tutsis  and
         Hutus at the University; and  the  Respondent  contends  that  the
         Appellant must have been well aware of this. An account relied  on
         by the Respondent suggests that Pauline Nyiramasuhuko entered  the
         town of Butare (though not the campus) periodically  before  April
         1994 in the company of MRND supporters, barricading  the  streets,
         and intimidating the civilian population with a  demonstration  of
         MRND and Hutu power. It is suggested that by  this  (and  similar)
         actions the MRND sought to  desensitise  Hutu  civilians  to  kill
         Tutsis on command. The Respondent asserts that the Appellant's own
         actions in support of the MRND made an important  contribution  to
         this agenda.

     91. We are concerned that the evidence about Pauline Nyiramasuhuko was
         not even put to the Appellant  in  cross-examination  despite  the
         fact that he has consistently stated that he  does  not  know  her
         personally, and although he knew who she was  as  wife  of  Butare
         University's Rector, he had no knowledge of the  events  described
         or where or when they occurred. Furthermore, Pauline Nyiramasuhuko
         was herself tried and acquitted of all conspiracy charges relating
         to the period before 6 April 1994. Once again it appears that  the
         Respondent's material has been overtaken by later events that cast
         doubt on the Respondent's characterisation of the MRND.

     92. Further pointers in the objective evidence, against  extremism  at
         Butare University are  the  facts  that  the  composition  of  the
         University was not sectarian, and students, including Tutsis, fled
         towards the campus on 7 April 1994, believing it to be a place  of
         safety. Further, according to the Akayesu  Judgment,  ICTR-96-4-T,
         at paragraph 110, it was not  until  the  leadership  of  the  new
         interim Government travelled to Butare that the  killings  started
         there.  It does not appear that  killings  on  the  Butare  campus
         started spontaneously in response to the aircraft being shot down,
         but required at least a  degree  of  central  involvement  by  the
         national leadership.

     93.  In  addition,  Mr  Nsengiyumva  has  stated  that  the  two  main
         professors relied on by the Respondent to indicate extremism there
         (Nahimana Ferdinand and  Leon  Mugesera)  were  not  lecturers  at
         Butare University at the time the Appellant started  in  1992.  He
         suggests that when they  became  lecturers,  they  were  based  at
         Nyakinama campus in Ruhengeri (in the North of Rwanda) some 200 km
         from Butare.


    The grounds for exclusion


     94. Against those findings of fact set in the context of the objective
         material, we turn to consider  the  grounds  relied  upon  by  the
         Respondent for considering that the Appellant should  be  excluded
         from protection.

          First Ground: the Appellant was a participant in acts of genocide
          in Rwanda (by killing and assaulting Tutsis and  moderate  Hutus)
          between 6 and 9 April 1994 in Gisenyi, and during the first  week
          in May 1994 at the University of Butare

     95. There  is  no  direct  evidence  to  support  any  part  of  these
         allegations.

     96. So far as the period 6  to  9  April  when  genocide  activity  in
         Gisenyi is relied upon, there is no  dispute  that  the  Appellant
         went to Kigali on 7 April  following  the  shooting  down  of  the
         aircraft on 6 April 1994, to find and bring back his sister-in-law
         and children. He and they returned to Rambura on  10  April  1994.
         Accordingly, the ground relied on  here  is  now  limited  to  the
         allegation that, on the evening of 6 April 1994, after hearing  of
         the shooting down of the aircraft, the Appellant  participated  in
         acts of genocide near Rambura College in Gisenyi.

     97. It is common ground that the Appellant was at home in  Rambura  on
         the night  of  6  April  when  the  aircraft  was  shot  down.  He
         volunteered in evidence that he and his family left the house that
         evening, having heard of  the  shooting  down,  to  use  a  public
         telephone  in  the  village  in  circumstances  where  there   was
         otherwise no evidence to show that he  had  left  the  house.  The
         public phone was at a post office  some  minutes'  walk  from  his
         house. He maintained that he saw  nothing  sinister  and  was  not
         aware of any killings in Rambura that night.

     98. The Respondent relies on statements that the prefecture of Gisenyi
         was the "heartland of Hutu extremism" and that systematic and well
         organised killing started here within hours of  the  plane  crash.
         Col Bagosora was held by the ICTR to  have  been  responsible  for
         organised killings perpetrated by soldiers and militia  men  at  a
         number of sites throughout Gisenyi between 6 and  9  April.  Given
         the Respondent's acknowledgment that Col Bagosora was  responsible
         (March 2010 refusal letter, paragraph 28) and  that  he  was  also
         likely responsible for bringing down  the  aircraft  in  order  to
         trigger the killings (paragraph 95 of the letter), we regard it as
         unlikely that the Appellant,  whose  brother  was  killed  on  the
         aircraft, would have been part of that same  group  of  extremists
         responsible for massacres in Gisenyi between 6 and 9 April 1994.

     99. The Respondent also relies on the newspaper article foot-noted  as
         contained in the Globe and Mail Canada of  11  April  1995  (about
         Tutsi killings at Rambura College on evening of 6 April, but which
         we have not actually seen). Even if correct, there is no  evidence
         linking these killings to the Appellant.  We do not know what time
         or where exactly the killing occurred; whether the  killings  were
         carried out by soldiers, militia or others; how many were  killed;
         whether others have been identified and implicated.   We  bear  in
         mind that what is required  is  the  considered  judgment  of  the
         decision-maker that there are serious reasons derived  from  clear
         and credible evidence. In  our  judgment,  there  is  insufficient
         evidence of precisely  what  happened,  still  less  to  hold  the
         Appellant responsible. Further, the Appellant's evidence about how
         he spent the evening of 6 April after hearing  that  the  aircraft
         had  been  shot  down,  was  plausible  and  there  is  no  proper
         evidential basis for rejecting it.

    100. The Respondent contends,  in  addition,  that  there  are  serious
         reasons for considering that the Appellant participated in acts of
         genocide at Butare "during  the  first  week  in  May  1994".  The
         objective evidence suggests that the  horrific  events  at  Butare
         started around 21 April 1994. The War Crimes Unit report refers to
         soldiers killing a student at the campus barrier on 21  April  and
         then to Tutsi students being rounded up  "that  evening",  checked
         off against a list and then taken to be killed; and the March 2010
         refusal letter (paragraphs 22-25) makes a similar  reference,  but
         without making  clear  when  the  killings  came  to  an  end.  Mr
         Nsengiyumva's first report states that "it is  generally  accepted
         that killings started on 21 April 1994 and  took  approximately  1
         week".   This  evidence  was  not  directly  challenged   by   the
         Respondent. CC's statement supports it: she refers to high tension
         on campus on 21 April, when RPF soldiers came on site and then for
         two to three days afterwards, but to relative calm after that.

    101. The Appellant's consistent evidence has been that he  returned  to
         Butare in early May 1994, remembering that it  was  a  "number  of
         days after" his deceased brother's birthday. CC saw him at  Butare
         on about 6 May 1994. It is at least surprising that, if he is  (or
         was) an extremist committed to  genocide,  he  would  have  waited
         until well after 21 April 1994 before returning to his campus,  as
         MRND representative, where critical events were taking  place.  In
         any event, given the evidence adduced by Mr  Nsengiyumva  and  CC,
         that the killings were over by the time he arrived there, and  the
         absence of clear evidence from  the  Respondent  that  there  were
         killings in Butare in early May 1994, we do not consider that  the
         Respondent has established a basis for this ground.

    102. There is no direct evidence of the Appellant's involvement in acts
         of genocide in these two periods. We have accepted the Appellant's
         account of the circumstances of his  visit  to  Butare  University
         consistently with the evidence of CC (see paras 63 to  65  above),
         The evidential basis for exclusion must be strong and  capable  of
         sustaining grounds that are stronger than merely suspecting.   The
         Respondent's case does not meet this standard for the  reasons  we
         have given.

          Second Ground: as a member of the student leadership structure of
          MRND at Butare University between 1992 and 1994, by his extensive
          activities  on  behalf  of  the  MRND  during  this  period,  the
          Appellant  knowingly   and   intentionally   contributed   in   a
          significant way to a joint  criminal  enterprise  of  persecuting
          Tutsis in Rwanda before April 1994.


    103. There is a significant overlap between this ground and  the  third
         ground for exclusion relied on by the Respondent.

    104. In considering this ground, we bear in mind that the  MRND  was  a
         national political party in a one  party  state  until  the  early
         1990s. It was made up mainly of Hutus, but there were  both  Tutsi
         members  and  Tutsi  officials,  even  in  the  early  1990s.  The
         Appellant was directly involved with the MRND at Butare University
         only, there being no persuasive evidence of his involvement before
         that. However, there  is  no  evidence  or  suggestion  that  MRND
         students generally were connected to the military or any extremist
         elements within the MRND  or  that  they  were  connected  to  the
         Interahamwe (which itself was separate and only became  active  in
         the genocide after it commenced, when the term began  to  be  used
         generally and broadly to refer to gangs of civilian killers).

    105. The MRND was a state  actor  and  not  proscribed.  The  Appellant
         joined as a volunteer from a long line of supporters of  President
         Habyarimana but there is no  evidence  that  he  joined  it  as  a
         consequence of any extremist views espoused by it or believing  it
         to be a party preparing for,  comfortable  with  or  planning  for
         genocide.  The Appellant was an active  member  from  November  or
         December 1992 until early April 1994. There is no direct  evidence
         of any MRND involvement or activity thereafter.

    106. We turn to  consider  the  Appellant's  knowledge  of  the  MRND's
         international crimes and his own personal involvement and role  in
         the   organisation,   including   particularly   what   (if   any)
         contribution he made towards the commission of war crimes.

    107. As a student representative, we accept that the Appellant was in a
         position to influence policy and opinion. He attended meetings  as
         a delegate; organised the attendance of students and was  involved
         in organising the attendance of speakers at public  meetings;  and
         he "defended the views of the MRND". There was a  faint  assertion
         in Mr Hopkin's oral submissions that the Appellant also encouraged
         recruitment to the MRND, although he was not  directly  challenged
         about this having stated at interview that he did not  recruit  to
         the MRND (Q34).  None of these actions  advance  the  Respondent's
         case unless there are serious grounds  for  considering  that  the
         Appellant did what he did, knowingly  and  intentionally  for  the
         purpose of  the  commission  or  support  of  the  commission,  of
         international crimes by members or recruits.

    108. We are not persuaded that the evidence establishes that  the  MRND
         was an organisation committed to human rights abuses between  1990
         and 1992, or from then to 6 April 1994.  The  historical  position
         suggests that the MRND was a broad-based,  mass  organisation  and
         that both Hutus and Tutsis were part of it until the early  1990s.
         The ICTR - albeit applying a criminal standard - was not satisfied
         that the MRND had a "criminal" plan or policy prior to April 1994,
         as we have indicated above by reference to the  judgment   in  the
         Karamera and other cases. The evidence before  us,  even  applying
         the lower standard in Art 1F, provides no basis for us to reach  a
         different view.


    109. The Mugusera speech was not promoted or apparently promulgated  by
         the MRND. Accordingly, we are not satisfied that there  is  clear,
         credible or strong evidence of a central ideology promoted by  the
         MRND encouraging the genocide or abuse of Tutsis. We are also  not
         satisfied that there is persuasive evidence from which to consider
         that the Appellant would have known that the MRND's central policy
         was driving human rights abuses at Kibilira or  elsewhere  at  the
         time he joined the MRND or afterwards in the period before 6 April
         1994. In our view, the prompt condemnation of the Mugusera speech,
         together with his  arrest,  would  have  suggested  the  contrary.
         Accordingly we cannot conclude on the  evidence  available  to  us
         that the Appellant joined an organisation he knew to be  committed
         to anti-Tutsi ideology.

    110. In the circumstances, even if there  were  'international  crimes'
         committed during the period 1990 to 1993, the  evidence  does  not
         afford  serious  reasons  for  considering  that  there  was   any
         'purpose', 'plan' or 'enterprise' on the part of 'the MRND', as an
         organisation, to commit such crimes  in  that  period.   For  that
         reason  also,  the  Appellant's  activity  as  part  of  the  MRND
         organisation  cannot,  therefore,  have  contributed  towards  the
         commission of international crimes in that period.

    111. If we had been satisfied on the  evidence  available  to  us  that
         there  was  an  'MRND'  purpose,  plan  or  enterprise  to  commit
         international crimes during the period 1990-1993, it  would  still
         have been necessary for the Respondent to demonstrate (even in the
         case of an organisation that is criminal or terrorist  in  nature)
         that some personal activity,  or  conduct,  on  the  part  of  the
         Appellant significantly  contributed  to  the  MRND's  ability  to
         commit international crimes between 1990 and 1993.

    112. There is no evidence (whether given by the Appellant himself or in
         the independent evidence  adduced  by  the  Respondent)  that  the
         Appellant did anything that  materially  contributed  towards  the
         commission of international crimes during the relevant period.  It
         has not been suggested that he engaged in the acts that formed the
         basis of the conspiracy charges in Karamera and  Bagosora  to  fix
         responsibility  on  senior  people  for  contributing  towards  an
         organisational  ability  to  commit  international   crimes:   for
         example, the preparation of  lists  of  Tutsis  for  killing;  the
         arming and training the militia for the purpose of mass  killings;
         the ethnic definition of the 'enemy'  as  'Tutsis'  and  mass  de-
         sensitisation to killings through mass  propaganda.  There  is  no
         evidence that speakers invited to MRND meetings were extremists or
         promoted genocide. Accordingly, we  are  not  persuaded  that  the
         Respondent has demonstrated serious grounds for  considering  that
         actions of the Appellant contributed "in a significant way" to the
         organisation's ability to commit international crimes (if any were
         committed) or that he acted in a way such that his assistance  did
         in fact further that purpose.  There  is  not  even  evidence  for
         example, of him turning a blind eye  to  people  being  abused  or
         tortured and then enabling such torture  to  continue  by  sending
         arrested individuals into the hands of abusers (as occurred in AAR
         (Iran) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 835).


    113. What the Respondent relies on ultimately is an assertion that,  in
         speaking at meetings and in defending the MRND, the Appellant was,
         promoting and  contributing  to  mass  killings.   The  Respondent
         relies on an apparent inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence as
         to whether he represented the views of the MRND  students  in  his
         year in internal meetings at  the  University  campus  but  simply
         attended national meetings as an ordinary member, rather than as a
         delegate (as he said in evidence to us); or represented his fellow
         MRND students' views at national meetings (as  he  stated  in  his
         fourth interview, Q.31).  There  is  a  lack  of  clarity  in  the
         questions and answers  on  this  point,  and  the  extent  of  the
         asserted discrepancy is not  clear;  but,  in  any  event  neither
         account gives  rise  to  any  inference  that  the  Appellant  did
         anything to promote or support the killings of Tutsis,  or  anyone
         else at any of these meetings. There is no  evidence,  other  than
         the Appellant's own, as to the  political  approach  and  attitude
         that he took and what he said when he spoke.  He does  not  accept
         that he provided any support for mass killings in  what  he  said;
         and we have found no evidence to support the contrary.


    114. Accordingly, we are not satisfied that there is evidence  that  he
         was actively defending the massacre or killing of Tutsis  in  what
         he said or did. We do not consider that there is  evidence,  still
         less persuasive evidence, that the Appellant knew  or  would  have
         known that Tutsi massacres were taking place in the  name  of  the
         MRND or supported by this organisation between 1990 and 1994.  The
         political conflict was  such  that  violent  conflict  and  abuses
         occurred  between  the  different   factions,   and   these   were
         misreported as part of persistent propaganda campaigns.

    115. Finally, we  are  also  not  satisfied  that  the  Respondent  has
         established the  crimes  committed  between  1990  and  1993  were
         'international crimes' in the sense that they were  criminal  acts
         committed as part of a "widespread or systematic  attack  directed
         against any civilian population" pursuant to or in furtherance  of
         a state or organisational policy to commit such attacks  (see  Art
         7, ICC Statute).  The March 1993 "Africa Watch Report"  relied  on
         by the Respondent describes killings and atrocities  committed  in
         the period 1990 to 1993. It refers to testimony  that  established
         that Rwandans were killed for the sole reason that  they  belonged
         to the Tutsi group. However, it continues:

             "The question remains whether the designation of  some  members
             of  the  Tutsi  ethnic  group  as  a  target  for   destruction
             demonstrates an intention, in the sense of the  Convention,  to
             destroy this group or a part of  it  because  of  its  members'
             ethnicity.
             While the casualty figures established by  the  Commission  are
             significant, they  may  be  below  the  threshold  required  to
             establish genocide. .."


    116. The evidence relied on by the Respondent does not persuade us that
         attacks, though horrific and brutal, were widespread or systematic
         pursuant to, or in furtherance of, state or MRND policy as we have
         described it above, by reference to the ICTR judgments  and  other
         material. Also important is the ICTR conclusion  in  the  case  of
         senior political figures of the MRND  and  the  military,  charged
         with conspiracy in this period, that the accused were  seeking  to
         protect themselves and their supporters from attack by  opposition
         parties, and their actions were consistent with preparations for a
         political or military power struggle and measures adopted  in  the
         context of an ongoing political war.


         Third Ground: he aided and abetted international crimes  of  murder
         or genocide after 6 April  1994,  by  acting  as  a  supporter  and
         defender of MRND and its policies between  1992  and  1994  and  by
         providing  acts  of  assistance  by  words  or  actions  that  lent
         encouragement or support,  knowing  that  these  acts  and  support
         encouraged violence and discrimination towards Tutsis at  the  time
         and knowing they would assist in any subsequent acts of  murder  or
         genocide.

    117. In light of our conclusions on the second ground, this ground must
         fail also given the significant overlap.

    118. The most senior members of the MRND and of the military  (Bagosora
         and  Karamera)  were  charged  and  tried  for   conspiracy.   The
         international  tribunal  exhaustively  considered  the   available
         material.  All  conspiracy  charges  were   rejected.   In   those
         circumstances we consider that there are grave difficulties in the
         way of the Respondent in seeking to assert that there are  serious
         reasons for considering that the Appellant was aiding and abetting
         in the period prior to April  1994,  the  genocide  offences  that
         occurred thereafter.

    119.  We  have  dealt  above  with  the  nature  of  the  MRND  as   an
         organisation; the fact that until the  early  1990s  there  is  no
         evidence of violence against  Tutsis;  the  fact  that  from  1990
         onwards the RPF  launched  a  civil  war  to  overthrow  President
         Habyarimana and there was retaliation and counter  attack.  During
         the period 1990 to 1994, the MRND had Tutsis in the  senior  ranks
         and  there  were  Tutsi  members.  The  Mugusera  speech  was  not
         apparently adopted by the MRND or published by them.

    120. Given the lack of faithful reporting of what was  being  done  and
         the propaganda campaign involving persistent fabrication of events
         by the government, we are not satisfied that the  Appellant  would
         have known that crimes were being committed by the MRND as part of
         any policy, purpose or plan if that is what was happening - and we
         do not consider that has been  established.  The  evidence  simply
         does not indicate that the  MRND  endorsed  or  was  planning  for
         genocide and/or abuse of the Tutsis.

    121. In any event, the atrocities committed after  6  April  appear  to
         have been committed by  a  different  regime  than  the  President
         Habyarimana regime. If Col Bagosora was responsible  for  shooting
         down the aircraft  to  trigger  the  violence  and  genocide  that
         occurred after 6 April, it is unlikely that  the  Appellant  would
         have been involved with the regime endorsed by Col  Bagosora.  The
         Appellant (and his family) were strong Habyarimana supporters,  as
         we have found.

    122. For all these reasons, the Respondent has not  satisfied  us  that
         she  had  serious  reasons  derived  from  strong  evidence,   for
         considering that the Appellant aided and abetted acts of  genocide
         by knowingly supporting or defending MRND in the period  prior  to
         April 1994, in a way that would support or encourage violence  and
         discrimination against Tutsis and  thereby  assist  in  subsequent
         genocide.


     III. INCLUSION



    123. We now turn to consider the issue  of  the  Appellant's  inclusion
         under the Refugee  Convention  or,  if  the  Appellant  is  not  a
         refugee, whether he is entitled to subsidiary protection under Art
         15 of the EU Qualification Directive (Directive 2004/83/EC) (given
         effect to domestically in the humanitarian  protection  provisions
         in para 339C of the Immigration Rules).

    124. We were referred by both representatives in their written and oral
         submissions to a considerable number of background  documents  and
         cases  contained  in  the  three  lever  arch  appeal  files,   in
         particular in paras 90-92 of the Appellant's skeleton argument and
         para 38 of the Respondent's written submissions.  The fact that we
         do not refer to each and every background  document  to  which  we
         were referred, in order not unnecessarily to lengthen this already
         long determination, does not mean that we have not  considered  it
         in reaching our findings.  We have  taken  into  account  all  the
         material relied upon by the parties.

    The parties' positions in summary

         The Appellant


    125. The Appellant's position on inclusion is set out  in  Mr  Seddon's
         skeleton argument dated 10  June  2014  at  para  67-104,  in  his
         written submission dated 1 July 2014 at paras  16-99  and  in  his
         oral submissions.

    126. The Appellant's position before us was advanced by  Mr  Seddon  on
         three principal bases which, it is contended, bring the  Appellant
         within  the  Refugee  Convention  or  entitle  him  to  subsidiary
         protection under the Qualification Directive.


          (i) there is a real risk that the Appellant  will  be  prosecuted
          for genocide on return to Rwanda

    127. In relation to the risk of prosecution  for  genocide,  Mr  Seddon
         submitted that the Appellant was known to the Rwandan  authorities
         and would be of interest to them on return.   He  relied  upon  an
         internet news agency report in  November  2012  (at  bundle  1/667
         which we  do  not  identify  further  in  order  to  maintain  the
         anonymity of the Appellant) in  which  the  Chief  Prosecutor  for
         Rwanda (Mr Ngoga) referred to the Appellant's case and that he  is
         suspected of genocide by the UK authorities.  He also relied  upon
         the Appellant's most recent witness statement where he stated that
         he has been contacted by a number of Rwandans as a result of  that
         news report which had been widely publicised  in  Rwanda  and,  in
         November 2012, four people dressed as civilians  had  visited  his
         family in Rwanda asking, amongst other things, of his whereabouts.





          (ii) there is a real risk that the Appellant will  be  prosecuted
          for '''genocide  ideology'''  or  ''divisionism''  on  return  to
          Rwanda


    128. In relation to the risk of prosecution for '''genocide ideology'''
         or ''divisionism'', Mr Seddon relied upon the  agreed  facts  that
         the Appellant's  family  (in  particular  his  sister-in-law)  was
         pursuing a claim against the Rwandan government  for  compensation
         in relation to his brother's death in the presidential plane crash
         in April  1994  and,  secondly  that  he  supported  international
         efforts by a group of French, Spanish  and  Australia  judges  who
         were investigating  the  RPF  government  headed  by  the  current
         president, Kagame for atrocities committed by the RPF.  Mr  Seddon
         submitted that these actions fell within the rubric of '''genocide
         ideology''' or ''divisionism''  as  they  challenge  the  accepted
         political stance in Rwanda on the genocide in 1994.


    129. Mr Seddon submitted that any trial would be so unfair as to amount
         to a flagrant breach of Article 6 of the ECHR as (a)  the  Rwandan
         judiciary are not impartial  or  independent  and  (b)  the  trial
         process would  not  allow  the  Appellant  effectively  to  defend
         himself.  There would be inequality of arms as the Appellant would
         be unable effectively to call witnesses,  especially  from  abroad
         who would be fearful of giving evidence on his behalf  because  of
         potential repercussions from the Rwandan authorities.   Mr  Seddon
         relied upon the Divisional Court's decision in Brown (aka Bajinja)
         and Others v The Government of Rwanda and  SSHD  [2009]  EWHC  770
         (Admin)  where  the  Divisional  Court  (Laws  and  Sullivan  LJJ)
         concluded that the extradition  of  a  number  of  individuals  to
         Rwanda in order to face prosecution for genocide was  unlawful  on
         the basis that there was a real  risk  of  a  flagrant  breach  of
         Article 6 and their right to a fair trial.

    130. Mr Seddon invited us to distinguish the European  Court  of  Human
         Right's (ECtHR) decision in Ahorugeze  v  Sweden  (Application  No
         37075/09) (27 October 2011) (2012)  55  EHRR  2  where  the  ECtHR
         concluded that a Rwandan national could lawfully be extradited  to
         Rwanda in order to stand trial on charges of genocide.   Mr Seddon
         submitted that the ECtHR's decision turned upon an application  of
         the Rwandan law  relating  to  transfers  from  the  International
         Criminal Tribunal for Rwandan (ICTR) or where  the  Rwandan  state
         extradited an individual for prosecution (Organic Law  No  11/2007
         of 16 March 2007 amended by Organic Law No 03/2009 of 26 May 2009)
         (the "transfer law").  That  law  provided  for  the  evidence  of
         witnesses to be  taken  from  abroad.   Further,  Organic  Law  No
         31/2007 of 25 July 2007 (as amended by Organic Law No  66/2008  of
         21 November 2008) abolished the death penalty  in  Rwanda  and  in
         transfer cases removed the  possibility  of  a  sentence  of  life
         imprisonment in isolation without the possibility of  release  for
         at least 20 years.  Neither of those laws applied to the Appellant
         who would not be subject to transfer by the ICTR nor was he  being
         extradited from the UK.


    131. In addition, Mr Seddon submitted  that  any  imprisonment  of  the
         Appellant would be imposed on a discriminatory basis  (based  upon
         political motivation) and prison conditions in  Rwanda  were  such
         that there would amount to persecution and  serious  ill-treatment
         contrary to Article 3.  In particular, Mr  Seddon  relied  on  the
         fact that the punishment for genocide  was  life  imprisonment  in
         isolation with no possibility of release for twenty years.


          (iii) There is a real risk that the Appellant will be subject  to
          persecution or serious ill-treatment because  he  has  previously
          been arrested, detained and ill-treated in 1997 and 1999  because
          of his and his family's association with the former president  of
          Rwanda



    132. In relation to the Appellant's past ill-treatment  in  Rwanda,  Mr
         Seddon relied upon the  Appellant's  evidence  of  his  past  ill-
         treatment in Rwanda in the circumstances  set  out  in  his  first
         statement dated 21 December 1999 (bundle 1/155-159) at paras 10-25
         in that in 1997 he was placed in a military camp and forced to  do
         manual work; his father was arrested  and  detained  and  died  in
         prison; his brother had  also  been  killed;  the  Appellant  was,
         having initially been released, again  arrested  on  suspicion  of
         supporting Hutu extremists and was detained, beaten and forced  to
         work in the fields; and finally was arrested in  July/August  1999
         and was questioned about his  sister-in-law's  claim  against  the
         government.  In addition, Mr Seddon relied  upon  the  Appellant's
         recent statement concerning the authorities' claimed visit to  his
         home village where his family were questioned about  his  and  his
         brother's whereabouts.

         The Respondent


    133. The Respondent's position is set out in her decision letter of  15
         March 2010, in Mr Hopkin's written submissions dated 20 June  2014
         and in his oral submissions before us.

          The Appellant's claim under headings (i) and (ii)


    134. The Respondent's principal case is that the Appellant  has  failed
         to establish that there is a real risk that he will be  prosecuted
         in Rwanda either for genocide or for  '''genocide  ideology'''  or
         ''divisionism''.


    135. Mr Hopkin submitted that there was no evidence that the  Appellant
         was subject to  any  ongoing  criminal  investigation  in  Rwanda.
         Further, he submitted that the internet news  report  of  November
         2012 should not be construed as linking knowledge of the Appellant
         with the Rwandan prosecutor or that  he  is  of  interest  to  the
         Rwandan authorities.

    136. Further, the Appellant's profile  did  not  fall  within  that  of
         someone at risk of  prosecution  for  '''genocide  ideology'''  or
         ''divisionism''.  Only perceived  opponents  of  the  regime  were
         targeted for prosecution.  Mr Hopkin submitted that the  Appellant
         would not be perceived as  someone  who  affected  the  "political
         settlement" in Rwanda.  He was not a political opponent nor was he
         a journalist challenging the government in the press.

    137.  Mr  Hopkin  submitted  that  if,  contrary  to  the  Respondent's
         principal case, there was a  real  risk  of  the  Appellant  being
         prosecuted in Rwanda he did not accept that any  such  prosecution
         would be politically motivated or that  the  Appellant  would  not
         receive a fair trial or that the circumstances of his imprisonment
         would amount to persecution or serious ill-treatment.   Mr  Hopkin
         placed reliance upon the ECtHR's decision in Ahorugeze and invited
         us to not follow Brown which, he submitted, had been superseded by
         the  ECtHR's  decision.   Although  initially  he  submitted  that
         Ahorugeze did not turn on the application of the  "transfer  law",
         in  the  course  of  his  submissions  he  recognised  that   that
         claimant's extradition in Ahorugeze was governed by  the  transfer
         law.  Nevertheless, he submitted that the improving conditions  in
         Rwanda both in relation to trial  procedures,  the  judiciary  and
         prison conditions meant that the Appellant had failed to establish
         a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR or that he would be  subject  to
         persecution or serious  ill-treatment  entitling  him  to  refugee
         status or subsidiary protection.


    138. Mr Hopkin submitted that any risk of the Appellant  being  subject
         to imprisonment in isolation was "remote" or "negligible".

          The Appellant's claim under heading (iii)


    139. Finally, Mr  Hopkin  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  past  ill-
         treatment occurred some 15-20 years ago and was not an  indicator,
         therefore, of any  risk  to  the  Appellant  in  the  future.   He
         submitted that the Appellant's recent evidence concerning interest
         in his family in Rwanda should be rejected on the  basis  that  it
         was  inconsistent  with  the  Appellant's  own   case   that   the
         authorities already knew all about him  and,  in  particular,  his
         whereabouts.

    The issues


    140. The issues we have to decide are, in summary, as follows:


                 a) Is there a real risk that he Appellant will  be  subject
                    to persecution for  a  Convention  reason  or,  if  not,
                    serious harm  entitling  him  to  subsidiary  protection
                    under  the  Qualification  Directive  on  the  basis  of
                    prosecution for genocide or '''genocide  ideology'''  or
                    'divisionism'' on return to Rwanda?


                    In deciding that issue:


                        i) Is there a real risk that the Appellant  will  be
                           prosecuted for (a) genocide  or  (b)  '''genocide
                           ideology''' or ''divisionism'' in Rwanda? And
                       ii) If prosecuted, is there  a  real  risk  that  any
                           trial will be 'flagrantly unfair'  in  breach  of
                           Art 6 of the ECHR? And
                      iii) If convicted, will any  punishment  amount  to  a
                           breach of Art 3 of the ECHR? And
                       iv)  If  so,  will  (ii)  and/or  (iii)   amount   to
                           persecution  for  a  Convention  reason   (namely
                           political  opinion)  or  serious  harm  for   the
                           purposes of subsidiary protection.


                 b) Is there a real risk that the Appellant will be  subject
                    to persecution for  a  Convention  reason  or,  if  not,
                    serious harm  entitling  him  to  subsidiary  protection
                    under the Qualification Directive on the  basis  of  his
                    past history  and  his  family's  association  with  the
                    previous president of Rwanda?


    The legal framework


    141. The Appellant's appeal is brought under s.83 of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  That is  because  the  Appellant
         has previously been granted leave to remain of at least 12  months
         duration.  Most recently,  the  Appellant  was  granted  leave  to
         remain on a discretionary basis "having regard to" the decision of
         the Divisional Court in Brown (see para 149  of  the  Respondent's
         decision letter of 15 March 2010).


    142. An appeal under s.83 of the 2002 Act may only be  brought  on  the
         grounds that the individual's removal from the UK would breach the
         Refugee Convention (see s.84(4)).  Mr Hopkin,  on  behalf  of  the
         Secretary of State, accepted that the Appellant  could  also  rely
         upon the subsidiary protection  provisions  in  the  Qualification
         Directive (and para 339C dealing with humanitarian protection)  on
         the basis of the Court of Appeal's decision in FA  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
         [2010] EWCA Civ 696 which is  binding  upon  the  Upper  Tribunal.
         However, he reserved the Secretary  of  State's  position  on  the
         correctness of FA (Iraq) for a higher court.

    143. What is clear is that the Appellant cannot directly rely upon  the
         European Convention on Human  Rights  to  resist  his  removal  to
         Rwanda.  He may only rely upon a breach of the ECHR to the  extent
         that, as a result, he qualifies as a refugee  or  is  entitled  to
         subsidiary protection.

    144. In Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention a 'refugee' is  defined
         as someone who:

             "owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
             race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social
             group or political opinion  is  outside  the  country  of  his
             nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling
             to avail himself of the protection of that country...is unable
             or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it. "

    145. The prohibition on refoulement in Article 33 prevents  the  return
         of a refugee to a place  where  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution for a Convention reason.

    146. It is for the Appellant to establish that there is  a  "reasonable
         likelihood" or "real risk" that his return will breach the Refugee
         Convention.  In Brown, Divisional Court stated what  is  meant  by
         "real risk" at para [34]:

             "[i]t means  a  risk  which  is  substantial  and  not  merely
              fanciful; and it may be established  by  something  less  than
              proof of a 51% probability."

    147. As  regards  subsidiary  protection  the  Qualification  Directive
         defines a "person eligible for subsidiary protection" in Art  2(e)
         as:

             "a third country national...who does not qualify as a  refugee
              but in respect of whom substantial grounds  have  been  shown
              for believing that the person concerned, if returned  to  his
              or her country of  original,...would  face  a  real  risk  of
              suffering serious harm as defined in Article  15,  ...and  is
              unable, or owing to such risk, unwilling to avail himself  or
              herself of the protection of that country;..."

    148. As the definition of a person entitled to subsidiary protection in
         Art 2(e) makes plain, a person can only be entitled to  subsidiary
         protection if that individual is not a refugee within the  meaning
         of the Refugee Convention.

    149. Article 15 of the Qualification Directive, so far as  relevant  to
         this appeal, defines "serious harm" as consisting of:

                "...

                  b)  Torture  or  inhuman  or   degrading   treatment   or
                     punishment  of  an  applicant  in   the   country   of
                     origin;..."

    150. That provision mirrors Article 3 of the ECHR which states that no-
         one shall be subjected to:

               "torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".



    151. Ill-treatment must attain a minimum  level  of  severity  to  fall
         within Article 3 (see, e.g. Ireland v  UK  (1980)  2  EHRR  25  at
         [162]).  The assessment of this minimum is relative and takes into
         account the individual's circumstances including the  duration  of
         the treatment, its  physical  or  mental  effects,  and  the  age,
         gender, vulnerability of the state of  health  of  the  individual
         (Ireland at [162]).

    152.  Torture,  unlike  inhuman  or   degrading   treatment,   requires
         deliberate ill-treatment causing very serious and cruel  suffering
         (Ireland at [167]).

    153. Treatment is  'degrading'  if  it  arouses  in  the  victim  to  a
         sufficiently high level feelings of fear, anguish and  inferiority
         capable of humiliating and debasing him (Ireland at [167]).

    154. A punishment  will be inhumane or degrading if it entails a degree
         of humiliation which attains the minimum level and which is  other
         than the usual level  of  humiliation  inevitably  involved  in  a
         legitimate punishment (see, e.g. Kudla v Poland (2002) 35 EHRR  11
         at [94]).  Discriminatory measures based on  race  may  constitute
         degrading treatment (see, East African Asians Cases (1973) 3  EHRR
         76).

    155. Likewise the conditions and  circumstances  of  any  detention  or
         imprisonment may breach Art 3 if the effect of those conditions on
         the individual attains the minimum level of severity going  beyond
         the inevitable suffering or humiliation arising from a  particular
         legitimate punishment (see, e.g. Mathew v  Netherlands  (2006)  43
         EHRR 444).

    156. Article 6 of the ECHR sets out the right  to  a  fair  trial.   It
         provides as follows:

             "1.  In a determination of ...any criminal charge against him,
                  everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing  within
                  a  reasonable  time  by  an  independent  and   impartial
                  tribunal established by law. ...

             ....

               3.  Everyone  charged  with  a  criminal  offence  has   the
                  following minimum rights: ...

                   (d) to examine or have examined witnesses against him and
                        to obtain the attendance examination of witnesses on
                        his behalf under the same  conditions  as  witnesses
                        against him;..."

    157. Article 6.1 sets out two aspects of  a  right  to  a  fair  trial:
         first, the right to a fair hearing within a reasonable  time;  and
         secondly that there be an independent and impartial tribunal.   As
         Article 6.3(d) spells out, a minimum content to  the  right  of  a
         fair trial is that an individual charged with a  criminal  offence
         should have the ability to examine and obtain  the  attendance  of
         witnesses on his behalf to the same extent as the prosecution.

    158. There  are  a  number  of  points  on  the  application  of  these
         provisions which we did not understand to be a matter  of  dispute
         between the parties.

    159. First, in a "foreign case" such as the present where the breach of
         Article 6 is said to arise abroad, it is  necessary  to  establish
         the "flagrant denial of justice" that is recognised in the settled
         jurisprudence  of  the  Strasbourg  case  law,  for   example   in
         Ahorugeze, the Court stated that a violation of  Article  6  would
         only arise where there was a "flagrant denial  of  justice"  which
         meant (at [ 115]):

             "A flagrant denial of justice goes beyond  mere  irregularities
             or lack of safeguards in the trial  procedures  such  as  might
             result in a  breach  of  Article  6  if  occurring  within  the
             Contracting State itself.  What is required is a breach of  the
             principles of fair trial guaranteed by Article 6  which  is  so
             fundamental as to amount to a nullification, or destruction  of
             the very essence, of the right guaranteed by that Article."

    160. That approach has been adopted by our domestic courts, for example
         by the House of Lords in EM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 64.

    161. Secondly, we did not understand Mr  Hopkin  to  dispute  that  if,
         indeed, there were a flagrant  breach  of  Article  6  that  would
         amount to persecution for the purposes of the  Refugee  Convention
         or serious harm for the purposes of subsidiary protection at least
         where  any  prosecution  or  punishment  was  disproportionate  or
         discriminatory  in  nature,  for  example  because  of   political
         motivation or interference.  In  our  view,  that  is  undoubtedly
         correct and follows from the definition of an "act of persecution"
         in regulation 6 of the Refugee or Person in Need of  International
         Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 (SI  2006/2525)  which
         provides, so far as relevant, as follows:

             "5(1) In deciding whether a person  is  a  refugee  an  act  of
             persecution must be:

                    a) Sufficiently serious by its nature or  repetition  as
                       to constitute a severe violation  of  a  basic  human
                       right, in particular a right  from  which  derogation
                       cannot be made under Article 15 of the Convention for
                       the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and   Fundamental
                       Freedoms; or

                         b) (i)     An accumulation  of  various  measures,
                            including the violation of human  rights  which
                            is  sufficiently  severe  as   to   affect   an
                            individual in a similar manner as specified  in
                            (a).

                       (ii)    An act of persecution may, for example, take
                            the form of: ...

                       (b) a legal,  administrative,  police,  or  judicial
                            measure which in itself  is  discriminatory  or
                            which  is  implemented  in   a   discriminatory
                            manner;

                       (c)   prosecution   of    punishment,    which    is
                            proportionate of discriminatory;

                       (d)  denial  of  judicial   redress   resulting   is
                            disproportionate or discriminatory  punishment;
                            ..."

    162. In our judgement, a combination  of  reg  5(1)(b)  read  with  (a)
         together with, in particular, reg 5(2)(c)  and  (d)  captures  the
         Appellant's case in this appeal if factually made out as contended
         for in Mr Seddon's submissions concerning the circumstances  of  a
         prosecution, any resulting trial and punishment if  the  Appellant
         were convicted.

    Risk of prosecution for genocide

    163. Mr Seddon placed reliance upon a news report  from  November  2012
         (at bundle 1/677).  We do not identify that  report  in  order  to
         retain the Appellant's anonymity  and,  subject  to  redaction  in
         order to maintain that anonymity, the report states as follows:

             "A Rwandan suspected of taking part in the l994 genocide [...]
              cannot be deported to Rwanda because of  human  rights  laws,
              according to a British newspaper.

              [The Appellant] is alleged by  the  UK  Border  Agency's  War
              Crimes Unit to have helped Hutu soldiers kill members of  the
              Tutsi ethnic group during the genocide in 1994, "the  website
              of the [   ] reported on Saturday.

              Reacting to the article, Rwandan  Prosecutor  General  Martin
              Ngoga said "there is not just one case.  There are four cases
              of people who were arrested and  released.   There  are  more
              fugitives who have not been mentioned yet to the opinion."

              But, according to Ngoga, the Crown Prosecution was well aware
              of these cases.  "Not withstanding what the Crown Prosecution
              has been trying to do, we are deeply disappointed by the  way
              this question of fugitives has been attended to in  the  UK,"
              he explained.

             Ngoga added, "The attention attached to this matter  does  not
              match the gravity of the charges against them.  There is some
              level of indifference.  This is unacceptable.""

    164. The report goes on to give further personal details in relation to
         the Appellant and then continues:

             "The suspect sought asylum, but  his  application  was  turned
              down.  An immigration tribunal has since ruled  he  does  not
              qualify for refugee or  humanitarian  protection  in  Britain
              because he is suspected of crimes against humanity in Rwanda.



              But he has been allowed to remain because of a precedent  set
              in the High  Court  which  let  four  suspected  Rwandan  war
              criminals stay in Britain on the basis that they may not  get
              a fair trial in their home  country,  breaching  their  human
              rights."

    165. The report then goes on to refer to the fact that the Appellant is
         a Hutu from a village in north Rwanda  where  the  former  Rwandan
         president came from and that his brother, who  was  identified  by
         name together with his connection with the previous president, was
         in the president's plane when it was shot down on 6 April 1994.

    166. Mr Seddon submitted that it was clear that the Rwandan  Prosecutor
         General, Mr Ngoga had  been  shown  the  article  in  the  British
         newspaper identifying the Appellant and had specifically  referred
         to him when he had stated "there is not just one case".  Mr Seddon
         submitted that the reference to the other four people,  presumably
         in Brown,  showed  that  Mr  Ngoga  was  prepared  to  "lump"  the
         Appellant with those whose extradition was  sought  for  genocide.
         He submitted that the reasonable inference was that Mr  Ngoga  was
         well aware of the Appellant and we should conclude that  Mr  Ngoga
         would be interested in prosecuting the Appellant on his return.

    167. Secondly, Mr Seddon relied upon the fact  that  the  Secretary  of
         State had granted the Appellant leave to remain in March  2010  on
         the basis that the Secretary of State took the view, in the  light
         of the decision in  Brown  that  the  Appellant  was  at  risk  of
         prosecution and a flagrant breach of his Article 6 rights  in  any
         trial on his return to Rwanda.

    168. Finally, Mr Seddon relied upon the Appellant's most recent witness
         statement at paras 91-104 in which the Appellant stated that as  a
         result of the publicity in the news report he had  received  calls
         from other Rwandans as had his family in Europe some of which were
         abusive.  Further, in November 2012 four individuals  in  civilian
         dress had visited the Appellant's family in his home  village  and
         had asked questions including as to the Appellant's whereabouts.

         Discussion

    169. It is clear from the background  material  that  since  1996  when
         Rwanda adopted a new law governing  the  prosecution  of  genocide
         related  crimes  there  have  been   a   substantial   number   of
         prosecutions (see  "Human  Rights  Watch,  Rwanda:  Justice  after
         Genocide - 20 years On", 28 March 2014 at pages 3-6).  There  have
         also been a number of prosecutions  of  high  profile  individuals
         before the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) based
         in Tanzania (ibid  at  pages  6-7).   Since  2011,  the  ICTR  has
         transferred several genocide cases to Rwanda; the first being that
         of Jean Bosco Uwinkindi in April 2012 (ibid at pages 8-9).   Prior
         to that, transfers from the ICTR were not  sanctioned  because  of
         perceived problems of fairness in the trials.  Further, Rwanda has
         sought the extradition from a number of countries of  Rwandans  to
         face prosecution for genocide or genocide related  offences  (ibid
         pages 10-11).  Until the first ICTR transfer, it seems  that  most
         countries denied extradition requests but,  following  the  ICTR's
         decision to transfer its first genocide case in  2011,  courts  in
         several countries including  Sweden  and  Norway  have  agreed  to
         extraditions.  The ECtHR  upheld  the  extradition  of  a  Rwandan
         genocide  suspect  in  October  2011  in   the   Ahorugeze   case.
         Extradition proceedings and appeals are, according to  the  "Human
         Rights Watch Report", on-going in several countries (ibid pages 9-
         10).

    170. In the light of that, it is a matter of some significance, in  our
         judgment, that no case  has  been  opened  against  the  Appellant
         before the ICTR and no extradition request has been  made  by  the
         Rwandan government for his return to Rwanda.  That is, despite the
         claim put forward by the Appellant, that the Prosecutor General of
         Rwanda is well aware of the Appellant's case and  his  involvement
         in genocide and, on Mr  Seddon's  submissions,  has  "lumped"  him
         together with the individuals who have been subject to extradition
         requests in the Brown case.

    171. Mr Seddon sought, in his submissions, to explain  the  absence  of
         any extradition request by submitting that the Prosecutor  General
         was, in effect, 'playing the system' and awaiting the  Appellant's
         removal  and  not  expending  time  and  money  on   seeking   the
         Appellant's extradition as a result of  the  lack  of  success  in
         extraditing the individuals in Brown.

    172.  We  do  not  accept  that  submission.   First,  it  is  entirely
         speculative in seeking  to  explain  the  absence  of  extradition
         proceedings against the Appellant if, as on the Appellant's  case,
         he is well  known  to  the  Rwandan  authorities.   Secondly,  the
         background material demonstrates that the Rwandan  authorities  do
         seek the extradition of those, in European countries, in whom they
         have an interest as potential perpetrators of genocide.    Indeed,
         the "Human Rights Watch Report" which is dated 28 March 2014  (and
         is therefore relatively recent) notes at page 11 that  as  regards
         the individuals in Brown:

             "Fresh extradition hearings are proceeding  in  this  case  at
           time of writing".

    173. We were not provided with  any  information  by  either  party  to
         suggest that this was other than the situation and, again, in  our
         judgment, demonstrates the  Rwandan  authorities'  persistence  in
         extraditing those in whom they have an interest in prosecuting for
         genocide offences.

    174. Mr Seddon referred us to  paragraphs  127,  143  and  149  of  the
         Respondent's refusal letter of 15 March 2010.  Both paragraphs 127
         and 143 are premised upon an assumption that the Appellant may  be
         investigated for the crime of genocide on return and subject to  a
         prosecution for it.  The thrust of the paragraphs is, however,  to
         deal with the issues of  whether,  if  prosecuted,  the  Appellant
         would be subject to treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR on
         the basis of the prison conditions that he would face  or  whether
         he was at risk of the death penalty.  In our judgment there was no
         explicit recognition that a real risk of prosecution for genocide,
         or indeed any offence, is accepted by the Respondent.

    175. We do not accept that  the  Respondent's  decision  to  grant  the
         Appellant discretionary leave following Brown in  March  2010  can
         materially assist the Appellant.

    176. The reasons for the grant of leave are set out at paragraph 149 of
         the decision letter and followed the Respondent's conclusion  that
         the Appellant would not  be  at  risk  of  treatment  contrary  to
         Article 3 if he were  imprisoned  in  Rwanda.   Nevertheless,  the
         Respondent stated that she would exercise her discretion to  grant
         discretionary leave in the light of the  Brown  decision.   Again,
         the Respondent premises her grant of leave on the  basis  that  if
         the claimants in Brown "were returned to Rwanda to  be  tried  for
         genocide in the High Court of Rwanda" they would be subject  to  a
         flagrant denial of justice in breach of Article.  We read  nothing
         further  into  this  than,  as  Mr  Hopkin  submitted,  that   the
         Respondent was out of an "abundance of caution" responding to  the
         Divisional Court's decision in Brown and it does not amount to  an
         explicit recognition that the risk of prosecution was established.
           Brown  is,  in  our  judgment,  distinguishable  in   that   the
         individuals concerned were seeking to resist extradition  for  the
         sole purpose of  prosecuting  them  in  Rwanda  for  genocide  and
         related offences.  There could, therefore, be no  doubt  in  their
         cases that there was a real risk of prosecution.

    177. In any event, even if it was recognised as  a  risk  in  2010,  we
         would still need to consider whether any risk existed, not  as  at
         March 2010 but at the date of the hearing before us.  That finding
         can only be made on the basis of all the  evidence  including,  to
         the extent that it is relevant,  the  Respondent  's  position  in
         March 2010.

    178. In relation to the Appellant's evidence set out in his most recent
         statement (which he adopted before us), we approach that  evidence
         with some caution.  Whilst it is the case that Mr Hopkin  did  not
         specifically cross-examine the  Appellant  on  this  part  of  his
         statement at the hearing, Mr Hopkin on behalf  of  the  Respondent
         directly put in issue the credibility of  the  Appellant.   As  we
         have already noted, we did not find the Appellant's evidence to be
         entirely reliable (see paras 36 and 37 above).

    179. At paras 91-97 of his statement the Appellant  refers to  interest
         in him and his family in Europe as a result of the news report  in
         November 2012 as follows:

             "91. Suddenly, in November 2012, not long before my  Court  of
                  Appeal case (which was anonymised), publicity  was  given
                  to my case by the [   ] newspaper in early November 2012.
                   There had never been any interest shown by the media  in
                  my case before this time.  I had had no contact from  the
                  media  and  no  journalists  or  members  of  the  public
                  attended my Tribunal  proceedings.   Also,  I  understand
                  that my Tribunal decisions were not  'reported'.   It  is
                  not clear how or why suddenly publicity was given  to  my
                  case.

              92. The publicity identified me as a person living in the  UK
                  who  was  involved  in  the  genocide  in  Rwanda.    The
                  publication of this article has had a profound affect  on
                  my life and also the life of others.

              93. The article was widely reported  in  other  websites  and
                  also in Rwanda.  It was on  Rwandan  television  and  the
                  Rwandan Chief Prosecutor expressed an interest in me.

              94. Since that  time  I  felt  like  a  rejected  person  and
                  everyone sees me as a killer.  I  live  in  fear  and  in
                  hiding.  I do not meet other Rwandan people except for my
                  closest friends who understand what has happened to me.

              95. After the publication of  the  article,  work  colleagues
                  began to make comments about me, saying  that  I  am  war
                  criminal.  I had to sop work as I was so stressed by  the
                  situation.  I used to  go  to  church  where  many  other
                  Rwandans attended but I had to stop going to that.

              96. I also received many calls.  Some were from Rwandans  who
                  were  friends  and  who  understood  about  the   Rwandan
                  government and felt sorry for me.  They  are  people  who
                  know that I  would  never  be  involved  in  killings  or
                  abuses.  However, I also received many calls  from  other
                  Rwandans who I knew through social gatherings,  or  other
                  meetings  and  who  were  on  the  side  of  the  Rwandan
                  government.  They asked me why did I kill  people.   They
                  were mainly Tutsis but also Hutus and many  of  them  had
                  had family killed in the genocide.  Many also still  have
                  contacts back in Rwanda and travel back to  Rwanda.   The
                  calls were abusive and I ended up  having  to  change  my
                  phone number.

              97. In addition, my family in  Belgium  also  received  calls
                  from Rwandans in Belgium and Holland.  As  was  the  case
                  with me, some of these calls were understanding but  most
                  were abusive."

    180. As regards this evidence, Mr Seddon did not draw our attention  to
         any supporting evidence showing that the article had been  "widely
         reported" on other websites or in Rwanda or otherwise disseminated
         to the public.

    181. At paras 98-104, the Appellant refers  to  "significant  problems"
         being caused to his family members still living  in  Rwanda  as  a
         result of the article.  At para 99 he states that:

             "In November 2012, four people in civilian dress came  to  [my
              village] and started interrogating my cousins about  my  late
              brother and myself and asking questions about the  land  that
              my family own.  They arrived in a white pick-up vehicle."

    182. At para 100 he states that:

               "They asked questions of many other people in the town"

             They spoke to his relatives one of whom was asked:

                 "Who was looking after all of my family's fields."

    183. At paragraph 101, the Appellant says that the four people spoke to
         "an  old  Hutu  military  man"  in  the  town  whom  his  relative
         identified to them.

    184. At paragraph 102, the Appellant says that his  four  cousins,  who
         look after the land, have now left Rwanda "as a result of concerns
         for their own safety".

    185. At paragraph 103, the Appellant says that his  relative  had  told
         his cousin that their properties had been taken but  she  did  not
         know by whom.  His relative  also  has  said  that  "other  family
         members who have stayed in the town are living in fear."

    186. As regards this evidence even taken at its highest it merely shows
         that "four people in civilian dress" enquired about  the  family's
         land in their village and the whereabouts of the Appellant's  late
         brother and the Appellant.  There is no suggestion in the evidence
         that anybody was threatened even if, again taking the evidence  at
         face  value,  the  Appellant's  relatives  decided  to  leave  the
         village.  The evidence does not establish that the  Appellant  was
         being sought by the Rwandan authorities because of  his  perceived
         involvement in genocide or genocide related offences.  Indeed,  on
         Mr Seddon's submission, the Rwandan  Chief  Prosecutor  would  not
         need to enquire about the whereabouts of the Appellant as, on  his
         submissions, he was well aware that the Appellant is in the UK  as
         a result of the news report.  As Mr  Hopkin  submitted,  to  infer
         from this evidence that the Rwandan authorities are interested  in
         the Appellant in order  to  prosecute  him  for  genocide  related
         offences is inconsistent with that part of the  Appellant's  claim
         that he is already well known to the prosecutor and in the UK.

    187. In addition, if the Appellant returned to  Rwanda  we  have  found
         that the evidence  does  not  establish  that  there  are  serious
         grounds to believe that he was involved in genocide in 1994.  That
         would, no doubt, be a relevant factor for the Rwandan  authorities
         if he were to come to their attention on return  to  Rwanda.   Our
         finding would run counter to the statement in  the  November  2012
         news article that a Tribunal had refused the Appellant's claim for
         refugee status or humanitarian protection on the basis that he was
         "suspected of crimes against humanity in Rwanda."

    188. We have taken all these  matters  into  account  and  we  are  not
         satisfied that there is a real risk that the Appellant would be of
         interest to the Rwandan authorities and at risk of prosecution for
         genocide upon return.

    Risk of prosecution for '''genocide ideology''' or ''divisionism''

    189. The Appellant also claims that he will be at risk  of  prosecution
         under the Rwandan laws dealing  with  '''genocide  ideology'''  or
         ''divisionism''.

    190. The Appellant principally puts his case under  this  head  on  the
         basis  of  the  two  claims  being  pursued  against  the  Rwandan
         Government by his family set out in para 9  of  the  'Schedule  of
         Agreed Facts' (at bundle 1/65-66):

             "The Respondent's family are pursuing two claims  against  the
             Rwandan Government.  One is a claim for  compensation,  namely
             for the money owed to the Respondent's sister-in-law  for  his
             brother's  [     ]  death.   The  second  claim  is  that  the
             Respondent's  family,  along  with  others,   are   supporting
             international lawyers who are pursuing  criminal,  convictions
             against the Kagame regime for their part in unlawful killings.
              The Respondent claims that members of  his  own  family  have
             been victims of  the  unlawful  killings  and  he  is  seeking
             justice for them.  These lawyers include French anti-terrorist
             Judge,  Jean  Louis  Bruguiere,   Spanish   Judge   Ferdinando
             Merrelles  and  the   Australian   Judge   and   former   ICTR
             investigator, Michael Hourigan."

    191. We were referred to a considerable body of material  dealing  with
         the offences of '''genocide  ideology'''  and  ''divisionism''  in
         Rwanda.  A useful summary is found in  the  Amnesty  International
         Report "Safer to Stay Silent:  The Chilling Effect of Rwanda's Law
         on ''genocide ideology'' and Sectarianism" (2010) (bundle 3/1-50).
          At pages 7-9 of the bundle in  the  introductory  section  headed
         "Summary" sets out the background as follows:

             "Rwanda's laws on "''genocide ideology''" and  "sectarianism",
             more commonly known as "'divisionism'", were introduced in the
             decade following the 1994 Rwandan  genocide.   Up  to  800,000
             Rwandans were killed during the 1994 genocide,  most  of  them
             Tutsi, but also some Hutu who opposed this  organized  killing
             and the forces that directed it.  Aware of the role that  hate
             speech and the infamous hate radio Radio Tlvision Libre  des
             Milles  Collines   (RTLM)   played   in   inciting   genocidal
             participation, the post-genocide government led by the Rwandan
             Patriotic Front (RPF) enacted  laws  to  encourage  unity  and
             restrict speech that could promote hatred.

             Following six years of extensive reforms to  the  conventional
             justice system, the Rwandan government announced a  review  of
             the  "''genocide  ideology''"  law  in  April  2010.   Amnesty
             International  welcomes  this  government  initiative.    This
             report identifies Amnesty International's concerns  about  the
             current legislation  and  its  application  in  light  of  the
             Rwandan government's review process.

             Prohibiting hate speech is a legitimate aim, but  the  Rwandan
             government's approach violates international human rights law.
               Rwanda's  vague  and  sweeping  laws   against   "''genocide
             ideology''"  and  'divisionism'"  under  "sectarianism"   laws
             criminalize speech protected by international conventions  and
             contravene Rwanda's regional and  international  human  rights
             obligations and commitments to  freedom  of  expression.   The
             vague wording of the laws is deliberately exploited to violate
             human rights.

             Prosecutions  for  "''genocide   ideology''"   and   so-called
             "''genocide ideology''-related"  offences  were  brought  even
             before the law defining this offence was promulgated.   People
             continue  to  be   prosecuted   for   "'divisionism'",   under
             "sectarianism"  laws,  even  though  "'divisionism'"  is   not
             defined in law.  Rwandans, including judges, lawyers and human
             rights defenders, expressed  confusion  about  what  behaviour
             these laws criminalize .

             These broad and ill-defined laws have created  a  vague  legal
             framework which is misused to  criminalize  criticism  of  the
             government  and  legitimate  dissent.    This   has   included
             suppressing calls for the prosecution of war crimes  committed
             by Rwandsn Patriotic Front ((RPF).  In the run-up to the  2010
             elections, legitimate political  dissent  was  conflated  with
             "''genocide   ideology''",   compromising   the   freedom   of
             expression and association of  opposition  politicians,  human
             rights defenders and journalists critical of  the  government.



             Individuals have exploited gaps in the law for personal  gain,
             including the discrediting of teachers,  for  local  political
             capital, and in the  context  of  land  disputes  or  personal
             conflicts.     Several     "''genocide     ideology''"     and
             "'divisionism'" charges based on flimsy evidence  resulted  in
             acquittals, but often after the accused spent several month in
             pre-trial detention.  Many such accusations should  have  been
             more thoroughly investigated,  but  broad  laws  offer  little
             guidance to the police and prosecution.

             The cumulative result of these laws is to  deter  people  from
             exercising  their  right  to  freedom  of  expression.    This
             chilling effect means that people who have  yet  to  have  any
             action taken against them nonetheless fear being targeted  and
             refrain from expressing opinions which may be legal.  In  some
             cases, this has discouraged people  from  testifying  for  the
             defence in criminal trials.

             The laws have had a corrosive effect  on  mutual  trust  in  a
             society already  fragile  after  the  1994  genocide  and  run
             counter to the  government's  stated  commitment  to  national
             unity.

             At times, the Rwandan government  went  to  great  lengths  in
             seeking "''genocide ideology''" prosecutions.  One  such  case
             involved  the  prosecution  of  a  failed  asylum-seeker   for
             statements made abroad. Such cases, in the context  of  public
             statements  by  government  officials  insinuating  guilt   of
             individuals before trial, contribute to the  broader  chilling
             effect and do little to instil trust  and  confidence  in  the
             justice system.

             The Rwandan authorities have taken a number of strides towards
             improving their conventional justice system, most notably  the
             abolition of the death penalty, to  improve  the  delivery  of
             justice and to try to secure transfers  to  genocide  suspects
             from the International  Criminal  Tribunal  (ICTR)  and  other
             national jurisdictions.   However,  many  improvements  appear
             stronger on paper than in practice, others are  untested,  and
             concerns around fair trials remain.

             Rwanda's efforts to reform many of its laws in line  with  its
             international  obligations  make  the  problematic  nature  of
             "''genocide ideology''" and "sectarianism"  laws  increasingly
             apparent.   These  laws  have  undermined  confidence  in  the
             judiciary,  impeding  government  attempts  to  have  genocide
             suspects living abroad extradited to be brought  to  trial  in
             Rwanda. They have also damaged efforts  to  create  conditions
             that will encourage Rwandese refugees  to  return  home.   The
             laws have attracted extensive international criticism  in  the
             lead-up to the August 2010 presidential elections.

             The Rwandan government announced a review of  the  "''genocide
             ideology''" law in April 2010. Amnesty International hopes  it
             will result in amended legislation and  practice  to  prohibit
             only  expression  amounting  to  advocacy   of   hatred   that
             constitutes  incitement  to   hostility,   discrimination   or
             violence, while allowing freedom of expression  in  line  with
             Rwanda's international human rights obligations.

             Freedom of expression is essential to  and  interrelated  with
             the realization and exercise of all human rights.

             There was a sudden surge of international attention  to  these
             laws following the arrest of defence attorney, Peter Erlinder,
             a US citizen, in May 2010 on charges of genocide denial  under
             a 2003 law and his subsequent  bail.   This  report  does  not
             specifically deal  with  this  case,  or  the  2003  law,  but
             addresses the application of similar and related laws.

             "''genocide  ideology''"  is  a  sensitive  issue  in  Rwanda.
             Rights groups and journalists are regularly rebuked  in  media
             outlets  close  to  government  for   drawing   attention   to
             deficiencies in the law. Amnesty international hopes that this
             report will be received by the Rwandan  government  and  other
             key stakeholders  as  a  useful  contribution  to  the  review
             process announced by the Rwandan government."

    192. The Human Rights Watch Report "Rwandan: Justice After Genocide: 20
         years On" summarises the position at page 12 as follows:

           "For the vast majority of families of victims of  RPF  killings,
           there is  therefore  little  hope  of  seeing  the  perpetrators
           prosecuted.  A few have attempted to demand  justice  for  these
           crimes, but it has been a difficult struggle.  There  are  tight
           restrictions on free speech  in  Rwanda,  and  few  people  dare
           broach publicly the sensitive subject of  RPF  crimes.   Talking
           about those, crimes, and effectively departing from the official
           version  of  Rwanda's  recent   history,   can   carry   serious
           consequences, such as charges  of  genocide  denial,  ''genocide
           ideology'' or 'divisionism' (inciting ethnic divisions).  Rwanda
           has passed a number of  laws  which  may  originally  have  been
           intended to prevent and punish hate speech of the kind which led
           to the 1994 genocide, but  in  practice,  have  restricted  free
           speech and imposed strict limits on how people  can  talk  about
           the genocide and other events of 1994. "

    193. A footnote to that passage in the report notes the revision of the
         ''genocide ideology'' law in 2013 as follows:

          "Some  of  these  laws  such  as  the  2008  law  on   ''genocide
          ideology'', have  been  used  to  stifle  dissent  and  prosecute
          government critics.   A  revised  and  improved  version  of  the
          ''genocide ideology'' law was adopted in 2013.  Although the  new
          law defines the offense more precisely and requires  evidence  of
          the intent behind the  crime,  thereby  reducing  the  scope  for
          abusive prosecutions, it retains language that could be  used  to
          criminalize free speech, and offenses are  punishable  by  up  to
          nine years' imprisonment."

    194. The change in the law  is  also  referred  to  in  the  "US  State
         Department Country Report on  Human  Rights  Practices  for  2013,
         Rwanda" (at bundle 2/132 at 146) as follows:

             "In August the government signed into law a revised ''genocide
             ideology'' law that introduced international  definitions  for
             genocide  and  narrowed  the   scope   of   what   constitutes
             "''genocide  ideology''"  and  related  offences  to  a   more
             specific range of actions and statements.   Specifically,  the
             new law states  that  "genocidal  ideology"  must  be  clearly
             linked to specific acts or statements, rather than the broader
             "aggregate of thoughts" standard  defined  in  the  2008  law.
             International and local human rights organisations,  including
             HRW and the Rwandan League for the Promotion  and  Defense  of
             Human Rights  (LIPRODHOR),  welcomed  the  revised  law  while
             expressing  concern  that,  despite  clearer  protections  and
             narrower  definitions,  the  law  still  could  be   used   by
             government to restrict freedom of speech and the press."

    195. That report notes (at bundle 1/147) that:

             "The  government  investigated  and   prosecuted   individuals
              accused of threatening  or  harming  genocide  survivors  and
              witnesses or of espousing ''genocide  ideology'',  which  the
              law defines as dehumanizing an individual or a group with the
              same  characteristics    by   threatening   ,   intimidating,
              defaming, inciting  hatred,  negating  the  genocide,  taking
              revenge, altering testimony or evidence, killing, planning to
              kill, or attempting to kill someone.

             The  NPPA  reported  that,  from  July  2012  to  July   2013,
             authorities prosecuted 772 individuals for  'divisionism'  and
             "''genocide  ideology''-related  crimes",  representing  a  33
             percent increase in such prosecutions, compared with the  July
             2011 to 2012 period."

    196. Mr Seddon submitted that  the  Appellant  had  already  been  ill-
         treated by the Rwandan authorities because of his perceived  anti-
         government or genocide denial views when he was detained and  ill-
         treated in August 1999.  Mr Seddon  referred  to  the  Appellant's
         evidence in his first witness statement dated 21 December 1999  at
         paras 20 et seq (bundle 1/20 et  seq).   He  submitted  that  that
         evidence was neither challenged in the refusal letter nor was  the
         Appellant cross-examined about it.  Mr Seddon pointed out that the
         Respondent had already, in her refusal  decision  of  March  2010,
         branded the Appellant as a  "revisionist"  (at  para  104,  bundle
         1/55).  In support of his submission that  the  Appellant  was  at
         risk of prosecution for these offences, Mr Seddon also relied upon
         the evidence in Brown that the reluctance  of  witnesses  to  give
         evidence was out of fear  of  prosecution  (see  especially  [49],
         [51], [52] and [62]).  Mr Seddon also relied upon the  prosecution
         of Victoire Ingabire for ''genocide ideology'' after she raised in
         a speech the RPF's involvement in war  crimes  (see,  for  example
         Amnesty International Report at page  21).   Mr  Seddon  submitted
         that drawing these strands together, the Appellant had established
         that there was a real risk that he would be subject to prosecution
         for ''genocide ideology'' or 'divisionism'.

    197. In addition, Mr Seddon relied upon the case of HJ  (Iran)  and  HT
         (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 32 and submitted that the  Appellant
         would be at risk because he would  be  required  to  suppress  his
         political opinions in order to avoid prosecution.

         Discussion

    198. We have set out  above  the  background  material  concerning  the
         Rwandan authorities' use of laws  to  suppress  political  dissent
         through prosecutions for ''genocide ideology'' or ''divisionism''.
          Those laws, at least as originally drafted, have been the subject
         of international criticism because of their open  textured  nature
         and potential for  suppressing  legitimate  political  opinion  or
         disagreement with the government's view in particular, so  far  as
         relevant to this appeal,  exploring  the  role  of  the  RPF  (and
         therefore the current President Kigame) in genocide.  We note,  as
         the "US Department of State Report for 2013" most recently  points
         out, there were 772 prosecutions for such  offences  between  July
         2012 and July 2013.  That represented a 33 per  cent  increase  in
         prosecutions over the previous 12 months.  We also  note  that  in
         2008, as a result of issuing international arrest warrants  for  a
         number  of  RPF  officers,  it  is  reported  that   the   Rwandan
         authorities were exploring the  possibility  of  prosecuting  that
         Judge for ''genocide ideology'' (see "Human Rights Watch  Report",
         July 2008 at pages 92-93 cited in Brown at [75]).

    199. Against that, it is clear that the Rwandan authorities acknowledge
         the international criticism of the Rwandan laws and  undertook  to
         carry out a review  (see  "Human  Rights  Council,  17th  Session,
         Report of the Working Group  on  the  Universal  Period  Review  -
         Rwanda" (14 March 2011) (bundle 2/1-20 at paras  79.3  and  79.4).
         That undertaking included an assurance that the law would  not  be
         manipulated  or  interpreted  in  a  manner  that  restricted  the
         responsible exercise of freedom of opinion and that it  would  not
         be abused for political or partisan purposes.

    200. As we have already noted, the law was amended in  2013  to  define
         the offences "more precisely" and  to  require  evidence  of  "the
         intent behind the crime" so that it thereby reduced "the scope for
         abusive prosecutions" (see "Human Rights  Watch  Report:   Rwanda,
         Justice After Genocide - 20 years On"  at  page  12  above).   The
         figure of 772 prosecutions between July 2012 and July 2013 relates
         to a period, of course, before the law was amended.

    201. We accept  that  there  have  been  a  number  of  "high  profile"
         prosecutions  essentially  of  opposition  politicians   such   as
         Victoire Ingabire (see "Amnesty International Report" at pages 21-
         22).   Likewise,  there  have  been  prosecutions  of  those   who
         represent their views to the public such as editors of  newspapers
         (see "US Department of State Report 2013" at bundle 2/17-18).   We
         do not say that all previous prosecutions are of such high profile
         perceived  opponents  of  the  Rwandan  Government  but,  in   our
         judgment, the background material does show that they  are  likely
         to be the targets for prosecution when criticism is made in public
         or in the press.  In our judgment, the  Appellant  does  not  fall
         into this category of targeted individual.

    202. Mr Seddon accepted that the Appellant is not named in any  of  the
         claims either brought by his sister-in-law  for  compensation  for
         the death of his brother or in his family's support for the action
         of the foreign judges in seeking to  bring  to  account  potential
         genocide perpetrators in the RPF.

    203. Mr Seddon submitted that the Appellant's evidence in  his  witness
         statement that he had been asked about the claim by his sister-in-
         law for his brother's death when he was detained in 1999  had  not
         been challenged in cross-examination.  Again, we remind  ourselves
         that in the evidence that the Appellant did give in  this  complex
         factual  case  we  did  not  find  his  evidence  to   be   wholly
         satisfactory or reliable.  In any event,  that  occurred  sometime
         ago and there is no evidence of any further State interest in  the
         Appellant or his family as a result of that claim.

    204. Our attention was drawn  to  pages  22  and  23  of  the  "Amnesty
         International  Report"  which  identifies  that  prosecutions  for
         ''genocide ideology'' have occurred in Rwanda for statements  made
         abroad.  One instance involved a  representative  of  the  RPF  in
         Switzerland during the war and the other a  failed  asylum  seeker
         deported  from  Germany.   As  regards  the  former,  the  Amnesty
         International Report states that it is unable  to  ascertain  what
         was the basis of the charges.  As regards the German deportee, the
         Rwandan Court appears to have dismissed the ''genocide  ideology''
         charge based upon his  statement  that  former  RPF  soldiers  had
         killed his parents and, instead, convicted  him  of  using  forged
         documents in his asylum claim in Germany.  It  would  appear  that
         the individual had initially claimed that his family members  were
         killed but subsequently retracted that  statement  and  said  that
         they were alive.

    205. We were also shown  news  reports  concerning  a  perceived  death
         threat to Rwandan exiles living in the  UK  (see,  e.g.  BBC  News
         Report dated 2 August 2011 at bundle 3/475-477).  The Rwandan High
         Commission has denied involvement in any  plot  to  kill  the  two
         exiles.  Both were  involved  in  political  groups  opposing  the
         ruling party of President  Kigame.   Even  accepting  the  threat,
         which we do not, it is clear to us that the political  profile  of
         the exiles distinguishes them from the Appellant.   The  Appellant
         has not been involved in political activity since leaving  Rwanda.
         The report also refers to a third exile who believes that he is in
         danger because he gave  evidence  to  a  French  judicial  enquiry
         detrimental to President Kigame.  As we  have  already  indicated,
         even if one equated that with the Appellant's support through  his
         family of the actions of the foreign judges to indict RPF members,
         the Appellant is not named or identified and there is  no  reason,
         in our judgment, to believe that the Rwandan authorities are  even
         aware of his involvement.

    206. In our judgment, the Appellant has not established that there is a
         real risk that the Rwandan authorities have any  interest  in  him
         which will lead to a  prosecution  for  ''genocide  ideology''  or
         denial based upon his sister-in-law's claim  for  compensation  or
         his family's support of the foreign judges' actions.

    207. As regards Mr Seddon's reliance on HJ  Iran,  we  accept  that  an
         individual who is prevented from expressing political opinion  for
         fear  of  persecution  falls  potentially   within   the   Refugee
         Convention (see RZ (Zimbabwe) and others v SSHD [2012]  UKSC  38).
         We are not, however, satisfied that the Appellant has  established
         that he will either express 'political' views consistent with  the
         two bases of  his claim under this head or will not do so for fear
         of persecution for expressing that opinion.    The  Appellant  has
         had no political profile since he left Butare University in  1994.
         He  has  shown  no  inclination  to  express  political   opinions
         including the view associated with  the  actions  of  the  foreign
         judges, namely that the RPF was, itself, guilty of genocide.

    208. For these reasons, we are not satisfied that there is a real  risk
         that the Appellant will be subject to prosecution for  '''genocide
         ideology''' or ''divisionism'' in Rwanda.

    Risk based on past history

    209. Although Mr Seddon continued to rely on this  basis,  it  was  not
         entirely clear to us to what  extent  it  formed  a  separate  and
         discreet factual basis for a risk to the Appellant.

    210. In terms, this basis of the  claim  relies  upon  the  Appellant's
         previous  detention  and  ill-treatment  in  1999;  his   family's
         association with the previous president  including  his  brother's
         close association with the previous president and the  Appellant's
         evidence in his most recent  statement  concerning  the  visit  by
         "four people in  civilian  clothes"  to  his  village.   In  large
         measure, we have already dealt with this evidence.

    211. As regards the latter evidence, as we explained above, it does not
         establish any interest in the Appellant based upon his involvement
         in genocide or, we would add, in relation to any views he may hold
         or be perceived to have expressed that could be  seen  as  falling
         within  the  rubric  of  'genocide  ideology'   by   the   Rwandan
         authorities.

    212. The evidence concerning  his  previous  detention  in  Rwanda  now
         relates to a period over 15 years ago.

    213. As regards the Appellant's association with the former  president,
         it is clear to us that in his evidence  the  Appellant  downplayed
         his family's  connection  (apart  from  his  brother)  effectively
         stating that they lived in the same village as the president  came
         from and, in that context, the Appellant and his family  knew  the
         president and his family.  We do not see that as  any  basis  upon
         which the Appellant can establish that he will be of any  interest
         and at risk of ill-treatment by the Rwandan authorities on return.



    214. As regards the association of the  Appellant's  brother  with  the
         president, as we have indicated there was a close association.  He
         was killed in  the  same  plane  crash  as  the  former  president
         accompanying him on that plane.  There is no suggestion  that  the
         family of the Appellant's brother, in particular his sister-in-law
         has ever experienced any difficulties in Rwanda as a result of her
         husband's  association  with  the  former  president  or,  indeed,
         because of her claim for compensation.

    215. Whilst we  acknowledge  that  past  ill-treatment  is  a  "serious
         indicator" of future risk (see para 339K of the Rules), taking all
         these matters together, we are not satisfied on the evidence  that
         the Appellant has established under this head of claim a real risk
         of persecution or serious ill-treatment contrary to Article  3  of
         the ECHR or falling within  Article  15(b)  of  the  Qualification
         Directive.

    Conclusion on risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment

    216. As the Appellant cannot establish a real risk  of  prosecution  in
         Rwanda and  has  otherwise  not  established  he  is  at  risk  of
         persecution or serious ill-treatment, the Appellant's  claim  must
         fail and his appeal is dismissed.

    217. In the light of that, it is  not  strictly  necessary  for  us  to
         decide whether if (contrary to our earlier findings)  there  is  a
         real risk that the Appellant would be prosecuted for  genocide  or
         'genocide ideology' or 'divisionism' there is a  real  risk  of  a
         flagrantly unfair trial contrary to Article 6 of the ECHR or to  a
         punishment, if convicted, that would breach Article 3 of the  ECHR
         and whether, on the Appellant's case,  the  prosecution,  judicial
         process and punishment would  be  inflicted  on  a  discriminatory
         basis because of his political view and so amount  to  persecution
         for a Convention reason.

    218. Both representatives made detailed written and oral submissions on
         these issues and, in the light of that, we consider it appropriate
         to express our views and findings on the hypothetical  basis  that
         the Appellant has established that there is a real  risk  that  he
         will be prosecuted in Rwanda.

    Unfair trial and punishment

         Unfair Trial

    219. The centre piece of the Appellant's case in relation to his  claim
         that any trial  for  genocide  or  'genocide  ideology'  would  be
         flagrantly unfair and a breach of Article 6 of  the  ECHR  is  the
         Divisional Court's decision in Brown.

          The Divisional Court's decision in Brown

    220. In that case, the claimants resisted their extradition  to  Rwanda
         to face prosecution for genocide on the basis that they would  not
         receive a fair  trial  before  the  High  Court  of  Rwanda.   The
         claimants relied upon Article 6 of the ECHR.  The Divisional Court
         recognised that in order to establish a breach of  Article  6  the
         claimants had to show  a  "real  risk  of  a  flagrant  denial  of
         justice" citing R v Special Adjudicator ex parte Ullah [2004] 2 AC
         323 and EM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 64.  The claimants  argued
         that there would be a flagrant denial  of  a  fair  trial  on  two
         bases.  First, they argued that  they  would  not  have  the  same
         opportunity as the prosecution to call  witnesses;  in  particular
         defence  witnesses  would  be  frightened  of  reprisals  if  they
         testified as there was a  risk  of  a  witness  being  accused  of
         "genocide ideology".  As regards witnesses  overseas,  there  were
         inadequate video-link  facilities  to  permit  witnesses  to  give
         evidence from abroad.  Secondly, it was argued  that  the  Rwandan
         judiciary was not independent and impartial  but  was  subject  to
         political pressure and influence.

    221. The Divisional Court considered the claimants'  arguments  in  the
         light of the Rwandan "transfer law" enacted on 16 March 2007.   As
         will become clear below, that law was subsequently amended  on  26
         May 2009 and it  was  that  amended  law  which  was  subsequently
         considered by the ECtHR in the Ahorugeze case.

    222. The Divisional Court accepted the substance of the claimants' case
         that there was a real risk of a flagrant denial of a  fair  trial.
         The  Court's  judgment  contains  a  detailed  and   comprehensive
         assessment of the background evidence and expert reports presented
         to it.  At paras [37]-[48], the Court set out the approach in  the
         existing ICTR jurisprudence concerning the transfer of  defendants
         for trial to the Rwandan High  Court  by  the  ICTR.   Summarising
         those  cases,  the  effect  of  which  was  that  the   ICTR   had
         consistently refused to transfer  cases  because  of  difficulties
         with the availability and presentation of  defence  evidence,  the
         Court said this at para [47]:

             "We can see, then, that in repeated recent decisions, the ICTR
             has not been satisfied that defendants charged  with  genocide
             and related offences will be fairly tried  in  Rwanda,  having
             regard to the apprehension of serious difficulties as  regards
             the availability and presentation of  defence  testimony.   On
             this ground it has consistently declined to order referral  to
             Rwanda for trial in such cases under Rule 11 bis.   Courts  in
             Europe have followed the ICTR.  Thus on 23  October  2008  the
             Toulouse Court of Appeal, in declining to order extradition to
             Rwanda  in  Bivugarabago,  explicitly  followed  the  ICTR  in
             Munyakazi and Kanyarukiga in relation  to  the  safeguard  and
             protection of defence witnesses.   A like decision was arrived
             at on 3 November 2008 by the Appellate Court of  Frankfurt  am
             Main in  Mbarushimana.   There  followed  Senyamuhara  in  the
             Mamoudzou Court of Appeal on 14 November 2008  and  Kamali  in
             the Court of Appeal of Paris on 10 December 2008.   Even  more
             recently, in Kamana, the Lyon Court of  Appeal  on  9  Janaury
             2009 refused to extradite the defendant on like grounds.   All
             these judgments relied heavily  on  extant  decisions  of  the
             ICTR."

    223. Those decisions emphasised the unsatisfactory nature of video-link
         facilities for overseas witnesses and the effect  upon  witnesses'
         willingness to give evidence in the light of potential accusations
         and prosecutions for "genocidal ideology".  The Court went  on  at
         para 49 to cite at length from a Human Rights Watch  Report,  "Law
         and Reality - Progress in Judicial Reform in Rwanda"  (July  2008)
         which again highlighted difficulties faced by defendants in  being
         able to call witnesses, in particular in the light of intimidation
         and threats of prosecution, including the risk of prosecution  for
         "genocidal ideology".

    224. The Court set out at paragraphs [50]-[56] evidence given before it
         on behalf of the defendants.  At para  [57],  the  Court  observed
         that the evidence marched in step with that of  the  Human  Rights
         Watch Report of July 2008 and the conclusions of the ICTR.

    225. At paras [59]-[66], the Court dealt with the Rwandan  government's
         response to this evidence which, the Court summarised at paragraph
         [79]:

             "...taken together points in our view to the existence (to say
              the least) of a substantial risk that if [the claimants]  are
              put on trial before the High Court of Rwanda [they]  will  be
              unable effectively to martial and  present  the  evidence  on
              which  they  desire  to  rely  from  the  mouths  of  defence
              witnesses."

    226. The Rwandan Government specifically drew attention  to  a  witness
         protection scheme administered by the  Office  of  the  Prosecutor
         General of Rwanda and that threats of harassment were reported  to
         the police.  The Court did not  accept  that  this  or  any  other
         argument presented by the Rwandan Government  deflected  from  the
         Court's view on the evidence that  there  was  a  real  risk  that
         potential  defence  witnesses  would  be  deterred   from   giving
         evidence.  At para [62] the Court said this:

             "In our judgement neither the judges' reasoning  nor  [Counsel
             for the Rwandan  Government's]  submissions  in  its  support,
             possess anything like  the  force  that  would  be  needed  to
             contradict the pressing effect of all the evidence now  before
             us which demonstrates a real risk that many potential  defence
             witnesses - whether presently inside or outside Rwanda - would
             be so frightened of reprisals that they  would  not  willingly
             testify.  The judge's dismissal  of  the  admitted  fact  that
             witnesses have been attacked and  killed  with  the  throwaway
             observation "this applies to  both  prosecution  and  defence"
             defies restrained comment.  And the possibility of accusations
             of "genocide minimization" is especially troubling.   It  pre-
             empts what is acceptable and what is unacceptable speech.  But
             that must be inimical to the giving and  receiving  of  honest
             and objective evidence."

    227. At paras [63]-[66], the Court considered the  evidence  concerning
         the availability of video-link facilities in order  that  overseas
         witnesses could give evidence but rejected the view that such  was
         readily available and concluded at para [65]  that:

             "There  must  at  least  be  a  substantial  risk  that   such
             facilities  would  not  be  available.   In  that  event   the
             appellants would effectively be deprived of the opportunity of
             calling witnesses in their defence.   It  might  be  suggested
             that the Court would permit the witnesses'  statements  to  be
             read.  That appears to be  a  very  doubtful  prospect  -  see
             Article 7 of the organic law (again, we have  no  evidence  of
             how the provisions work in practice).  But  even  if  it  were
             done, there is a plain likelihood that little weight would  be
             attached to them."

    228. At para [66], therefore, the Court concluded that:

             "If [the claimants] were extradited to face trial in the  High
             Court of Rwanda, the appellants would suffer a real risk of  a
             flagrant denial of justice by reason of their likely inability
             to adduce the evidence of supporting witnesses."

    229. Having reached that  view  in  relation  to  the  availability  of
         witnesses, the Court went on to consider whether the Rwandan  High
         Court was an independent and impartial tribunal.

    230. At para [68] the Court set out the importance of considering  this
         issue in the context of the "qualities of the political  frame  in
         which it is located" as follows:

             "Moreover the question whether  a  court  is  independent  and
             impartial cannot be answered without considering the qualities
             of the political  frame  in  which  it  is  located.   If  the
             political regime is  autocratic,  betrays  an  intolerance  of
             dissent, and entertains scant regard for the rule of law,  the
             judicial arm of the State may be infected by the  same  vices;
             and even if  it  is  not,  it  may  be  subject  to  political
             pressures at the hands of those who are, so that at the  least
             the courts may find it difficult to deliver objective  justice
             and even-handed procedures for  every  litigant  whatever  the
             nature of his background or the colour of  his  opinions.   We
             must take care, of course, to avoid crude  assumptions  as  to
             the quality of a State's judiciary based on the quality of the
             State's politics.  There are, thankfully,  many  instances  of
             independent judges delivering robust and balanced justice in a
             harsh and inimical  environment;  but  it  takes  courage  and
             steadfastness of a high order."

    231. The Court then went on to  consider  the  background  material  to
         which it was referred, ICTR judgments concerning transfer  to  the
         Rwandan Court and expert evidence  presented  to  the  Court.   In
         particular,  at  paras  [100]-[107]  the  Court   considered   the
         Bizimungu case upon which Mr Seddon placed reliance on  behalf  of
         the Appellant.  That concerned the prosecution of the president of
         Rwanda between 1994 and 2000.  In 2004, he was put  on  trial  for
         various forms of sedition,  criminal  association  and  fraud  and
         embezzlement.  He was convicted and his conviction was  upheld  by
         the Supreme  Court  of  Rwanda.   The  evidence  accepted  by  the
         Divisional  Court  was  that  the  Judge  who  had   presided   at
         Bizimungu's trial in the first instance had fled  Rwanda  and  had
         told journalists that there  had  been  no  substantial  proof  of
         Bizimungu's guilt and  he  had  been  convicted  as  a  result  of
         political pressure (see [106]  of  Brown).   At  para  [107],  the
         Divisional Court accepted what the trial judge  in  the  Bizimungu
         case had said  and  concluded  that  it  amounted  to  significant
         evidence of judicial interference in the  judicial  process.   The
         Court said this:

             "In our judgment there is a substantial  likelihood  that  the
             trial judge said what he is  alleged  to  have  said,  whether
             there is one source or more.  There is no  reason  to  suppose
             otherwise.  And if it was said, there is nothing to suggest it
             was fake.  We must assess its significance.  It is  of  course
             right that the relevant events took place some time ago:   the
             trail was in 2004.  It is also right that the case  must  have
             possessed an especially high  profile.   Balancing  the  whole
             matter (and we should not forget  that  the  appellants,  too,
             would have a considerable, profile as defendants in a genocide
             trial:  three were bourgmestres, the fourth said to have  been
             a close associate of President  Habyarimana),  we  regard  the
             Bizimungu case as  being  significant  evidence  of  executive
             interference in the judicial process in the  High  Court,  and
             thus of a want of impartiality and independence."

    232. The Court set out its conclusions on the fair trial issue at paras
         [119]-[121] as follows:

             119. As will be apparent from this judgment, we  accord  great
                  respect to the ICTR's decisions.   However,  the  Appeals
                  Chamber's finding that no reasonable Trial Chamber  would
                  have  concluded  that  there  was  sufficient   risk   of
                  government interference with  the  Rwandan  judiciary  to
                  warrant denying the prosecution's  transfer  request  was
                  based only on the record before it, and in particular  on
                  the failure to mention any specific incidents of judicial
                  interference (paragraph  78  above).   We  have  had  the
                  advantage of being able to  consider  not  only  the  HRW
                  Report of July  2008,  including  its  treatment  of  the
                  Bizimungu  case  (paragraph  104  above),  but  also  the
                  evidence of  Professor  Reyntjens,  Professor  Sands  and
                  Professor Schabas, and in particular  the  acceptance  by
                  Professor Schabas in cross-examination on 21 August  2008
                  that there probably was  executive  interference  in  the
                  Bizimungu case (see paragraph 101 above).  Thus  we  have
                  the  evidence  of  a  specific   incident   of   judicial
                  interference that the Appeals Chamber lacked.

             120. More generally, we have not forgotten the  scale  of  the
                  dreadful tribulations suffered in Rwanda  in  1994.   Nor
                  have we ignored the real and substantial  measures  taken
                  to establish a  judicial  system  capable  of  delivering
                  criminal justice to acceptable standards.  But  our  duty
                  is to apply an objective test -  real  risk  of  flagrant
                  denial  of  justice.   We   certainly   cannot   sanction
                  extradition  as  a  means  of  encouraging  the   Rwandan
                  authorities  to  redouble  their  efforts  to  achieve  a
                  justice system that guarantees due process.   That  might
                  serve a political aspiration, but would amount to  denial
                  of legal principle.

             121. We  stated  earlier  (paragraph  68)  that  the  question
                  whether a court is independent and  impartial  cannot  be
                  answered  without  considering  the  qualities   of   the
                  political frame in which it is located.  We have  had  no
                  day-by-day details from the GoR of  the  conduct  of  the
                  Rwandan High Court's business.  No details of trials;  of
                  defences run, successfully or unsuccessfully; no  details
                  of any of the myriad events that show a court is  working
                  justly.  We have reached a  firm  conclusion  as  to  the
                  gravity of the problems that would face these  appellants
                  as regards witnesses if they were returned for  trial  in
                  Rwanda.  Those very problems do not promise well for  the
                  judiciary's impartiality and independence.   The  general
                  evidence as to the nature of the Rwandan polity offers no
                  better  promise.   When  one  adds  all  the   particular
                  evidence we have described touching the  justice  system,
                  we are driven to conclude that if these  appellants  were
                  returned there would be  a  real  risk  that  they  would
                  suffer a flagrant denial of justice..."

    233. As we have said, Mr Seddon placed reliance upon the Brown decision
         and its conclusion that any trial for genocide (and he  would  add
         'genocide ideology' or 'divisionism') would be  flagrantly  unfair
         both because of the lack of impartiality and independence  of  the
         Rwandan judiciary and because of the lack of equality of  arms  in
         the Appellant's ability  to  defend  any  prosecution  by  calling
         witnesses even if, and it appears to be only the case in  transfer
         cases, video link facilities would be in theory available  because
         the evidence did not show that in practice that was the case.

    234. Mr Hopkin did not seek to undermine the Court's decision in Brown.
          Instead, he relied upon the ECtHR's decision in  Ahorugeze  which
         reached the opposite conclusion to the Court in  Brown.   He  also
         relied upon the background material in particular  the  "US  State
         Department Report on Human Rights Practices for Rwanda" for  2011,
         2012 and 2013 which he submitted  demonstrated  that  the  Rwandan
         judiciary was now impartial and independent except perhaps in high
         profile cases which would not be the  proper  characterisation  of
         any prosecution of the Appellant (see,  in  particular,  the  2013
         report at pages 144 and 145).  He submitted that  the  prosecution
         of Victoire Ingabire was an example of such a  high  profile  case
         where political interference could not be excluded.

          The ECtHR's decision in Ahorugeze

    235. In Ahorugeze, the  ECtHR  concluded  that  the  extradition  of  a
         Rwandan national to face prosecution for genocide  in  Rwanda  did
         not breach Articles 6 or 3 of the ECHR.

    236. In reaching its decision, the ECtHR  relied  upon  the  amendments
         made to  the  Rwandan  "transfer  law"  from  26  May  2009.   The
         provisions of the law are set out at  para  [34]  of  the  ECtHR's
         judgment which we gratefully adopt.  Principally those  amendments
         provided for two significant changes to the Rwandan law.

    237. First, in Article 13 the law now provides for  the  protection  of
         witnesses from criminal liability for anything said or done  in  a
         trial.  It provides as follows:

             "Without prejudice to the relevant laws on contempt  of  court
             and perjury, no person shall be criminally liable for anything
             said or done in the course of a trial."

    238. At least in principle, therefore, the law protects witnesses  from
         the risk of a prosecution for anything said at a trial which might
         otherwise constitute "genocide ideology"  or  "divisionism"  which
         was one of the dangers which influenced  the  Court  in  Brown  to
         conclude that a defendant in a genocide trial  might  be  unfairly
         prejudiced by the reluctance of witnesses to give evidence.

    239. Secondly, Article 14 bis allows for the giving of testimony  by  a
         witness residing abroad, including by  video-link  which  has  the
         obvious advantage that a witness does not return to Rwanda.

    240. The ECtHR also referred to the Rwandan law of 2007 abolishing  the
         death penalty and its amendment from 1 December 2008  in  relation
         to genocide cases.  Article 2 of the original  law  abolished  the
         death penalty.  Article 3 provided that  the  penalty  substituted
         would be either "life imprisonment"  or  "life  imprisonment  with
         special provisions".  Article 4 defines  "life  imprisonment  with
         special provisions" as imprisonment in isolation with no  prospect
         of release for at least 20 years.  However, by  the  amendment  to
         that law on 1 December 2008, Article 3 was amended such that "life
         imprisonment with special provisions" could not be  pronounced  in
         respect of any case transferred to Rwanda from the  ICTR  or  from
         other states in accordance with the  provisions  of  the  transfer
         law.

    241. It is clear from Article 24 of the transfer law that the  transfer
         law (and the exclusion of the  punishment  of  "life  imprisonment
         with special provisions")  apply  both  to  cases  transferred  to
         Rwanda by the ICTR or where:

             "extradition of suspects is sought by the Republic  of  Rwanda
             from other states".

    242. It follows,  in  our  judgment,  that  the  transfer  law  has  no
         application to this appeal as the Appellant is not subject  to  an
         extradition request.

    243. By contrast, there is no doubt that the  ECtHR  in  Ahorugeze  was
         concerned with a case in which the "transfer law" did apply.

    244. The ECtHR was influenced by the transfer decision of the  ICTR  in
         Uwinkindi where the Court,  for  the  first  time,  permitted  the
         transfer of a case to Rwanda (see [51]-[56]).  At [58], the  ECtHR
         also noted the  ICTR's  view  in  Uwinkindi  in  relation  to  the
         independence and impartiality of the Rwandan judiciary as follows:



             "On the issue of the  independence  and  impartiality  of  the
             Rwandan judiciary, the Chamber was of the  view  that  Rwandan
             judges, as professional judges, benefited from  a  presumption
             in their favour that could not be lightly rebutted  (paragraph
             166).  The judges of the High Court and the Supreme Court were
             considered qualified and experienced and in possession of  the
             necessary skills to handle a transferred case (paragraph 178).
              Furthermore,  the  Rwandan  legal  framework  guaranteed  the
             independence and  impartiality  of  the  judiciary  (paragraph
             186).  The submissions made in the case by the defence and  by
             amici curiae in support of their contention that the judiciary
             lacked those qualities in practice, in the Chamber's  opinion,
             mainly concerned cases of  a  political  nature  and  did  not
             reflect the conditions of the trial or the  charges  faced  by
             the accused (paragraph 196).   In  addition,  the  information
             available to the Chamber did not give reason to conclude  that
             the judiciary was unduly corrupt (paragraph 185).

    245. Further, at para [56], the  ECtHR  noted  the  witness  protection
         programme in Rwanda.  At para [51] it also noted the  availability
         of defence counsel.  At para [59] the ECtHR also noted that  there
         were "additional  safeguards  in  the  monitoring  and  revocation
         mechanisms" available under rule 11 bis of the  ICTR's  Rules  and
         Procedure and Evidence.

    246. Mr Hopkin placed reliance upon  the  case  of  Uwinkindi  and  its
         adoption in Ahorugeze.  He also relied upon a decision of the Oslo
         District Court on 11 July  2011,  referred  to  by  the  ECtHR  in
         Ahorugeze  at  [72]-[75])  in  which  the  Court   permitted   the
         extradition from Norway to Rwanda of a genocide suspect.  At  para
         [73], the ECtHR recorded that the Oslo court:

             "found that the legislative and other changes, as well as  the
             possibility for observers to  follow  the  trial,  meant  that
             there was no real risk that the trial would be unfair."

    247. It is also clear from para [74] of the ECtHR's decision  that  the
         Oslo District Court was itself influenced  by  the  ICTR  Referral
         Chamber's decision in Uwinkindi.  We were informed at the  hearing
         that an appeal had been dismissed in the  Uwinkindi  case  by  the
         ICTR's Appeal Chamber.

    248. The ECtHR's conclusion in relation to  the  fairness  of  a  trial
         subject to the "transfer law" is set out at paras  [117]-[123]  as
         follows:

            "117. The Court reiterates that, in 2008 and  early  2009,  the
                 ICTR as well as courts and authorities of several  national
                 jurisdictions refused to  transfer  or  extradite  genocide
                 suspects to Rwanda due to concerns that the suspects  would
                 not receive a fair trial in  the  country.   The  decisions
                 mainly focussed on the  difficulties  for  the  defence  to
                 adduce witness  testimony,  on  account  of  the  fears  of
                 witnesses to appear for fear of reprisals and the risk that
                 remote defence testimony would not be given the same weight
                 by the courts as evidence  for  the  prosecution  given  in
                 person.  While the ICTR found no reason  to  criticise  the
                 impartiality and independence of the Rwandan  judiciary  or
                 the composition of the courts, the UK High Court  concluded
                 that there was evidence of  judicial  interference  by  the
                 Rwandan executive.  Several decisions also found  that  the
                 possibility of life imprisonment in  isolation  constituted
                 an impediment to transferring the suspects to Rwanda.

            118. Since these decisions were taken, several  amendments  have
                 been made  to  the  Rwandan  legislation.   The  respondent
                 Government and the third-party  intervener  have  submitted
                 that there  have  been  additional  improvements  in  legal
                 practice.  Consequently, it needs to be determined  whether
                 these changes are  sufficient  to  conclude  that,  if  the
                 applicant is now extradited to  Rwanda,  he  would  not  be
                 subjected to a real risk of a flagrant denial of justice.

            119. As noted above in regard to the applicant's complaint under
                 Article 3, he cannot be sentenced to life  imprisonment  in
                 isolation (see 93).  Thus, this particular issue need  not
                 be examined further.

            120. The Court considers that the central issue in this  present
                 case is the applicant's ability to adduce witnesses on  his
                 behalf and obtain an examination of testimony by the courts
                 that reasonably respect the equality of arms vis--vis  the
                 prosecution.

            121. As regards the fears  of  reprisals  that  the  applicant's
                 witnesses may have, it is, noted by the ICTR in  Uwinkindi,
                 not determinative whether those  fears  are  reasonable  or
                 well-founded but rather whether there are objective reasons
                 to believe that witnesses would refuse to come forward.  In
                 this respect, the Court first notes  that,  through  a  May
                 2009 amendment to Article 13 of the Transfer Law, witnesses
                 - as well as other participants in the  proceedings  -  are
                 afforded immunity from prosecution for statements  made  or
                 actions taken during a trial.  Furthermore, in addition  to
                 the witness protection programme  previously  in  existence
                 under the auspices of the Office of the  Prosecutor-General
                 ("VWSU"), Rwanda has  recently  made  arrangements  for  an
                 additional witness protection unit under the  direction  of
                 the judiciary ("WPU").  The Court also takes  into  account
                 the  submissions  made  by  the   Netherlands   Government,
                 according to which, during Dutch investigations of genocide
                 cased in Rwanda, the Rwandan officials had  never  inquired
                 about  the  witnesses   or   their   statements.    Similar
                 assessments, recorded in the Oslo District Court's judgment
                 of 11 July 2011, had been  made  by  the  Norwegian  police
                 after having interviewed  149  witnesses  in  Rwanda  since
                 September 2009.

            122. Furthermore, the introduction of  Article  14  bis  of  the
                 Transfer Law provides  for  the  possibility  of  witnesses
                 residing outside Rwanda to give testimony through  the  use
                 of several alternative means, without having to  appear  in
                 person at a  trial.   Besides  the  possibility  of  making
                 depositions before a judge in Rwanda or  abroad,  the  most
                 important development is perhaps that the law now  provides
                 for the hearing of witnesses during the  trial  via  video-
                 link.  Already in its first referral case,  Munyakazi,  the
                 ICTR  Appeals  Chamber  was   satisfied   that   video-link
                 facilities were available and would likely be authorised in
                 cases where witnesses residing abroad genuinely  feared  to
                 testify in person.  In the  present  case,  the  respondent
                 Government have  submitted  that  there  are  no  technical
                 obstacles to the use of  video-link  in  Rwanda.   In  this
                 connection, the Court reiterates  that  it  has  previously
                 held that the use of video-link testimony  is  as  such  in
                 conformity with Article 6  (see  for  instance,  Kabwe  and
                 Chungu v. the United  Kingdom  (dec.),  nos.  29647/08  and
                 33269/08, 2 February 2010).  Furthermore, in  view  of  the
                 legislative  changes  providing  for  alternative  ways  of
                 giving testimony, the  Court  cannot  find  any  basis  for
                 concluding that statements thus made would  be  treated  by
                 the courts in a manner inconsistent with  the  respect  for
                 the equality of arms.

            123. In conclusion, the Court finds no reason to  conclude  that
                 the applicant's ability to  adduce  witness  testimony  and
                 have such evidence examined by the courts in  Rwanda  would
                 be circumscribed in a manner inconsistent with the  demands
                 of Article 6."

    249. At para [124] the ECtHR noted that the  claim  that  no  qualified
         lawyer  would  be  able  to  defend  the  applicant   was   simply
         unsubstantiated.  As regards the independence and impartiality  of
         the Rwandan judiciary, the ECtHR (at [125]) rejected the  argument
         that the Rwanda judiciary lacked the  requisite  independence  and
         impartiality in the following terms:

             "Turning to the independence and impartiality of  the  Rwandan
             judiciary, the Court takes note of the concerns  expressed  by
             some international organisations as well as the UK High Court.
              However, in its referral cases, the ICTR has  concluded  that
             the  Rwandan  judiciary   meets   these   requirements.    The
             Uwinkindi, the Referral Chamber considered that the judges  of
             the High Court  and  the  Supreme  Court  were  qualified  and
             experienced and in  possession  of  the  necessary  skills  to
             handle a transferred case.   Furthermore, both  the  ICTR  and
             the respondent  Government  have  pointed  to  the  legal  and
             constitutional guarantees of the judiciary's independence  and
             impartiality.  The experience of the Dutch investigative teams
             and the Norwegian police - that Rwandan authorities had not in
             any way interfered with their work or with the witnesses  they
             heard - points in the same  direction.   The  Court  therefore
             concludes that there is  no  sufficient  indication  that  the
             Rwandan  judiciary  lacks  the  requisite   independence   and
             impartiality."

    250. At para [127] the Court noted the ICTR Referral Chamber's decision
         in Uwinkindi  and,  in  particular  its  reference  to  monitoring
         mechanisms but considered those  not  to  have  had  any  material
         effect on  the  Chamber's  decision  based  upon  changes  to  the
         transfer law:

             "The Court has in the foregoing referred to the ICTR  Referral
              Chamber's decision  in  Uwinkindi.   While  noting  that  the
              decision is not final, the Court nevertheless considers  that
              its conclusions have to be given considerable weight.  It  is
              the first transfer decision  taken  by  the  ICTR  since  the
              legislative changes in Rwanda.  The Chamber  found  that  the
              issues that had led  to  the  decisions  in  2008  to  refuse
              transfers  had  been  addressed  to  such  a  degree  in  the
              intervening period that the Chamber was  confident  that  the
              accused would be  prosecuted  in  a  manner  consistent  with
              internationally recognised fair trial standards enshrined  in
              the ICTR Statute and other human rights  instruments.   While
              the Chamber also relied on the monitoring it ordered and  its
              ability to revoke the transferred  case  if  necessary,  this
              does not, as noted above in regard  to  the  complaint  under
              Article 3, change the conclusions drawn.  In this connection,
              the Court notes that Sweden has declared itself  prepared  to
              monitor  the  proceedings  in  Rwanda  and  the   applicant's
              detention."

    251. At para [128], in a passage relied upon by Mr  Hopkin,  the  ECtHR
         noted that the standard in transfer cases "clearly  set  a  higher
         threshold" than the test for extraditions under Article 6  of  the
         Convention as the transfer  court  must  be  satisfied  "that  the
         person in question will receive a fair trial".

    252. At para [129] the ECtHR concluded  that  if  extradited  to  stand
         trial in Rwanda the applicant: "would not  face  a  real  risk  of
         flagrant denial of justice".

         Discussion

    253. In our judgment, the ECtHR's decision in Ahorugeze  cannot  assist
         the Respondent in this appeal.

    254. First, the ECtHR's decision, in relation to the  fairness  of  any
         trial based upon difficulties of  witnesses  attending  or  giving
         evidence from abroad, is squarely based  upon  the  new  "transfer
         law" which has no application in this appeal for  the  reasons  we
         have already given.  As a result, this Appellant is in  no  better
         position than were the individuals in the Brown  case  as  regards
         his ability fairly to defend himself in any prosecution in Rwanda.



    255. Secondly, as the ECtHR  made  clear  at  para  [127]  it  was  the
         amendment  to  the  "transfer  law"   which   was   the   material
         consideration  in  the  change  in  the  ICTR  Referral  Chamber's
         position adopted in the Uwinkindi case.

    256. Thirdly, there is no evidence before us  that  any  trial  of  the
         Appellant would be subject to independent monitoring to the extent
         that that could, though we do not accept it to be the case, affect
         the fairness of any trial.

    257. Fourthly, as regards the  independence  and  impartiality  of  the
         judiciary, the Divisional Court in Brown based its decision  on  a
         detailed consideration  of  the  background  evidence  and  expert
         reports.  It set the trial process and the  Rwandan  judiciary  in
         the political context in which it operates.  By contrast the ECtHR
         in Ahorugeze relied (at [125]) on the views of the  ICTR  Referral
         Chamber in Uwinkindi (set out at [58]  of  the  ECtHR's  judgment)
         based, it would seem, on structural matters alone: the judges  are
         professional  and  benefited  from  a  presumption  in  favour  of
         independence  and  impartiality  (the  source  of  which  is   not
         vouchsafe) and the legal framework guaranteeing  the  independence
         and impartiality  of  the  judiciary.   The  points  made  by  the
         Divisional Court in Brown, based upon more comprehensive  evidence
         including that of experts, are simply not met by those  structural
         considerations.   The  evidence  in   Brown   went   further   and
         demonstrated that executive influence occurred in  trials  with  a
         political element, for example the Bizimungu prosecution.  In  our
         judgment, if (and we  emphasise  this  is  not  our  finding)  the
         Appellant were subject to prosecution for  genocide  or  'genocide
         ideology' or 'divisionism' there is a real risk that the political
         context would potentially  entail  executive  influence  over  the
         judiciary.

    258. We see nothing in the  material  relied  upon  by  Mr  Hopkin,  in
         particular in the "US Department of State Reports" that  leads  us
         to any different conclusion.  The most recent 2013  report  states
         that (at bundle 2/143):

              "The  constitution  and  law  provides  for  an   independent
              judiciary, and the judiciary operated in most  cases  without
              government interference; however, there were  constraints  on
              judicial  independence,  and  government  official  sometimes
              attempt to  influence  individual  cases.   In  February  the
              Ministry of Justice announced that 10 judges and clerks  were
              dismissed during the previous 24 months  due  to  corruption.
              Authorities generally respected court orders."

    259. Under the rubric "Judicial Civil Procedures and Remedies" the 2013
         states at page 14 (bundle 2/145) that:

             "The judiciary was  generally  independent  and  impartial  in
          civil matters."

    260.  The  latter,  in  our  judgment,  tells  us  nothing  about   the
         impartiality and independence  of  the  judiciary  from  executive
         interference  in  trials  for  genocide  and   related   offences.
         Likewise, the former extract recognised that government  officials
         do  attempt  to  influence  some  individual  cases  despite   the
         constitution providing  for  an  independent  judiciary.   As  the
         Divisional Court in Brown acknowledged, the issue is  not  one  of
         independence in theory but rather what happens in  practice.   The
         material to which we have been referred does not persuade us  that
         there is any proper basis for reaching any different conclusion to
         that of the Divisional Court in Brown.  The material  referred  to
         in Brown and to which we were referred by the parties leads us  to
         conclude that the political milieu in Rwanda is such that, if  the
         Appellant were subject to prosecution for  genocide,  there  is  a
         real risk  of  executive  interference  (see  in  particular  that
         referred to in Appellant's skeleton argument paras 90 and 91).

    261. Consequently, we make the following findings.  First, on return to
         Rwanda, if prosecuted for genocide or genocide  related  offences,
         there  is  a  real  risk  that  the  Appellant's  trial  would  be
         flagrantly  unfair  and  a  breach  of  Article  6  of  the  ECHR.
         Secondly, the circumstances of prosecution (which  are  themselves
         likely to involve political considerations) and of the trial given
         the prospect of executive  interference,  would  entail  "judicial
         measures" or "prosecution" on a discriminatory basis resulting  in
         a sufficiently serious violation of the Appellant's  human  rights
         (Article 6 of the ECHR) so as to  constitute  "persecution"  under
         reg 5 of the Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
         (Qualification) Regulations 2006.  Thirdly, that persecution would
         be for a Convention reason, namely  imputed  or  actual  political
         opinion.

    262. If we are wrong about that, and the Appellant is not  entitled  to
         refugee status, we are satisfied that  the  circumstances  of  the
         trial would amount to "inhuman  or  degrading  treatment"  falling
         within  Article  3  of  the  ECHR  and  Article   15(b)   of   the
         Qualification Directive  entitling  the  Appellant  to  subsidiary
         protection.

         Punishment

    263. Mr Seddon also  relied  upon  the  risk  of  the  Appellant  being
         convicted,  following  a  prosecution  for  genocide  or  genocide
         related offences, and subject to a sentence of  life  imprisonment
         in isolation without the prospect of  parole  for  20  years.   He
         submitted  that  this,  in  itself,  amounted  to   discriminatory
         punishment and therefore "persecution" within reg 5  of  the  2006
         Persons  in  Need  of  International  Protection  Regulations  or,
         alternatively,  "inhuman  or  degrading  punishment"  contrary  to
         Article 3 of the ECHR  and  Article  15(b)  of  the  Qualification
         Directive.   In addition, he  relied  upon  the  circumstances  in
         which the Appellant would  be  detained  pre-trial  and  the  more
         general circumstances of his imprisonment post-conviction.

    264. We deal first with the risk of the Appellant being imprisoned  for
         life in isolation with no possibility of parole for 20 years.

    265. In Ahorugeze the ECtHR was not required to determine whether that,
         in itself, breached Article 3 of the ECHR (see [119]).  That  was,
         of course, because the individual in that case was subject to  the
         new "transfer law" and by virtue of the Organic Law No 31/2007 (as
         amended) by Organic Law No 66/2008 that punishment  could  not  be
         imposed in a transfer case.  This is not a transfer case  and  so,
         in principle, that punishment is available.

    266. Mr Hopkin submitted that the risk of the Appellant  being  subject
         to this  punishment  was  "so  remote  as  to  be  negligible"  or
         speculative.  This risk, of course, only arises in relation  to  a
         conviction for genocide.  The punishment for  "genocide  ideology"
         has, since 2008 been a maximum term of 9 years imprisonment.

    267. Mr Seddon did  not  draw  our  attention  to  any  material  which
         suggested that the punishment for genocide  was  necessarily  life
         imprisonment in  isolation.   That  would  seem,  on  the  limited
         material before us,  to  be  the  maximum  rather  than  the  only
         available punishment.  Whilst  there  must  be  a  risk  that  any
         conviction of the Appellant might attract the  maximum  punishment
         for his offences, there is nothing in the material  before  us  to
         suggest that his involvement  in  genocide  (accepting  for  these
         purposes the Respondent's claim in that  regard  at  its  highest)
         would put his offences in the highest possible category justifying
         the maximum sentence.  We do not accept that  there  is  a  'real'
         risk of this punishment being imposed and we do not consider  that
         simply facing the risk (albeit not real) of such a punishment  is,
         in itself, inhuman and degrading treatment contrary to  Article  3
         of the ECHR.

    268. That said, Mr Hopkin accepted that he was in some difficulties  if
         the Appellant was subject to pre-trial detention.  However, he did
         not accept that prison conditions in themselves, if the  Appellant
         were convicted, breached Article 3 of the ECHR.  He submitted that
         the  background  evidence  demonstrated   that   although   prison
         conditions were "harsh" they met international standards (see  "US
         Department of State Report" 2011 at bundle 2/43-46; 2012 at bundle
         2/87-88 and 2013 at bundle 2/136-137).

    269. We were told about Mpanga Prison in Rwanda where those transferred
         by the ICTR were held if  convicted  and  the  similarly  upgraded
         security wing at Kigali Central Prison and facilities where  those
         individuals were held during the trial.  It was not  a  matter  of
         dispute  between   the   parties   that   those   facilities   met
         "international standards"  (see,  e.g.  "US  Department  of  State
         Report 2012" at bundle 2/88).  It is not entirely clear to us from
         Mr Hopkin's submissions whether the Respondent disputed  that  the
         Appellant would be held in Mpanga Prison if convicted  and  during
         any trial in similar facilities.  It seems to us that there is  at
         least a real risk that the Appellant would not, if  convicted,  be
         held in Mpanga Prison.  For example, the "US Department  of  State
         Report 2012" refers (at bundle 2/8):

             "Individuals  convicted  of  genocide   -   related   offences
              comprised a majority of the adult prison population."

    270. The next paragraph deals with eight prisoners held at the purpose-
         built detention centre (which we understand to be  Mpanga  Prison)
         following transfer from the ICTR.  That, in our judgment, at least
         creates a very real possibility that the Appellant maybe  held  in
         an "ordinary" Rwandan prison.  We have  carefully  considered  the
         evidence relied upon, particularly by Mr Hopkin,  in  relation  to
         prison and detention conditions.  As he submitted, the  conditions
         are described a "harsh" in the US  Department  of  State  Reports.
         Likewise, those reports record that the government made  "numerous
         improvement"  during  the  relevant   year.    Nevertheless,   the
         background material paints a bleak picture of prison and detention
         conditions including  physical  abuse  of  inmates,  overcrowding,
         deaths from conditions such as anaemia, HIV/aids albeit at similar
         rates to those found in the general public.

    271. In relation to police and  military  detention  centres,  the  "US
         State Department Report 2013" (bundle 2/137) states that:

             "Overcrowding was common in police detention centres, and poor
             ventilation often led to high temperatures.  The provision  of
             food and medical care was  inconsistent,  and  some  detainees
             claim to have gone for several days without food.  There  were
             complaints regarding inadequate sanitation in  some  detention
             centres, and not all detention centres had toilets."

    272. Any pre-trial detention would be likely to be lengthy.   There  is
         clear evidence of delays in bringing  proceedings  to  court  ("US
         State Department Report 2013" at  bundle  2/11-12).   Despite  the
         claim of the government making "improvements during the  year"  in
         2011, 2012 and 2013 (including improvement  in  the  provision  of
         food), we are satisfied  that  there  is  a  real  risk  that  the
         conditions in pre-trial detention and,  if  convicted,  in  prison
         will be of such harshness and severity as to pass the threshold of
         the minimum level of severity to amount to "inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment".

    273. Consequently, we are satisfied (on this hypothetical  basis)  that
         there is a real risk that the Appellant's pre-trial detention  and
         post-conviction imprisonment would breach Art 3 of the ECHR.  That
         imprisonment  would  arise   from   a   discriminatory/politically
         motivated application of the law and the trial process and so  the
         ill-treatment would amount to persecution for a Convention  reason
         or, alternatively, a breach of  Art  15(b)  of  the  Qualification
         Directive.

    Conclusion

    274. Despite our conclusions in relation to the fairness of  any  trial
         or punishment the Appellant would  face  if  prosecuted  for  (and
         convicted of) genocide or 'genocide ideology', this appeal  fails.
         For the reasons we gave above, we are not satisfied that there  is
         a real risk that the Appellant will be prosecuted for genocide  or
         'genocide ideology' or 'divisionism' or that there is a real  risk
         that  the  Appellant  would  be  subject  to  persecution  for   a
         Convention reason or serious ill-treatment as a result of his past
         history and family  associations  with  the  former  president  of
         Rwanda.

IV. DECISION

    275. The Appellant is not excluded from the  Refugee  Convention  under
         Art  1F  or  from  subsidiary/humanitarian  protection  under  the
         Qualification Directive/para 339D.

    276. The Appellant has failed to establish that his  return  to  Rwanda
         would breach the Refugee Convention or  that  he  is  entitled  to
         subsidiary/humanitarian protection in the UK.

    277. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                  Date: 6 November 2014


Mrs Justice Simler


-----------------------
[1] Indictment of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda against
Bizimanz, Karemera et a(ICTR-98-44-i)- 1.13
[2] Indictment of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda against
Bizimana, Karemera et at (ICTR-98-44-I)-3.10,3.11).

