
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05612/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 3 February 2015                  |On: 25 March 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Latimer, Duncan Lewis & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Archer in which he allowed the  appeal  of
    HA, a citizen of Iraq, against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse asylum. I shall refer to HA as the Applicant,  although  he  was
    the Appellant in the proceedings below.

 2. The Applicant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  19  October  2012  and
    claimed asylum the same day. His application was  refused  on  22  July
    2014.  The Applicant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This is the appeal which  came  before  Judge  Archer  on  9
    September 2014 and was allowed both under the  Refugee  Convention  and
    the Human  Rights  Convention.  The  Secretary  of  State  applied  for
    permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  application  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid on  6  October  2014  in  the
    following terms

         The grounds argue inter  alia:  the  judge  materially  misdirected
         himself in law by failing to consider any of the  relevant  Country
         Guidance or Appeal Court decisions; there is no reference to any CG
         case law including HM and others (family members of Ba'athists  and
         KRG relocation), HF (Iraq)  and  Others  (relocation  to  KRG),  ZQ
         (serving soldier) Iraq (applying Fadli); the judge  attached  undue
         weight to the report by Dr George whilst ignoring the  findings  of
         the Tribunal;  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
         findings on material matters including internal flight.

         Having found at [34-35] that the Appellant's account was reasonably
         likely to be true the judge then went on to consider sufficiency of
         protection and internal relocation at [36-42]. However in doing  so
         the judge attached weight to the report by Dr George but completely
         omitted to demonstrate that he had considered it with reference  to
         the Country Guidance case law. The judge did not set out if or  why
         he chose to depart from it.

         The grounds disclose an arguable error of law.

 3. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Richards  appeared  to  represent  the
    Secretary of State and Ms Latimer represented the Applicant. Ms Latimer
    submitted a rule 24 response.

Background

 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Applicant was born in Iraq on 1 December  1983
    and was employed as a policeman in Baghdad. He arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 19 October 2012 and claimed asylum on arrival.

 5. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing the judge accepted  the  credibility
    of the Applicant's account (see paragraphs 35 to 40). In doing  so  the
    Judge accepted that the Applicant is an Arabic  speaking  Sunni  Muslim
    whose father, a senior member of the Ba'ath party in Erbil  (KRG),  was
    murdered in 1991 when the Applicant was a child. The Applicant lived in
    Baghdad where he served as a policeman between 2007  and  2012.  Having
    been approached by a member of Al Mujahadeen and having  reported  this
    approach to a senior officer causing the detention of the Al Mujahadeen
    member the Appellant's brother was killed when the Al Mujahadeen sought
    the Applicant. This incident caused the Applicant to leave the country,
    he fears return to his home area because of adverse  interest  from  Al
    Mujahadeen and his father's association with the  Ba'ath  party  causes
    him to fear relocation within Iraq to the KRG.

Submissions

 6. On behalf the Secretary of State Mr Richards relied on the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal. He said that it was not simply a  failure
    of the Judge to cite the  relevant  case  law;  he  had  departed  from
    country guidance authority without giving reasons for doing  so.  Other
    than that there was not a lot to be added to the grounds.  The  finding
    in HM concerning family members of former Ba'athists is  clear  enough.
    In respect of relocation to the KRG the Judge gives undue weight to the
    expert's report of Dr George.  Mr  Richards  said  that  the  state  of
    emergency in Iraq pertaining  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  was  not
    mentioned in the Home Office Operational Guidance  Note  of  22  August
    2014.

 7. For the Applicant Ms Latimer referred to  the  rule  24  response.  She
    pointed out that HM and others (Article 15(c) ) Iraq CG [2012]  is,  as
    the  citation  suggests,  a  15(c)  case  dealing  with  the  risk   of
    indiscriminate rather than targeted violence. In his report  Dr  George
    specifically deals with  the  likelihood  of  violence  being  targeted
    against the Applicant. The Judge made positive credibility findings  in
    this respect. The First-tier Tribunal Judge gives clear reasons why the
    Applicant cannot be expected to relocate to  the  KRG.  So  far  as  ZQ
    (serving solider) Iraq CG [2009] UKAIT 00048 is concerned the  decision
    specifically excludes policemen from its ambit. The Judge was  entitled
    to give weight to Dr George's report and having done so  to  allow  the
    appeal.

Error of law

 8. The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  are  almost  exclusively
    concerned with the issue of internal relocation. There is  no  specific
    challenge to  the  Judge's  credibility  findings.  Under  the  heading
    'Making a material misdirection of law on  any  material  matters'  the
    Secretary of State submits that the Judge failed to consider any of the
    country guidance and Court of Appeal decisions. The  first  submission,
    paragraph 1(a) of the grounds, is

         "Its (sic) is respectfully submitted that the Immigration Judge has
         materially erred in law by failing to consider any of  the  country
         guidance and Court of Appeal decisions relevant to this case. It is
         respectfully submitted that no reference is  made  to  any  country
         guidance cases in the determination and  as  such  the  Immigration
         Judge has materially erred in law as a result"

    These submissions are manifestly incorrect. There is no requirement  to
    quote or refer to country guidance cases or Court of  Appeal  decisions
    in a determination. For there to be a material error of law in  failing
    to consider country guidance or Court of Appeal decisions both the fact
    and the effect of such failure must be  identified.  These  submissions
    fail in both respects.

 9. In seeking to identify the nature and effect of what is said  to  be  a
    failure to follow such authorities the grounds go on  (paragraph  1(b))
    to identify a failure to take  into  account  HM  and  others  (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG in finding that the Applicant  will  be  at  risk  as  a
    result of  his  father's  role  in  the  Ba'ath  party  some  23  years
    previously on relocation to the KRG. This ground identifies, correctly,
    that HM and others holds that family members of former  Ba'athists  are
    not at risk in Iraq per se.

10. However the finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  that  the
    Applicant was at general risk or risk  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
    Iraq because of his family's association with the Ba'ath party. It  was
    that the Applicant was at specific risk in the KRG of targeted violence
    because of the senior position that his father held in the Ba'ath party
    in Erbil and that as a result he cannot safely relocate to the KRG (see
    paragraph 40 of the determination). In making this  finding  the  Judge
    took into account not only the role played by  the  Applicant's  father
    and  that  it  was  reasonably  likely  that  the  Applicant  would  be
    identified as his son but also the current climate  in  the  KRG  based
    upon the security situation at the time of his decision. Paragraph 339O
    of HC395 provides

         The Secretary of State will not make:

         a grant of asylum if in part of the country of origin a person
         would not have a well founded fear of being persecuted, and the
         person can reasonably be expected to stay in that part of the
         country;

         ... the Secretary of State, when making his decision on whether to
         grant asylum or humanitarian protection, will have regard to the
         general circumstances prevailing in that part of the country and to
         the personal circumstances of the person.

    In his determination the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found,  and  the
    factual basis of his finding in this respect is  not  challenged,  that
    the Applicant was at risk of persecution on a return to his  home  area
    of Baghdad. It is, to say the least, implicit in the  reasoned  finding
    of the First-tier Tribunal that  the  Applicant  cannot  reasonably  be
    expected to relocate to the KRG and indeed  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect him to do so given the finding that  he  cannot  safely
    relocate there. There is no error of law in failing to refer to HM  and
    others given that HM and others is authority for the fact that there is
    no a risk per se to individuals caused by family connections  with  the
    Ba'ath party whereas the clear finding in this case is that there is  a
    specific risk to the Applicant and it is that specific risk that  makes
    it unreasonable or unduly harsh for him to be expected to relocate.

11. The submissions in paragraph 1(c) of the grounds  are  essentially  the
    same as those in paragraph 1(b) and do not identify an error of law for
    the same reasons.

12. Paragraph 1(d) of the grounds submits that the Judge erred  by  failing
    to take into account the principles outlined in  ZQ  (serving  soldier)
    Iraq CG [2009] UKAIT 00048 when considering the Applicant's role  as  a
    policeman and the protection afforded to him under the Convention.  The
    grounds do not expand upon this assertion other than to submit that  it
    was a material error of law for the Judge to find  that  the  Applicant
    would be at risk from terrorist groups as a result of his duties  as  a
    policeman. In fact, and  as  the  rule  24  response  points  out,  the
    principles outlined in ZQ (serving soldier) Iraq CG as the  case  title
    suggests relate to serving soldiers and not policeman. Paragraph  2  of
    ZQ makes this clear.

         For the most  part  our  focus  is  on  persons  who  are  ordinary
         soldiers, i.e. members of their country's armed forces  and  we  do
         not as  such  address  the  sometimes  more  complex  situation  of
         irregular fighters. Nor do we seek to deal  with  persons  who  are
         members of the police or intelligence services except to the extent
         that IHL would treat them as forming  part  of  a  country's  armed
         forces.

13. The grounds go on to say that the Judge attached undue  weight  to  the
    expert's report whilst ignoring the findings of the Tribunal.  In  fact
    the findings of the Tribunal referred to, being ZQ  were  not  for  the
    reasons given above relevant and the grounds do not seek to explain why
    the weight given to the expert report of Dr George could  otherwise  be
    described as 'undue'. Indeed Dr George is an expert well known to  this
    Tribunal whose qualifications and experience carry great weight. Indeed
    Dr George gave evidence to this Tribunal in HM and others. Dr  George's
    report (pages  6-55  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal) is meticulously sourced. It includes reference to the upsurge
    in violence between 2013  and  2014  and  considers  the  risk  to  the
    Applicant based on the  facts  put  forward  by  him  and  accepted  as
    credible by the First-tier Tribunal. Dr George analyses  the  situation
    and concludes that in his 'very firm opinion' the Applicant would  have
    an insufficiency of protection in Baghdad, central and  southern  Iraq.
    So far as internal relocation is  concerned  Dr  George  expresses  the
    clear view that  entry  to  the  KRG  and  the  granting  of  permanent
    residence in that region are uncertain. Further Dr George  opines  that
    KRG society and suspicion of strangers is such that family and personal
    background are quickly exposed. There is in my judgement no  basis  for
    the assertion that too much weight was given to Dr George's report.

14. The second ground of appeal asserts a failure to give  any  reasons  or
    any adequate reasons for findings on material matters.  This  assertion
    again refers  to  internal  flight  and  quotes  paragraph  40  of  the
    determination. The submission is that the Judge failed to give adequate
    reasons as to how the Applicant would be identified as a family  member
    of his father or why if he was so identified  this  would  prevent  him
    entering the KRG given the Tribunal authorities.

15. There is no material error of  law  identified  here  for  the  reasons
    already given. The Tribunal authorities cited are not relevant to  this
    Applicant's situation based upon the credibility findings. Dr  George's
    report explains how the Applicant is likely to come to  attention.  The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is clearly and adequately reasoned.



16. My conclusion from all of the above is that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains no error of law  material  to  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal. The appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is  therefore
    dismissed.

Summary

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. I dismiss the Secretary of  State's  appeal  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed:     Date: 24 March 2015

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
