
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05086/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 October 2015                   |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Simmonds, Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is an  Eritrean  national.  The  Respondent  refused  her
    application for asylum and humanitarian protection in a letter dated 11
    July 2014. The Respondent also concluded that  her  removal  would  not
    breach her right to respect for family and private life under Article 8
    of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  (ECHR)  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and outside the Rules on  the  basis  of  exceptional
    circumstances. The Respondent made a decision  the  remove  her  as  an
    illegal entrant under section 10 of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision. First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Osborne dismissed her appeal. He found that she would not be at risk of
    persecution on return to Eritrea  and  that  Article  3  would  not  be
    breached. He also considered Article 8  ECHR  and  concluded  that  her
    removal would be proportionate.

 3. The Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that  decision.
    Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler but  granted
    on renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 29  May  2015.  She  found
    that there was no merit in the argument that the Appellant would be  at
    risk on return to Eritrea but found it  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to give proper  consideration  to,  and  make  adequate
    findings on, the provisions of paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) in  the  light
    of the Appellant's history and connections to Eritrea.

The Grounds

 4. Ground 1 argues that the First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected  himself
    in law and did not properly consider the case of  MO  (Illegal  exit  -
    risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 00190.

 5. Ground 2 argues that the First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected  himself
    in law in relation to paragraph 276 ADE (1)  (vi)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. It is submitted that given the national language of  Eritrea  is
    Tigrinya, a language that the Appellant could only  speak  at  a  basic
    level and that the Appellant had not lived in Eritrea since the age  of
    five, there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    integration in Eritrea.  It  is  argued  that  having  found  that  the
    Appellant was a national of Eritrea, had not lived there since the  age
    of five, that her family  were  not  in  Eritrea  and  that  she  spoke
    Amharic, it was perverse that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  then  went
    on to conclude that the Appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi).

The Rule 24 Response

 6. The Respondent submits that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  directed
    himself appropriately and that the Appellant used to live in an area of
    Eritrea where Amharic was spoken. Further, she appeared to  be  capable
    in Arabic. In the circumstances it was open to the  Judge  to  conclude
    that she fell outside the provisions of paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi).

The Hearing

 7. Mr Simmonds accepted that permission to  appeal  was  granted  only  in
    relation to the ground that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  give
    proper consideration to paragraph 276 (1) ADE (vi). He  relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal submitted to the Upper Tribunal.  He  submitted  that
    there was no reason given in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as
    to why the Appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph  279ADE
    (1) (vi). Amharic was spoken in Eritrea  but  it  was  not  a  national
    language. The Judge made a finding of fact that  she  was  an  Eritrean
    national and no challenge had been brought against that finding. On the
    basis that it had been accepted that she had limited  understanding  of
    the languages the First-tier Tribunal either perversely found that  she
    had not met the requirements or failed to give reasons why she did  not
    meet the requirements.

 8. I asked Mr Simmonds why, in view of the fact that paragraph 276 ADE was
    not relied on in the grounds of appeal, and was neither  relied  on  in
    the skeleton argument nor in Counsel's  submission  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the First-tier Tribunal could be said to have made  an  error
    of law in failing to consider it. Mr Simmonds submitted that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had directed himself to the relevant paragraph  and
    it was "Robinson obvious" point.

 9. Mr Richards submitted that the Judge was not invited to  consider  this
    part of the Rules and it could not be a material error of  law  not  to
    deal with it. There was a reason why it was  not  raised  on  Counsel's
    skeleton argument, namely the absurdity of the argument.  Her  argument
    was that she was Eritrean and lots of people spoke Amharic in Eritrean.
    To then say that she could not go back there because she spoke  Amharic
    was a ridiculous argument. She spoke Arabic. Had the Judge been invited
    to deal with 267ADE he would have given it short shrift and his failure
    to deal with it could not be a material error of law.

10. I reserved my decision. The parties agreed that if I found an error  of
    law I should re-make the decision on the evidence before me.

Discussion and Findings

11. Permission to appeal was granted on limited grounds only. It  is  clear
    from grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  Appellant
    did not rely on Article 8 ECHR.  The  Appellant's  counsel  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not argue that Article 8  was  engaged  in  his
    skeleton argument and it is clear from  a  perusal  of  the  record  of
    proceedings that he made no arguments either in relation  to  paragraph
    276 ADE or Article 8 in submissions.

12. In Sakar v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 195 Moore-Bick, LJ  at  paragraph  [13]
    held that where no evidence or argument was placed  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in support  of  an  Article  8  claim  the  tribunal  was
    entitled to treat it as having been abandoned. In that case, Article  8
    had been raised as a ground of appeal, whereas, in this  case,  on  the
    evidence before me it was not. Arguably, therefore First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Osborne was under no duty to deal with Article 8.

13. In GS (India) and Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40  Laws  LJ  held,  in
    relation to an appeal from the Upper Tribunal, at paragraph [89]

   "Generally, the UT will not make an error of law by failing to  consider
         a point never put to it.  That is not, however, an  absolute  rule.
         Sometimes new issues are (in the lamentable patois  of  the  cases)
         "Robinson obvious".  The reference is to Robinson  v  Secretary  of
         State [1998] QB 929, in which it was held at paragraph 39 that  the
         appellate authorities

             "are not required to engage in a search for new points. If
             there is readily discernible an obvious point of Convention
             law which favours the applicant although he has not taken it,
             then the special adjudicator should apply it in his favour,
             but he should feel under no obligation to prolong the hearing
             by asking the parties for submissions on points which they
             have not taken but which could be properly categorised as
             merely 'arguable' as opposed to 'obvious'... When we refer to
             an obvious point we mean a point which has a strong prospect
             of success if it is argued. Nothing less will do."

    The Robinson hurdle is a high one: see my observations in R (Khatoon) v
    ECO Islamabad & Anor [2014] EWCA Civ 1327 at paragraph 21."

14. As stated, no point in relation to  paragraph  276  ADE  (1)  (vi)  was
    argued before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is clear that the burden  of
    proof is on the Appellant and she was required to demonstrate, in order
    to meet the  requirements  of  the  Rule,  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to her integration to Eritrea. It  is  argued  on
    her behalf that the fact that she could only speak Tigrinya to a  basic
    level would be a very significant obstacle to her integration. However,
    her case was that she spoke Amharic  which  is  one  of  the  languages
    spoken Eritrea. I do not consider therefore that this  is  a  "Robinson
    obvious" point.  I also do not consider that the fact that she had  not
    lived in Eritrea since the age of 5  years  and  had  no  family  there
    involves an obvious point of Convention law. These points were arguable
    rather than obvious. In any event, despite the fact that Article 8  was
    neither raised as a ground of appeal nor argued, the  Judge  considered
    it and gave a fully reasoned  decision  finding  that  the  Appellant's
    removal was proportionate.  He noted that the Appellant had  only  been
    in the UK since May 2014 which was less than a year before the  hearing
    and that she and her child were healthy. The Appellant has  not  sought
    to impugn the Article 8 assessment outside the Rules. I find  no  error
    of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of  law.  I  do  not  set  aside  the
    decision and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
