
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05542/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd November  2015                |On 9th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     R S
                          (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 3rd December  1981  and
    he appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated  13th
    March 2015 to remove him from the UK as an illegal entrant following  a
    refusal to grant him asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  protection
    under the European Convention.

 2. The appellant was said to be a Tamil and a national of Sri  Lanka.   He
    claimed that he was trained by the LTTE in 2003 and  recruited  to  the
    intelligence service but this was rejected by the  respondent.  He  was
    supposed to spy on ministers after he moved to Colombo.  The  appellant
    claimed one of his sisters was a combatant in the LTTE.  The  appellant
    came to the UK in September 2009 on a student visa and  his  leave  was
    extended.  He returned for a wedding on 28th March 2012 and  claims  he
    was abducted and interrogated by the CID (government services).  He was
    released following a payment of a bribe and returned to the UK  on  his
    own passport as his student visa was still valid.  His father and  wife
    were subsequently detained on 4th July 2012  but  then  released.   The
    appellant feared the Sri Lankan authorities on his return.

 3. The appellant's case was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ghani.
    At that appeal oral evidence was given by the appellant's sister and  a
    witness statement was submitted  by  the  appellant's  brother.   Judge
    Ghani dismissed the appeal on  22nd  July  2015  on  all  grounds.   An
    application for permission to appeal was made and granted by Designated
    Judge Macdonald.

 4. It was asserted in the application for permission to  appeal  that  the
    judge made no findings on  the  appellant's  express  evidence  on  the
    appellant's arrest and detention on 6th April 2012, did not give proper
    reasons for rejecting the sister's evidence of not  leaving  Sri  Lanka
    with her brother, made no findings on the evidence of  the  appellant's
    family (father and  wife)  being  arrested,  failed  to  give  reasoned
    findings as to the appellant's activities with the  LTTE  and  did  not
    make  reasoned  findings  on  the  appellant's  medical  evidence.   In
    addition the judge's finding that the appellant's release on payment of
    a bribe was indicative of a lack of interest was flawed  as  not  being
    consistent with GJ and others, (paragraph 276).  In addition the  judge
    failed to consider the appellant's brother's and the sister's evidence.

 5. At the hearing before me Ms Anzani relied on the  written  reasons  for
    refusal.  She emphasised that the claimed sister's involvement with the
    LTTE had not been assessed and there were no clear findings as  to  the
    appellant's arrest.  There were 3  witnesses  who  had  given  evidence
    (either by statement or orally) as to the  involvement  of  the  sister
    with the LTTE and this had not been addressed by the  judge.  This  was
    material as to the  interest  of  the  government  authorities  in  the
    appellant.  There was no clear finding on the appellant's  own  arrest.
    In addition the appellant had relied on out of date  country  guidance.
    GJ made clear that the payment of a bribe for release was not  inimical
    to further interest and did  not  undermine  the  significance  of  the
    charge.

 6. Ms Sreeraman submitted that the judge had found that there was no prior
    interest in the family of the appellant.  The judge had dealt with  the
    evidence of the sister and it could be concluded from  the  finding  in
    paragraph 21 that her evidence was not accepted.  Mr Sreeraman accepted
    that the findings on the evidence had not been  set  out  clearly.  The
    judge set out the inconsistencies in the evidence and noted that  there
    was no medical evidence to support his claim that he  had  been  beaten
    and injured in detention. That he had used out of date country guidance
    was not a material error.  A holistic approach had been  taken  to  the
    evidence.

 7. The key issue in this is the  assessment  of  the  appellant's  overall
    credibility and the  risk  to  him  on  his  return  particularly  with
    reference to his claimed detention.  To that end the judge rejects  the
    sister's evidence at paragraph 21 in relation to the return to  the  UK
    but  does  not  clearly  address  her  evidence  in  relation  to   the
    appellant's arrest [25]. Nor  does  the  judge  address  the  brother's
    witness statement in that regard.   The  judge  additionally  makes  no
    clear finding as to whether  the  appellant  was  indeed  detained  and
    interrogated even if she  rejects  the  evidence  that  he  was  beaten
    because there was no medical evidence to support that contention.  Even
    if there was no  prior  interest  in  him  prior  to  his  event,  this
    occurrence needs to be clearly determined on all the evidence.

 8. Nor does the judge make any findings in relation to the claimed  arrest
    of the family which was another matter in issue  and  relevant  to  the
    assessment of risk on return.

 9. GJ (Sri Lanka) [2013] UKUT 00319 replaced all previous country guidance
    but the judge applied country guidance which was out of date (PT  (Risk
    - Bribery - Release) Sri Lanka  CG  [2002]  UKIAT  03444).   The  judge
    stated at [23] and [26] that the fact he was released on payment  of  a
    bribe indicated that he was of no interest but this is  not  consistent
    with evidence accepted in GJ (paragraphs 146 and 275).

10. I find an error  of  law  for  inadequate  findings  and  reasoning  in
    relation to whether the appellant is at risk on return.  As  stated  in
    MP (Sri Lanka) [2011] EWCA Civ 362 there must be an assessment based on
    the material risk factors and I am not persuaded that here  there  were
    clear findings as to what factors were accepted or rejected.  MK  (duty
    to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC) confirms  that  if  a
    tribunal finds  oral  evidence  or  a  document  to  be  incredible  or
    unreliable a bare statement as such is not sufficient  to  satisfy  the
    requirement to give reasons.

11. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date 3rd November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
