
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05191/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 27 November 2014                        |On 12 December 2014            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

               THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ELISABETH LAING DBE
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MRS D BIRRELL


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MR D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mason, Counsel instructed by Appleby Shaw
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State  from  a  determination
    promulgated on 23 September 2014. That determination was  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal on Mr  D's  appeal  from  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal of his asylum claim. Mr D is  the  respondent  to  this
    appeal, but we will refer  to  him  throughout  as  the  appellant  for
    convenience. The Secretary of State refused the appellant's asylum on 9
    July 2014. The main basis on which the asylum  claim  was  refused  was
    that the Secretary of State had not accepted that he was a gay man.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Judge  Shimmin  on  22
    October 2014. He noted that the grounds of appeal were that  the  judge
    had erred in two respects: firstly in seeking to reverse the burden  of
    proof from the appellant to the respondent and, secondly, in failing to
    apply the findings of the country  guidance  cases.   First-tier  Judge
    Shimmin expressed the view that it was arguable that in paragraph 73 of
    the determination the judge had imposed the  burden  of  proof  on  the
    Secretary of State and First-tier Judge Shimmin also  referred  to  the
    country  guidance  cases  which  he  said  indicated   that   generally
    homosexuals  were  not  at  risk  in  Albania  of  anything  more  than
    discrimination or harassment and for that reason it was  arguable  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in finding that the  appellant  would
    be persecuted on grounds of his sexuality.

 3. We turn to the determination.  The structure of the determination is as
    follows:

       . In paragraphs 3 to 7 the First-tier  Tribunal  set  out  the  legal
         framework for its consideration of the appeal and  in  paragraph  6
         clearly stated that the burden of proof was on the appellant;

       . In paragraphs 8 to 14 of the determination the Tribunal set out the
         nature of the appellant's claim and it was as follows:

          i) he claimed to be an Albanian national from Tirana;

         ii) he first realised he was gay when he was 18;

        iii)  in  2011  he  met  a  man  called  Enhxi  and  they  began  a
             relationship together;

         iv) in October 2011 he decided to move in with  Enhxi  whose  home
             was twenty to thirty minutes away from his  family  home.   He
             told his family he was moving for work.  When  he  arrived  he
             was greeted by Enhxi and they embraced and kissed.   This  was
             witnessed by the appellant's uncle who hit him and caused  him
             to lose consciousness.  When he woke  up  he  discovered  that
             Enhxi was in hospital.  The appellant had suffered  a  cut  to
             the back of his head requiring stitches and Enhxi had suffered
             injuries and was in hospital for two weeks.  The appellant did
             not report  the  incident  to  the  police  for  fear  of  the
             consequences.  After Enhxi was  released  from  hospital  they
             lived together at his address until December 2011 and  had  no
             problems during that period but  on  Christmas  day  2011  the
             appellant tried to  contact  Enhxi  but  his  calls  were  not
             returned.  He believed his uncle had threatened Enhxi  and  he
             went back to the apartment in 2012 but could find no trace  of
             him.

          v) In November 2012 he formed a relationship  with  another  man.
             Again he was attacked, this time by four or five men who  were
             stopped by the arrival of the police.  The  appellant  made  a
             complaint to the police but later  withdrew  it  for  fear  of
             reprisals.  As a result of the second  attack  he  decided  to
             leave Albania.

         vi) He arrived, he claimed, in the United Kingdom on 5 March 2013.



        vii) He was encountered by police on 17 October 2013.

       viii) Removal directions were made for December 2013.

         ix) He claimed asylum on 1 November 2013.

          x) His screening interview took place on 8 November.

         xi) His asylum interview started on 14 November.

        xii) He was released from detention  for  what  were  described  as
             operational reasons on  15  November  and  his  interview  was
             completed on 14 February 2014.

       xiii) He had spoken to his parents before he left Albania  and  they
             had told him on the phone they wanted nothing to do with  him.
             The rest of his family felt the same way towards him.  He  had
             not been in a relationship with anyone in the United Kingdom.

        xiv) He claimed he  suffered  from  breathing  difficulties,  heart
             problems and to have a problem with his liver.

         xv) He claimed his uncle had promised that  if  he  ever  saw  him
             again he would kill him because he is gay  and  for  the  same
             reason he fears everyone in Albania.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal then set out  the  respondent's  case  and,  in
    summary, the respondent did not accept that the appellant was  gay  and
    the respondent did not accept that the appellant had been  attacked  in
    Albania because he was a gay man.

 5. The respondent also relied on Section 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 and the First-tier Tribunal set
    out in paragraph 18 of the determination in some detail the  nature  of
    the respondent's reliance on Section 8.

 6. So far as the structure of the determination is  concerned  the  First-
    tier Tribunal then dealt with  the  Home  Office's  case  on  "risk  on
    return" in paragraphs 19 to 22 with "humanitarian  protection"  at  23.
    It considered the Home Office's case on  "medical  considerations"  and
    "private and family life" at paragraphs 24 to 27.

 7. The Tribunal then described the evidence that had  been  given  at  the
    hearing in paragraphs 28 to 48 of the determination.  We do not seek to
    do more than to summarise the main points:

       . At  paragraph  8  the  structure  of  the  appellant's  family  was
         described and the  Tribunal  referred  to  the  evidence  that  the
         appellant's father's brother, his uncle, had openly expressed their
         disapproval of the appellant's lifestyle and had told him  that  he
         would pay for it with his life.

       . At paragraph 29 the Tribunal discussed the first  asylum  interview
         which the appellant had had.

       . His evidence about what had happened to Enhxi was then set  out  at
         paragraphs 31 and 32.

       . At paragraph 33 the Tribunal recorded the appellant's evidence that
         his uncle had asked a friend called Kujtim to kill  him  for  money
         but the appellant had called him to ask him why  his  family  hated
         him so much.

       . The Tribunal recorded the appellant's evidence at paragraph 37 that
         the he wanted to  be  open  about  who  he  was,  and  express  his
         sexuality, but would not be able to do so in Albania,  which  is  a
         small country. His family is very large and they would be  able  to
         find where he was.  He has brothers in the army and another brother
         has his own business and another brother is a security guard for  a
         Swiss company.

 8. The material that emerged in  cross-examination  was  set  out  by  the
    Tribunal at paragraphs 38 and following.  The Tribunal then referred to
    evidence which had been given by Ms Crystal Doka.  She is the wife of a
    cousin of his who owned the car wash at which the appellant  was  found
    by the police.  Her evidence was that the appellant's  family  had  not
    accepted that he was gay and were not willing to have him  as  part  of
    their family.  She had become very close to him, more so since  he  had
    come to the United Kingdom.  She gave evidence that she was scared  for
    him in Albania.  Tom had not been happy to discover that the  appellant
    was gay but had come round and learnt to accept him for what he was.

 9. She went on to say that she had seen the appellant being abused by  his
    family. He had been smacked on the head by his brothers who called  him
    rude  names  associated  with  his  sexuality.   This  had   made   her
    uncomfortable and she had seen it get worse over the years.   She  said
    that she had seen him with his uncle twice and had heard him  tell  the
    appellant that if he is gay he will kill  him.   The  appellant  looked
    terrified, according to her evidence, and she left the house  with  Tom
    and her daughter.

10. In cross-examination she accepted that her Albanian was not fluent  but
    she said that she could converse well and  she  had  not  misunderstood
    what the uncle had said.

11.  At  paragraphs  49  to  50  the  Tribunal  set  out  the  respondent's
    submissions.  There is again reference to the fact that the  submission
    that the appellant's credibility had been damaged by his delayed claim,
    his illegal working and  his  failure  to  claim  asylum  in  Italy  or
    Holland.

12. The Tribunal  then  set  out  the  appellant's  submissions  and  other
    evidence which they had heard and in particular, at paragraph  59,  the
    Tribunal referred to extracts from the Home Office's Country of  Origin
    Information Report which were in the appellant's bundle. It  summarised
    that evidence as follows:

       . There is an anti-discrimination law in Albania. Its  implementation
         is however uncertain;

       . there are several reports of incidents of persecution and  evidence
         of reluctance to report incidents to the police who  are  perceived
         as a source of harassment rather than protection;

       . an article  on  the  website  "Balkan  Insight"  dated  March  2013
         reported a European social survey which described  Albania  as  the
         most homophobic society of the 30 which had been surveyed.

13. At paragraph 61 and following the Tribunal set out its findings.

14. At paragraph 62 the Tribunal said that the issue of  the  core  of  the
    appeal was whether  or  not  the  appellant  was  homosexual.   It  was
    suggested by Mr Tufan for the Home Office that this was a misdirection.
     We reject that submission.  It is clear because the Secretary of State
    had rejected the appellant's claim to be gay that this was  indeed  the
    core issue of the appeal.

15. The Tribunal then dealt with the evaluation of credibility of  evidence
    provided by the appellant in his asylum interviews.  We do not need  to
    deal with that in any detail.

16. It then referred at paragraph 64 to the respondent's guidance  entitled
    "Sexual Orientation Issues in the Asylum Claim" dated June 2011 and the
    Tribunal went on to say "background evidence about Albania satisfies me
    that it is a country where  open  homosexual  orientation  is  at  best
    discouraged and at worst punished".

17. The Tribunal then referred to the UNHCR guidelines on  gender  identity
    and at paragraph 66 the Tribunal found that the appellant's account had
    been consistent throughout his claim. The evidence of Crystal Doka  who
    had actually witnessed mistreatment which he received from his  family,
    based on a mere suspicion about his sexuality, was compelling, and  not
    effectively  challenged  by  cross-examination.   It  was  clear,   the
    Tribunal went on, that the appellant's family do  not  approve  of  his
    lifestyle, and it is  therefore  credible  that  his  cousin  would  be
    reluctant  (that  is,  his  cousin  Tom)  to  challenge  that  attitude
    publicly.

18.  At  paragraph  67  the  Tribunal  expressly  considered  the   adverse
    credibility issues which the respondent claimed had arisen by virtue of
    Section 8 of the 2004 Act.

19. At paragraph 68 the Tribunal made this finding: "I  am  satisfied  that
    the appellant has given a credible account of  his  lifestyle  and  his
    experiences in Albania and accordingly I find that I am satisfied  that
    he is a gay man".

20. The Tribunal went on to say "The background evidence satisfies me  that
    if he returns to Albania he will be at risk from members of his family,
    his uncle has stated that he will kill him for bringing  shame  on  his
    family and I find this a credible threat, based upon  evidence  in  the
    respondent's Country of Origin Information Report".

21. The Tribunal then considered, at paragraphs 70 to 72 the impact on  its
    assessment of the decision of the Supreme Court in  HJ  (Iran)  and  HT
    (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department.   We  consider
    that the Tribunal's self-direction in accordance  with  that  authority
    was perfectly correct and that section of  the  determination  finishes
    with the Tribunal saying this:

         "I am satisfied that the appellant  would  be  treated  as  gay  by
         potential persecutors in Albania because, as  is  accepted  by  the
         respondent, he has already been treated as such  in  that  country.
         Past persecution is  strong  evidence  of  future  risk  and  I  am
         therefore satisfied that if  he  returns  to  Albania  he  will  be
         treated as gay by potential persecutors there."

22. The Tribunal then referred to the country guidance decision IM (risk  -
    objective evidence - homosexuals) Albania CG [2003]  UKIAT  00067.   It
    summarised the effect of that country guidance case and  then said:

         "This guidance was issued 11 years ago and needs to  be  considered
         against the background of more recent evidence  summarised  in  the
         respondent's Country of Origin Information Report.   That  evidence
         shows  that  although  anti-discrimination  legislation  has   been
         introduced  enforcement  is  still  questionable.   The  respondent
         accepts, at paragraph 71 of  the  refusal  letter,  that  there  is
         clearly some societal discrimination against gay people in Albania.
          Significantly, although there is evidence that LGBT  organisations
         have been established in Albania, the most that  can  be  said  for
         them is that they are able to  operate  without  interference  from
         police or other state actors.  There is no evidence  to  show  that
         they have made any impact on the willingness of the authorities  to
         act positively to  protect  homosexuals.   The  suggestion  by  the
         respondent that it is possible for a person to live an  openly  gay
         lifestyle without being exposed to persecution in Albania is simply
         not supported by any evidence.  It is not generally appropriate  to
         deviate from country guidance, but I am  satisfied  that,  in  this
         case, it is appropriate to do so, and to find that  this  appellant
         faces a real risk of persecution based on his homosexuality because
         of the credibility of his evidence of past  persecution,  supported
         by his witness, and the background evidence on Albania covering the
         11 years since the country guidance was issued."

23. The Tribunal went on to find that:

         "It was satisfied on  the  evidence  that  if  the  appellant  were
         returned to Albania he would be forced to conceal his sexuality  in
         order to avoid persecution.  This is because when he last lived  in
         Albania his sexual orientation became public  despite  attempts  to
         conceal it.  He therefore knows that if he is again  identified  or
         suspected of being homosexual he will be exposed to risk  of  death
         or serious injury.  That being the case, I  am  satisfied  that  he
         will not attempt to live an openly gay lifestyle in Albania."

24. The Tribunal went on to find that it was  therefore  satisfied  by  the
    evidence that if he did return to Albania  he  would  attempt  to  live
    discreetly and thereby suppress or conceal his sexual  orientation  and
    that his reason for doing this would not be his own  choice  or  social
    pressures from family and friends but because he knew that he would  be
    exposed to the risk of being killed, this knowledge being based on  his
    previous experience shortly before he left the country.  He should have
    the right to live openly and freely  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
    persecution.  That right does not exist in Albania.

25. The Tribunal then went on to consider internal relocation and expressed
    its view that it was satisfied that that was not  an  effective  option
    for the appellant.

26. Turning to the two criticisms that are made of the determination in the
    grounds of appeal, both of which hinge on the approach of the  Tribunal
    in paragraph 73 of the determination, we consider that the Tribunal did
    not misdirect itself in that paragraph.  The first suggestion which  is
    that the Tribunal reversed the burden of proof in paragraph 71  has  to
    be read in the context of a determination  as  a  whole,  in  which  it
    directed itself correctly, at paragraph 6, about the burden  of  proof,
    and in which the passages to which we have referred show clearly  that,
    at various stages, the Tribunal appreciated that it had to be satisfied
    of various aspects of the appellant's case.  The passage  on  which  Mr
    Tufan relies as showing, as he suggests, a reversal of  the  burden  of
    proof is the sentence that we have already  read,  which  the  Tribunal
    said that there is no evidence to show that they have made, that is the
    LGBT organisations, any impact on the willingness of the authorities to
    act positively to protect homosexuals.

27. We reject the argument that this  shows  that  the  Tribunal  erred  by
    reversing the burden of proof.  The sentence has to be read in context.
    It  simply  reflects  the  Tribunal's  assessment  of  the   up-to-date
    evidence.

28. The second submission, that the Tribunal erred  in  not  following  the
    country guidance case, we also reject.  It seems to us  from  paragraph
    73 which we have already read  that  it  is  clear  that  the  Tribunal
    appreciated the importance of following the country guidance case.  The
    Tribunal said that generally it is  not  appropriate  to  deviate  from
    country guidance, but in our  judgment  gave  cogent  and  satisfactory
    reasons for departing from it on the  facts  of  the  particular  case.
    Those reasons were set out in paragraph 73 of the determination.

29. For those reasons we reject the submission that the Tribunal  erred  in
    the way that it dealt with this claim and it follows  that  the  appeal
    must be dismissed.



Signed   Date 12/12/14

Mrs Justice Elisabeth Laing DBE

