
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05622/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2016                            |On 9 March 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                           shahin darvishnarenjbon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Pickering, instructed by Bankfield Heath
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Shahin Darvishnarenjbon, was born on 12 August 1988  and
    is a male citizen of Iran.  The appellant  first  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor and subsequently returned as  a  student  claiming
    asylum shortly before his post-study visa expired in December 2013.  On
    17 March 2015, a decision was made to refuse  to  grant  the  appellant
    asylum and to remove him from the United Kingdom by way  of  directions
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.
    He appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Aspden)  which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 2 September 2015  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of appeal.  First, the appellant  submits  that
    the judge failed properly to apply the law.  The appellant  claimed  to
    have been "caught up in political demonstrations" in Iran and  gave  an
    account which the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not believe.  At  [37],
    the judge wrote: "Whilst it is perfectly possible that  each  of  these
    events did  occur,  the  chances  of  all  these  events  happening  in
    combination are very low."

 3. The judge went on to observe that the appellant had, in relation to the
    same account of past events, given inconsistent evidence regarding  his
    knowledge of the procedures adopted by lawyers in  Iran.   The  events,
    the combination of which the judge found to be unlikely, concerned  his
    family changing addresses so that  documents  concerning  his  criminal
    conviction would not be served on his  family  whilst  the  appellant's
    brother happened to visit heir former property  and  learnt  about  the
    criminal proceedings and was able to tell the  appellant  very  shortly
    before his United Kingdom visa  was  due  to  expire.   Thereafter,  "a
    family friend happened to be travelling to the UK a few days later  and
    was able to deliver the original  documents  to  the  appellant."   The
    judge also noted that  criminal  proceedings  which  had  been  pursued
    against the appellant in around  2011  appears  to  have  been  dropped
    whilst a solicitor in Iran who claimed to have acted for the  appellant
    had done so without his knowledge.   The  judge  also  noted  that  the
    Iranian authorities had not tried or been able to locate the  appellant
    with a view to taking him into custody to serve  the  sentence  he  was
    given following this conviction even though his family were living only
    seven miles away from their previous address.

 4. The grounds of appeal submit that  the  judge  has  applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof by her use of the words "very low" in describing  the
    likelihood of the events described above occurring in  sequence.   This
    ground of appeal has no merit.  The judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to
    express her scepticism regarding the appellant's account of the  events
    in Iran.  It was perfectly obvious that the use of the words "very low"
    did not indicate the adoption of an inappropriate standard of proof,  a
    standard which the judge had succinctly  and  accurately  described  at
    [12].  It was correct for the judge to consider the appellant's  entire
    narrative, including the likelihood of events happening in  combination
    or sequence, rather than merely assessing the likelihood of each  event
    occurring in isolation.  It was plainly open to the judge to find  that
    the likelihood of the events described by the  appellant  happening  in
    combination is very low and  that  his  account  cast  doubt  upon  his
    credibility as a witness.

 5. The second ground of appeal states that the judge has given  inadequate
    reasons for preferring the evidence in the COIS Report (September 2013)
    to the  evidence  where  Mr  Rashti  expressed  the  opinion  that  the
    documents adduced by the appellant were likely to be genuine.  The COIS
    Report stated that it was easy to obtain fraudulent documents in  Iran.
    The judge concluded from that evidence [42] that she should review  the
    documents "with some suspicion".  I cannot see anything wrong  in  that
    finding.  The judge was not rejecting Mr Rashti's evidence out of hand;
    she was simply recording her legitimate view that the  evidence  should
    be viewed in  the  context  of  other  evidence  which  indicates  that
    fraudulent documents circulated freely within Iran.

 6. Miss Pickering, who appeared for the  Appellant,  concentrated  in  her
    oral submissions upon the third ground of appeal.  She  submitted  that
    the Tribunal had perpetrated a procedural  unfairness.   The  appellant
    had  been  unrepresented  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   The
    appellant had discussed with the judge whether he wished  to  call  his
    mother to give evidence.  In this context, I note that his  mother  had
    signed a written statement which is dated 13 August 2015 and  that  the
    appellant's First-tier Tribunal bundle had been submitted on 11  August
    2015.  It appears that the appellant was  aware  that  his  mother  had
    provided a witness statement but he did not seek to bring  that  before
    the attention of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  nor  did  he  call  his
    mother to give evidence.  The judge discusses the  appellant's  conduct
    at [43].  The judge found that the appellant was aware  that  witnesses
    could give evidence on his behalf including his mother and also  a  Mrs
    Miri.  Indeed, an interpreter had been provided at the hearing so  that
    the mother could give evidence.  The judge went on to observe  that  it
    was for the appellant to prove his case and found that,  "it  was  easy
    for the appellant to obtain evidence  from  either  or  both  of  these
    witnesses and the lack of such evidence affects the assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility."   Miss  Pickering  submitted  that,  had  the
    appellant, who did not have the assistance  of  professional  advisers,
    known that not calling his mother or Mrs Miri to give evidence would be
    detrimental and damaging to his case he would have called the witnesses
    to give evidence.

 7. I examined the judge's Record of Proceedings and read out  extracts  to
    the representatives.  The judge had recorded her  own  statement  that,
    "your mother is central to your case" but also  the  appellant's  reply
    ("My statement is sufficient".)  It is unclear why the mother's written
    statement was not put before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  was
    clearly not the fault of the judge.  I am satisfied that the judge made
    it clear to the appellant that it was important for him  to  prove  his
    case to the necessary standard and that his mother  was  a  potentially
    important  witness.   The  appellant  himself  is  an  intelligent  and
    educated individual and I am satisfied that he understood  the  judge's
    comments regarding the importance of discharging the burden of  proving
    his case that he freely chose not  to  call  his  mother  or  Mrs  Miri
    because he genuinely believed that his own evidence  was  "sufficient".
    I find that it is simply not the case, as  the  appellant  now  claims,
    that he only realised the importance of the witnesses' evidence when he
    read the judge's decision.  It is true that the judge  found  that  the
    failure of the  mother  to  give  evidence  "affected  the  appellant's
    credibility" but, read in the context of her  other  comments,  I  find
    that this indicated little more than that the weight attaching  to  all
    the appellant's evidence was less than might have been the case had the
    witnesses testified before the Tribunal.  In this particular context, I
    do not find that the judge believed that the appellant was dishonest or
    lying  because  he  chose  not  to  call  his  mother.   In   all   the
    circumstances, I find that the judge has  not  erred  in  law  for  the
    reasons asserted in the grounds of appeal or at all.   The  appellant's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 1 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 1 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

