
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05313/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1 March 2016                           |On 14 March 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     VB
                          (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Lane, Counsel instructed by Genesis Law
Associates Ltd.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal, promulgated on 6 July  2015,  in
    which she allowed VB's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision
    to refuse to grant asylum.


 2. For the purposes of this appeal, I refer to the Secretary of  State  as
    the Respondent, and to VB as the Appellant, reflecting their  positions
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. I have made an anonymity direction, following that made in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


 4. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It is arguable that the judge has  not  sufficiently  addressed  those
    "credibility points not related to documentation"  in  the  process  of
    deciding that the appellant's core asylum account fell to be accepted."


 5. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard oral submissions from both
    representatives following which I  announced  that  I  found  that  the
    decision did not involve the making of a material  error  of  law,  and
    that my full reasons would follow.


Submissions


 6. Mr. Harrison relied on the grounds of appeal.


 7. Mr. Lane relied on  his  skeleton  argument.   He  submitted  that  the
    grounds  of  appeal  were  very  basic,  and  related  only  to   "non-
    documentation" issues.   He  submitted  that  these  consisted  of  the
    mayoral race, the Appellant's family going to Turkey,  and  whether  or
    not the Appellant had  gone  to  hospital  after  being  tortured.   He
    submitted that these were minor points.  The decision was detailed  and
    well thought through.  The documents were the crux of  the  Appellant's
    case.  A large amount of the decision was concerned with  consideration
    of the documentary evidence, as the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  had
    been.


 8. The judge had pointed to mistakes in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    relating to the documents.  She had considered the documents in  detail
    and found them to be genuine, and their contents accurate.   She  found
    them to be corroborative of the Appellant's account.  I was referred to
    paragraph [40].  Having found that  the  documents  were  genuine,  the
    judge found that the Appellant had reached the lower standard of  proof
    required.


 9. I was referred to paragraphs [3], [20] and [21] of the  decision  which
    showed that the judge was aware of the reasons that the Respondent  had
    refused the Appellant's claim, including the "non-documentary" reasons.
     The non-documentary credibility  issues  were  referred  to  again  in
    paragraph [38].  At three points in the decision the judge had set  out
    the  Respondent's  assertions  in  detail.   She  had  weighed  up  the
    documentary evidence  with  the  few  minor  credibility  concerns  and
    concluded that the documents corroborated the Appellant's  claim.   The
    minor  non-documentary  credibility  concerns  did  not  outweigh   the
    documentary evidence.


10. The judge had dealt with the issues in full and, even if she  had  not,
    given her findings as to the documentary  evidence,  it  could  not  be
    material.  There was nothing to show that the decision was  irrational.
    I was referred to the case of Nixon  (permission  to  appeal;  grounds)
    [2014] UKUT 00368 (IAC).


11. In response Mr. Harrison referred to the way in  which  the  judge  had
    dealt with the documentation at paragraph [32].  He submitted that  the
    judge had given her own evidence regarding the documents  at  paragraph
    [34].  The judge's finding that the documents were genuine was made  on
    rather inadequate grounds.  There were no findings in paragraph [38] in
    relation to the non-documentary issues.  If I were  to  find  that  the
    judge had done sufficient in relation to the documentary  evidence,  he
    accepted that his point relating to the inadequacies in paragraph  [38]
    would carry no weight.  He accepted that the grounds were brief and did
    not challenge the approach to the documentary evidence.  The judge  had
    attached weight to the documentary evidence, not to the concerns of the
    Respondent as set out in the reasons for refusal letter.


12. Mr. Lane submitted that  the  grounds  of  appeal  were  limited  to  a
    challenge to the non-documentary issues.  The grant of  permission  was
    limited to non-documentary issues.  In any event, the  judge  had  made
    clear and detailed findings in relation to the documents.  The  grounds
    amounted to no more than a disagreement.

Error of law


13. While the grounds of appeal are not very clear, as  recognised  by  the
    grant of permission, what is apparent is that there is no challenge  in
    the grounds of appeal to  the  judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the
    documentary evidence.  Permission to appeal was granted in relation  to
    the non-documentary issues.  I find that there is no challenge  to  the
    judge's approach to the documentary evidence, or  to  her  findings  in
    respect of the documentary evidence.


14. The judge dealt fully with the documents submitted  by  the  Appellant,
    and made clear and detailed findings.  As submitted by  Mr.  Lane,  the
    documents were the crux of the Appellant's claim.  I find that,  having
    found that the documents provided  were  genuine,  and  their  contents
    accurate, it was open to the judge to find that the Appellant had shown
    to the lower standard of proof  applicable  that  he  was  at  risk  in
    Ukraine on account of his political opinion.


15. In relation to the non-documentary aspects of the claim, the judge  set
    out  in  detail  the  reasons  why  the  Respondent  had  refused   the
    Appellant's claim in paragraph [3], which  include  these  issues.   In
    paragraphs [20] and [21] she set out the Respondent's  representative's
    submissions, including the Respondent's concerns relating to  the  non-
    documentary issues.  In paragraph [38] the judge set these  out  again.
    It is clear from the decision that she was aware of these issues.


16. However, in paragraph [30], when commencing her findings, she states:


    "The crux of the respondent's refusal is that she does not  accept  the
    documents which the appellant has submitted in  support  of  his  claim
    because the translations are not certified and some of them are clearly
    wrong in terms of  the  names  and  dates  which  have  obviously  been
    mistranslated."


17. The judge is clear  that  the  documents  lie  at  the  centre  of  the
    Appellant's claim, and  also  that  they  lay  at  the  centre  of  the
    Respondent's reasons  for  refusing  the  Appellant's  claim.   She  is
    entitled therefore to place consideration of  these  documents  at  the
    heart of her decision.  In paragraphs [39] and [40], having  considered
    the documents individually in paragraphs [30] to [37], as well  as  the
    issue of the translations, she finds that she can place reliance on the
    documents.  This leads to her finding that the Appellant is at risk  in
    paragraph [41].


18. In paragraph [40] she finds that the documents  "corroborate  what  the
    appellant has said about his experiences which to an  extent  are  also
    supported by the report from Amnesty  International  and  Human  Rights
    Watch".  She links the documents to  the  Appellant's  account  of  his
    experiences, and specifically finds that the documents corroborate  his
    account.  It is clear from this  that  she  has  the  entirety  of  the
    Appellant's account in mind.


19. Given that the crux of the Appellant's claim rests  on  the  documents,
    the findings in respect of which the Respondent has not  challenged,  I
    find that the judge was entitled to  place  less  weight  on  the  non-
    documentary aspects of the Appellant's claim, and to consider  them  to
    be  minor  concerns  of  the  Respondent  when  weighed   against   the
    documentary evidence.  I find that she was aware of these issues, as is
    clear from the fact that she has referred to them on three occasions in
    the decision, but that she placed less weight on them.  She placed more
    weight, as she was entitled to do, on the documents.  I find that there
    is no error of law in her consideration of these issues.


20. In any event, even if I were to have found that she made  an  error  of
    law by insufficiently addressing the  non-documentary  aspects  of  the
    claim, given her findings in relation to the documents, which have  not
    been challenged, such error could not be material.

Notice of Decision


21. The decision does not involve the making of a material error of law and
    I do not set it aside.


22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 4 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

