
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa051982015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th May 2016                              |On 8th June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                   A.M.O.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Alban of Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against the decision of  Judge  O'Hagan  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 30th July 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a female  Nigerian  citizen  born  in  June  1983  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor on 5th December 2012, with a
    visa valid until 21st December 2013.

 3. The Appellant overstayed and made an  asylum  claim  on  28th  February
    2014.  The claim was refused on 18th March 2015, and a decision made to
    remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.  The Appellant has twins,
    born in the United Kingdom on 12th July 2013.

 4. The appeal was heard by the FTT on 24th  June  2015  and  dismissed  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights  grounds,  and  under
    the Immigration rules.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission  to  appeal,  and  permission  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley who found it arguable that the
    FTT had erred in considering Article 8 of the 1950 European  Convention
    on Human  Rights  (the  1950  Convention).   Judge  Lindsley  found  it
    arguable that the FTT had erred in concluding that the Appellant's twin
    children are not British citizens, even though they were  born  in  the
    United Kingdom to a British  father.   Judge  Lindsley  described  this
    finding as being clearly incorrect.

Error of Law

 6. At a hearing on 3rd February 2016 I heard submissions from both parties
    regarding error of law.  It was conceded on behalf  of  the  Respondent
    that the FTT had erred in law by finding that  the  children  had  been
    born in the United Kingdom, to a British father, but had then concluded
    that the children were not British without giving any adequate  reasons
    for that finding.  Set out below are my  conclusions  and  reasons  for
    finding an error of law and setting aside the decision of  the  FTT  in
    relation to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention;

         "15. I announced at the hearing that the FTT had erred  in  law  in
             considering the Appellant's children.  The Appellant has twins
             born in the United Kingdom on 12th July 2013.  The  error  was
             in not explaining the conclusion reached by the FTT, that  the
             children are not British.

         16.  Mrs Petersen  was  correct  not  to  rely  upon  the  rule  24
             response, as it is clear that this issue was raised before the
             FTT, both in the grounds of  appeal  and  in  the  Appellant's
             evidence (paragraph 19).

         17.  The FTT found in paragraphs 39 and 40 that the  children  were
             born in the United Kingdom  to  a  British  father,  but  then
             concluded that the children are not British citizens,  without
             explaining that finding.  It would appear  that  the  children
             are British as pointed out by Judge Lindsley in paragraph 6 of
             the grant of permission.

         18.  Had this error not been made the  FTT  would  have  considered
             Appendix FM in relation to leave to remain as a parent,  in  a
             different manner, by considering the  British  citizenship  of
             the children.  The FTT would also have  considered  Article  8
             outside the Immigration rules in a different way, taking  into
             account that  the  Appellant  has  'qualifying'  children  and
             therefore section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002 needed to be considered on that basis.

         19.  I therefore set aside the decision of the FTT.  As  there  was
             no error disclosed in the findings made by the  FTT  that  the
             Appellant  was  not  entitled  to   asylum   or   humanitarian
             protection, and that her removal from this country  would  not
             breach Articles 2 or 3 of the 1950  Convention,  the  findings
             made by the FTT on those issues are preserved.   The  findings
             are summarised in paragraph 38 of the FTT  decision,  and  the
             conclusion that the Appellant  has  fabricated  her  claim  is
             preserved."

 7. The hearing was then adjourned following a request  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, that up-to-date medical evidence was required in relation to
    the  Appellant's  daughter.   Full  details  of  the  application   for
    permission to appeal, the grant of permission, and the submissions made
    by both parties are contained in my error of law  decision  promulgated
    on 18th February 2016.

Re-making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 27th May 2016

Preliminary Issues

 8. I ascertained that I had  all  documentation  upon  which  the  parties
    intended to rely, and that each party had served  the  other  with  any
    documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.

 9. I had the Respondent's bundle  that  had  been  before  the  FTT,  with
    Annexes A-C and the reasons for refusal dated 18th March 2015.  I  also
    had the Notice of Appeal, and the  Appellant's  skeleton  argument  and
    attached documents comprising 61 pages which had been submitted on  3rd
    February 2016.  Miss Alban had submitted a further bundle of  documents
    comprising 60 pages.  Inexplicably, this bundle had not  been  provided
    in advance of the hearing, but as Mr  Mills  indicated  that  the  late
    submission caused him no difficulties, the  bundle  was  admitted  into
    evidence.

10. The hearing was put back  briefly  as  Miss  Alban  had  not  seen  the
    Appellant's witness statement dated 24th June 2015.  When  the  hearing
    resumed both representatives indicated that they were ready to  proceed
    and there was no application for an adjournment.

Oral Evidence

11. The Appellant gave oral evidence in English.  There was no need for  an
    interpreter.  I have recorded all questions and answers in my Record of
    Proceedings and it is not necessary to reiterate them in full.

12. In brief summary the Appellant confirmed that her  twins  are  British.
    They now have British passports.  The twins live with the Appellant.

13. The Appellant is no longer in a relationship with  the  father  of  the
    twins, who is a British citizen.  In her witness statement  she  stated
    that the relationship ended three months after the twins were born  and
    she had had no further contact with him.

14. In her oral evidence she said that she did not know where he lived, but
    that she had some telephone contact with him.  However he  had  another
    partner and he did not play any part in the twin's upbringing.

15. The twins' father did not financially support them, he  had  only  seen
    them once in 2016, which was in February.  Prior to that the last  time
    the Appellant saw him was in September 2015 when she was  out  shopping
    and saw him by coincidence.

16. The Appellant stated that she had sole responsibility for the twins and
    received no assistance from their father whatsoever.

The Respondent's Submissions

17. Mr Mills accepted that the twins are British citizens.  It was accepted
    that the Appellant satisfied E-LTRPT.2.2, 2.3, 2.4, and 3.1.  Therefore
    the issue was whether the requirements of EX.1(a)  are  satisfied.   It
    was not disputed that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with her children, that they are under  18  years
    of age and they are in the UK and are British citizens.  The issue  was
    whether it would be reasonable to expect  the  children  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  Mr Mills submitted  that  this  involved  a  balancing
    exercise  and  that  the  public  interest  in  maintaining   effective
    immigration control must be taken into account.

18. Mr Mills pointed out that the Appellant  had  left  three  children  in
    Nigeria, who  were  being  cared  for,  and  on  balance  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the British twins to return to  Nigeria  with  the
    Appellant.

19. Mr Mills submitted  that  the  same  test  applied  if  Article  8  was
    considered outside the Immigration rules, pursuant to section  117B(6).
    When Article 8 was considered outside the Immigration rules,  the  fact
    that the Appellant lacked financial independence  must  be  taken  into
    account, as must the fact that she had remained in the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully following the expiry of her visit visa.

20. With reference to the point made in the skeleton argument submitted  on
    behalf of the Appellant, that Appellant was also  entitled  to  succeed
    with reference to regulation 15A of The Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 and obtain a derivative right of  residence,  Mr
    Mills accepted that the Appellant is the primary carer of  two  British
    citizens but did not accept that the British citizens would  be  unable
    to reside in the United Kingdom if the Appellant had to leave, as  they
    could live with their father, as the Appellant's evidence could not  be
    relied upon to prove that he would not accept  responsibility  for  his
    children.





The Appellant's Submissions

21. Miss Alban relied upon her skeleton  argument.   She  argued  that  the
    issue to be decided in this appeal related to whether  or  not  it  was
    reasonable for the children to leave the United Kingdom.  I  was  asked
    to find that it would not be reasonable as they British citizens.

22. Miss Alban submitted that the Appellant's evidence was that she had  no
    suitable accommodation in Nigeria.  I was asked to  consider  the  best
    interests of the children as a primary consideration and to  find  that
    their best interests would be served by remaining in the United Kingdom
    with their mother.  Reliance was placed in particular  upon  paragraphs
    29-33 of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.

23. At the conclusions of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

24. Findings made by the FTT in relation to the Appellant's claim to be  at
    risk if returned to Nigeria have been preserved and are  summarised  in
    paragraph 38 which I set out below.

         "38. Having considered all of these matters, I  was  not  satisfied
             therefore that the Appellant  has  discharged  the  burden  of
             proving that she faces a substantial risk of serious  harm  or
             persecution from those she claims to fear in her home country.
              I find she has fabricated her claim.  Since I do  not  accept
             the  Appellant's  claims,  the  issues   of   sufficiency   of
             protection and internal relocation do not arise.  I  find  the
             Appellant does not discharge the burden of  proof  of  showing
             entitlement  to  protection  of  the  Refugee  Convention   or
             Articles 2 and 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  Any claim to
             humanitarian protection would  stand  or  fall  for  identical
             reasons".

25. The main issue raised by the Appellant relates to Appendix FM, and  her
    claim to be entitled to leave to remain as a parent.  I  remind  myself
    that when considering the Immigration rules the burden of proof  is  on
    the Appellant and the standard of proof is a balance of probability.

26. It has rightly been conceded by the Respondent that the  Appellant  has
    two British citizen children, those being her twins born on  12th  July
    2013.

27. I accept that the Appellant's relationship with the father of the twins
    ended shortly after their birth.  I also accept  that  the  father  has
    played no role in the upbringing of the twins.  I am satisfied,  having
    considered the Appellant's evidence carefully, that the Appellant  does
    not know his current address, and genuinely believes that he  is  in  a
    relationship with another woman.

28. I am satisfied that  the  father  of  the  twins  has  not  contributed
    financially to them, save on one occasion, in February 2016 giving  the
    Appellant �5.  I accept the Appellant's evidence that the father of the
    twins has only seen them once in 2016, that  being  one  visit  to  the
    Appellant's shared accommodation in February.

29. The requirements for limited leave to remain as a parent are set out in
    section R-LTRPT of Appendix FM.

30. The applicant for leave to remain and  the  children  must  be  in  the
    United Kingdom and the  applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal  under
    section S-LTR which contains the suitability requirements.

31. It has been conceded, and rightly so,  that  the  Appellant  meets  the
    requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT2.2-2.4 and 3.1.  This is because the
    Appellant is in the United Kingdom as  are  the  twins,  and  they  are
    British citizens.  The twins live with the Appellant, not  their  other
    parent.  I am satisfied that the Appellant has sole responsibility  for
    the children, and that she is taking and intends to continue to take an
    active role in their upbringing.  This was not disputed  on  behalf  of
    the Respondent.

32. Turning then to EX.1.(a) it  is  accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with her children, who are
    in the United Kingdom and are British citizens.  The issue therefore to
    be decided is whether it would not be reasonable to expect the children
    to leave the United Kingdom.

33. As explained in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4,  a  consideration  of  the
    best interests of a child will involve asking whether it is  reasonable
    to expect the child to live in another country.  The best interests  of
    a child must be considered as a primary consideration, but this is  not
    the  only  consideration,  and  this  may  be   outweighed   by   other
    considerations.

34. Guidance on considering the best interests of a child was given  in  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and I set out below paragraph 35;

         "35. A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens."

35.  In considering the factors set out above, I take into account that the
    children are not quite 3 years  of  age  and  have  not  started  their
    education.  They have never been to Nigeria, but because of their young
    age they would in my view be able to adapt to life in that country with
    their mother.  Neither child has any significant medical issues.  I  do
    not find that they would have linguistic difficulties in  Nigeria,  and
    their removal from the United Kingdom would not  interfere  with  their
    family life, as they would be removed together with their mother.  I do
    not find that their father has any meaningful contact with  them.   The
    issue that has to be decided is how their removal  would  affect  their
    rights as British citizens.

36. I find that it is clear that the best interests of the  children  would
    be to remain with their mother, and a decision  must  be  taken  as  to
    whether their best interests would be to remain with  their  mother  in
    the United Kingdom, or travel to Nigeria with her.

37. It was made clear in paragraph 30 of ZH (Tanzania) that nationality  is
    not a "trump card".  However nationality  was  described  as  being  of
    particular importance in assessing the best interests of a child.

38. In paragraph 32 Lady Hale stated;

         "32. Nor should the intrinsic importance of citizenship  be  played
             down.  As citizens these children have rights which they  will
             not be able to exercise if they move to another country.  They
             will lose the advantages of growing up and being  educated  in
             their own country, their own culture and their  own  language.
             They will have lost all this when they come back as adults."

39. Lord Hope at paragraph 41 of ZH (Tanzania) stated;

         "41. But there is much more to British citizenship than the  status
             it gives to the children in immigration law.  It carries  with
             it a host of other benefits and advantages, all of which  Lady
             Hale has drawn attention  to  and  carefully  analysed.   They
             ought never to be left out of account, but they  were  nowhere
             considered in the Court of Appeal's  judgment.   The  fact  of
             British citizenship does not trump everything  else.   But  it
             will hardly ever be less than a very significant  and  weighty
             factor against moving children who have that status to another
             country with a  parent  who  has  no  right  to  remain  here,
             especially if the effect of  doing  this  is  that  they  will
             inevitably lose those benefits and advantages for the rest  of
             their childhood."

40. I take into account when considering whether it is reasonable to expect
    the British children to leave the United Kingdom,  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant deliberately overstayed following the  expiry  of  her  visit
    visa, and fabricated an  asylum  claim.   However,  I  also  take  into
    account that in ZH (Tanzania) the Appellant was described as having  an
    appalling immigration history yet her appeal, based  upon  the  British
    citizenship of her children,  was  allowed.   It  was  emphasised  that
    children should not be  blamed  for  the  conduct  of  a  parent.   The
    Appellant in this case does not have such an appalling history  as  the
    Appellant in ZH (Tanzania)  who  made  three  unsuccessful  claims  for
    asylum, one in her own identity and two in false identities.

41. I do take into account that the Appellant has not proved  that  she  is
    financially dependent,  and  there  is  a  strong  public  interest  in
    maintaining effective immigration control.

42. However I attach very significant weight to  the  fact  that  the  twin
    children are British citizens, and if they  left  the  United  Kingdom,
    they would not be able to exercise their rights as British citizens and
    I therefore conclude that their  best  interests  would  be  served  by
    remaining in the United Kingdom, with their  mother  who  I  accept  is
    their primary carer, and I therefore conclude  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect them to leave the United Kingdom.

43. Therefore the Appellant's appeal succeeds  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration  rules.   It  is  not  necessary  to  go  on  and  consider
    alternative submissions made on the Appellant's behalf, to  the  effect
    that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration rules, and that the removal from the United  Kingdom  would
    be unlawful under the Zambrano principle.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds in relation to Articles  2  and
3 of the 1950 Convention.

I allow the appeal under Appendix FM of the Immigration rules

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because the Tribunal has considered the best interests  of
two minor children.


Signed                              Date 2nd June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 2nd June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
