
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA057282015
     AA057292015
     AA057302015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th June 2016                             |On 16 June 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                            C H (FIRST Appellant)
                           S Z (second Appellant)
                            A Z (third Appellant)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr K Behbahani (Solicitor) of Behbahani Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. These are appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal M Davies who, on 8th  December  2015,  dismissed  the  1st
         Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to remove  her
         and her dependents (the 2nd Appellant, who is her husband, and  the
         3rd Appellant, who is their child) from the UK under section 10  of
         the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The  1st  Appellant  and  her
         dependents sought  to  resist  their  removal  on  the  basis  that
         returning them to Iran would expose the 1st  Appellant  to  a  real
         risk of persecution and would consequently contravene  the  Refugee
         Convention.


    Background


      2. The 1st Appellant was born in February 1987 and is  a  national  of
         Iran, as are her husband and their child, who was 7  years  old  at
         the date of the First-tier Tribunal decision. The 1st Appellant and
         her child applied for a visit visa to enter the United  Kingdom  on
         3rd October 2013.  They  had  been  residing  in  the  United  Arab
         Emirates where the 2nd Appellant had a jewellery business. The  1st
         Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with her daughter  on  19th
         October 2013. On 6th December 2013 the 1st Appellant contacted the
         Home Office and indicated her desire to claim asylum. She underwent
         an asylum screening interview on 24th January 2015 but it was  not
         until February 2015 that she had a  substantive  asylum  interview.
         The Secretary of State refused the asylum claim on 3rd March  2015.




      3. The basis of the asylum claim advanced by the 1st Appellant related
         to mistreatment she feared would follow from her family's discovery
         that she had consumed alcohol, sung and attended a mixed sex  party
         where she was not  appropriately  dressed.  The  1st  Appellant  is
         Muslim and lived in Marivan, a region  in  Iranian  Kurdistan.  She
         claimed that in June 2015 she attended a private party  on  one  of
         her visits back to Iran. At the party she did not wear her  Islamic
         cover. There were some twenty people at  the  party  and  she  knew
         about fifteen of them. She claims that she got drunk  and  sung  at
         her friend's request. During the party, despite a  prior  agreement
         that no-one was to  take  any  photographs  or  film,  someone  did
         photograph  the  appellant  drinking  and   singing   without   her
         knowledge.


      4. In November 2013, whilst visiting the United  Kingdom  to  see  her
         sister-in-law the 1st Appellant claims she  was  contacted  by  her
         brother. Her brother was aware of the 1st Appellant's attendance at
         the party and her consumption of alcohol. He  had  been  given  the
         photograph taken without her knowledge. Her brother was a  sergeant
         in the Sepah, more commonly  known  as  the  Iranian  Revolutionary
         Guard. The 1st Appellant's father was said to  be  a  spy  for  the
         Sepah but did not have  a  rank.  The  1st  Appellant  claimed  her
         brother had influence and connections  in  Iran  and  that  he  was
         financially well-off. She claimed that her family were very  strict
         and orthodox. Her father and brother accused the 1st  Appellant  of
         putting their jobs at risk and they threatened her.


      5. Around 11th November 2013 the 1st  Appellant's  brother  telephoned
         her husband in Dubai and said he would travel there to  talk  about
         what the 1st Appellant had  done.  On  his  arrival  in  Dubai  the
         brother showed the 1st  Appellant's  husband  the  photograph.  The
         brother threatened to find and kill the 1st Appellant. Her  husband
         informed the 1st Appellant's brother that he would go to the UK and
         talk to her about what she had done.  The  brother  said  he  would
         remain in Dubai  until  the  husband  returned.  When  the  husband
         returned to Dubai the 1st Appellant  was  not  with  him.  The  1st
         Appellant's brother became angrier and said that he would find  the
         1st Appellant and kill her either in Iran or  Dubai.   This  threat
         was made on 3rd December 2013. It was as a result  of  this  threat
         that the husband advised his wife to remain in the  United  Kingdom
         and she eventually claimed asylum. The Respondent  did  not  accept
         the 1st Appellant's account and rejected her asylum claim.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


      6. On appeal, after having considered oral evidence both from the  1st
         and 2nd Appellants, the Judge found the 1st Appellant's account  to
         be incredible. The Judge's findings are contained at  paragraph  40
         onwards of his decision. The Judge  rejected  the  1st  Appellant's
         claim to have attended a party, to have drunk  alcohol  and  become
         drunk.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of leave

      7. The grounds before the Upper Tribunal challenge the adequacy of the
         reasons provided by the First-tier Judge  for  his  conclusion.  In
         granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal
         Judge Kopieczek stated


             "I do not consider that there is much, if any, arguable  merit
             in the hearsay point, which it seems  to  me  was  merely  the
             First-tier Judge's description of the evidence of  the  second
             appellant in terms of his not having had first-hand  knowledge
             of the party because he was not there (although he is said  to
             have been shown photographs). Other factual  complaints  about
             the Judge's assessment could also be said in some respects  to
             be weak. However, I consider it arguable  that  if  the  Judge
             considered it adverse  to  the  Appellant's  credibility  that
             certain evidence had not been provided, for example  names  of
             those at the party, the party's host, evidence from the second
             Appellant's sister, those are matters that  should  have  been
             put to the appellant at the hearing.  In the circumstances, it
             is arguable that the adverse credibility findings are  flawed.
             The point about the  expert  evidence  in  terms  of  the  1st
             Appellant's brother's reactions to events  is  also  arguable.
             Whilst I have expressed doubt about some other aspects of  the
             grounds I do not limit the grounds that may be argued."


      8. I heard  submissions  from  Mr  K  Behbahani  who  represented  the
         appellants in the appeal and, on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
         Ms Z Ahmed. Having carefully considered  their  submissions,  which
         expanded upon the grounds, I reserved my decision.
    Discussion


      9. The Appellants raise a  number  of  criticisms  of  the  First-tier
         Judge's decision.  The first criticism relates to the  Judge's  use
         of the word 'hearsay' in respect of evidence given by the  husband.
         The husband claimed he was shown photographs of the 1st Appellant's
         attendance at the party. These photographs were shown to him by the
         1st Appellant's brother in Dubai. At paragraph 42 of  his  decision
         the Judge  stated  there  had  been  no  evidence  other  than  the
         testimony of the 1st Appellant and  the  hearsay  evidence  of  her
         husband that she attended a party and drank alcohol. Given that the
         2nd Appellant said he actually saw photographs of his wife  at  the
         party it was wrong to categorise  this  evidence  as  hearsay.  The
         husband did not however actually witness his wife at the party. Put
         in its appropriate context it  is  satisfactorily  clear  that  the
         reference to 'hearsay'  probably  related  to  the  fact  that  the
         husband did not actually see the 1st Appellant at the party  as  he
         was not there. I do not find this a material basis for  undermining
         the determination.


     10. In paragraphs 43 to  46  the  First-tier  Judge  rejected  the  1st
         Appellant's account of attending the  party  and  drinking  alcohol
         because he did not find it likely that  she  would  have  done  so,
         given that this occurred in a small town in Kurdistan and given her
         family's role within the Sepah. The Judge simply did not  think  it
         credible that the 1st Appellant would take such a risk,  given  her
         parents'  strict  views.  The  Judge  specifically  asked  the  1st
         Appellant why she drank and she said it was because her brother was
         on duty outside the village. The Judge's reasoning is criticised on
         the basis that he reached a conclusion that was premised on his own
         perception of what was reasonable or likely to have happened, which
         was said to be unsupported by the evidence before him. It is argued
         that, had the Judge fully taken into account  the  1st  Appellant's
         background, the evidence given by her  in  her  interview  and  her
         statement as to why she went to the party, and why she  decided  to
         take a calculated risk, he may have reached a different conclusion.
         It is further argued that  the  Judge  did  not  give  adequate  or
         satisfactory reasoning in support of his conclusions.


     11. Whilst I harbour some  concerns  with  the  Judge's  decision,  for
         example it is not entirely clear  whether  the  1st  Appellant  was
         asked by anyone at the appeal hearing why she attended  the  party,
         it is clear that the Judge did ask her why she drank alcohol and he
         took account of her answer. It is for the 1st  Appellant  to  prove
         her account. There is no need for a Judge  to  ask  questions  that
         ought to have been asked and for her representatives to  prove,  to
         the lower standard of proof, the necessary elements required for  a
         protection claim. A Judge is not obliged to explore every aspect of
         a witnesses'  evidence  or  to  always  put  inconsistencies  to  a
         represent appellant (Y [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 and Maheshwaran  [2002]
         EWCA Civ 173). I am satisfied that the Judge was entitled  to  draw
         an adverse inference in the circumstances.



     12. I do however have greater concerns with the  Judge's  reasoning  at
         paragraphs 49, 50 and 54. In these paragraphs the  Judge  draws  an
         adverse inference from the failure of the 1st Appellant to identify
         the individuals who attended the  party,  her  failure  to  give  a
         detailed account of the party, her failure to name the party  host,
         and the failure to give an  explanation  for  the  absence  of  any
         evidence from the 1st  Appellant's  sister-in-law.   HA  and  TD  v
         Secretary of State from the Home Department [2010] CSIH 28  states,
         at [8]


             "As an  expert  body,  the  Tribunal  is  entitled  to  reject
             evidence  notwithstanding  that  the  evidence  has  not  been
             challenged before it.  Fairness  may  however  require  it  to
             disclose its concerns about the evidence so as to  afford  the
             parties an opportunity to address them."


     13.  The  First-tier  Judge  clearly  drew  an  adverse  inference   in
         circumstances where the 1st Appellant does not appear to have  been
         informed about the Judge's concerns, and without any opportunity to
         respond to the Tribunal's concerns. In my judgment  this  undermine
         the safety of the Judge's overall credibility conclusions.


     14. I have other concerns with the decision. At paragraph 51 the Judge
         considers evidence given by the 1st Appellant's husband. The  Judge
         record's the husband's claim to have seen  pictures  of  his  wife,
         shown by his brother-in-law in Dubai. The pictures showed his  wife
         holding what appeared to be a glass of alcohol and she was  wearing
         a party dress. He was asked how he could tell  that  his  wife  was
         drunk and he responded  that  she  looked  drunk.  The  Judge  then
         concludes,


             "... having heard the second appellant's oral evidence  I  did
             not find that my concerns in respect of the credibility of the
             claim were addressed and I was  not  satisfied  to  the  lower
             standard of proof that he was telling me the truth".

     15. There is an absence of sufficient reasoning as  to  why  the  Judge
         found the husband's evidence incredible.


     16. In paragraph 52 the Judge found the brother's wish to kill the  1st
         Appellant to be an extreme  claim.  The  Judge  doubted  whether  a
         brother would genuinely wish to kill his sister for  getting  drunk
         at a party. While accepting that honour killings did occur in Iran,
         and having made reference to an  expert  report  authored  by  Anna
         Enayat, the Judge stated that he  had  not  been  directed  to  any
         material in the Appellants' bundles showing that  women  who  drank
         alcohol and attend mixed sex parties had  been  subject  to  honour
         killings. At paragraph 5 of her expert report Ms Enayat stated,


             "Even if the kind of mixed party described by the client  went
             unnoticed by officialdom, there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
             disclosure of  photographs  by  a  participant  might  trigger
             threats of an honour killing, or another form of honour  based
             violence from a  brother,  (or  another  male  member  of  the
             family) socialised to the honour/shame culture active  amongst
             the Kurds of the Marivan area and, were he  a  member  of  the
             Revolutionary Guard, bring the additional fear that  he  would
             lose face with his superiors.  In  the  Kurdish  context  even
             apparently  trivial  matters,  such  as  attire   can,   among
             traditional sectors of the population, be a cause  of  violent
             retribution.  Seeing a female relative singing solo to a mixed
             gender group would be a particular provocation."

     17. The  Presenting  Officer  provided  a  Guardian  newspaper  article
         offered as a reference in the expert  report  to  support  of  last
         assertion about singing solo but which did not suggest that a woman
         singing would be regarded as a  particular  provocation.  No  issue
         however was taken with the other assertions  made  by  the  expert.
         There was therefore evidence before the  First-tier  Judge  in  the
         expert report indicating why the brother's reaction  may  plausibly
         have been so extreme. This explanation does not appear to have been
         considered by the Judge. Nor has the Judge  taken  account  of  the
         assertion that the brother and father were involved with the Sepah,
         the Revolutionary Guard, and their  consequential  fear  for  their
         positions as a  result  of  the  1st  Appellant's  activities  when
         assessing the plausibility of the brother's reaction.


     18. The Judge finally draws an adverse inference, at  paragraph  55  of
         his decision, based on the 1st Appellant's brother having allegedly
         travelled  illegally  to  Dubai.  There  was  however  no  evidence
         presented to the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  brother  had  ever
         travelled to Dubai illegally or that there was any need for him  to
         have so travelled. In these circumstances  it  is  clear  that  the
         Judge gave weight to an irrelevant consideration.

Conclusion

     19. Having holistic regard to the various  legal  deficiencies  I  have
         identified in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  I  am  satisfied
         that the impact of those deficiencies is sufficient to  render  the
         decision unsafe. In these circumstances it is appropriate to  remit
         the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for full reconsideration
         of the evidence before a Judge  other  than  Judge  M  Davies,  the
         hearing to be de novo.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law.
The matter is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full  re-hearing
before a Judge other than Judge M Davies, all issues open.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 16th June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

