
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05078/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd January 2015                          |On 4th February 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                         MISS EMILY ELEANOR NANTAMU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Clarke
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 23rd December 1979 is a citizen of  Uganda.   The
    Appellant was represented by Miss Clarke of  Counsel.   The  Respondent
    was represented by Mr Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant  had  made  application  for  asylum  in  2012  and  that
    application had been refused by the  Respondent  more  than  two  years
    later.  The Appellant had appealed that decision  and  her  appeal  had
    been heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Higgins sitting at Taylor House
    on 21st August 2014.  The judge had allowed her appeal under  both  the
    Refugee Convention and Article 3 of the ECHR.

 3. The Respondent had sought application to appeal that decision  on  10th
    October 2014.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Osborne on 26th November 2014.  The permission found arguable the
    Respondent's assertion that the judge had made a material error of  law
    in refusing the Respondent's adjournment  request  and  further  stated
    that all other issues were arguable.

 4. Directions were issued that the Upper Tribunal should firstly  consider
    whether an error of law had been made and the matter came before me  in
    accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Tufan relied on the Grounds of Appeal which focussed on two ways  in
    which it was  said  the  refusal  to  grant  an  adjournment  had  been
    procedurally unfair.

 6. I indicated to Miss Clarke that I did not need to hear any  submissions
    on the Appellant's behalf.  I indicated that I found no  error  of  law
    but would provide  my  decision  with  reasons.   I  now  provide  that
    decision.

Decision

 7. Leaving aside the Grounds of Appeal brought by the Respondent there  is
    no material error of law  made  in  this  case.   The  judge  noted  at
    paragraph 55 that the Respondent had accepted within the refusal letter
    that the Appellant would face persecution in Uganda on account  of  her
    claim to be a lesbian and to have participated  in  the  activities  of
    SILC and MFJ, if true.

 8. At paragraph 73 the judge accepted unequivocally that the Appellant was
    a member of SILC in Uganda and that her involvement with both SILC  and
    MFJ from May 2011 had not been challenged by  the  Presenting  Officer.
    The judge referred to the weight of evidence in support of this part of
    the Appellant's case.

 9. Accordingly leaving aside the question of an adjournment  or  potential
    concoction/similarities between the Appellant's evidence  and  that  of
    others, there was as  noted  above  separate  and  untainted  evidence,
    largely accepted by the Respondent that would in itself  have  led  the
    judge to allow the appeal as he so did.

10. Turning to the specific Grounds of Appeal they have limited  merit  and
    indeed in respect of the first ground seems somewhat  surprising.   The
    Appellant and her friend, Miss Namata had both made their asylum claims
    in 2010.  Thereafter the Respondent, for reasons not provided, took two
    years to refuse the Appellant's application.  This case was being heard
    by the First-tier Tribunal in August 2014.  That meant  the  Respondent
    had had four years to produce the documentary evidence relating to Miss
    Namata and to include it within the Appellant's bundle  in  support  of
    their assertion that Miss Namata's evidence was strikingly  similar  to
    the Appellant's evidence and by inference therefore  one  or  both  had
    concocted their accounts.  In those circumstances it was not wrong  for
    the judge to refuse the adjournment request given the substantial  time
    the Respondent had had and thus far had failed to produce evidence upon
    which they sought to rely.  Four years is a substantial period of time.
     In any event the judge was aware of the substance  of  the  assertions
    made by the Respondent as those assertions had been included within the
    Appellant's second interview and noted by the judge at paragraph 63  of
    the decision.  The "striking similarity" features was presented by  the
    Respondent as indicated above to no  doubt  claim  that  the  Appellant
    and/or Miss Namata had concocted their accounts.  The Respondent sought
    to bolster that by reference to inconsistencies between  the  Appellant
    and Miss Namata in terms of their evidence of being in  a  relationship
    together in the UK .  That was noted by the judge at paragraph 61.  The
    judge however for reasons given at paragraph 72 had found the Appellant
    and Miss Namata were in a relationship between July  2010  and  August
    2012 which in itself was evidence that went to  the  central  issue  of
    risk on return to Uganda of the Appellant if she was a lesbian.

11. The second Ground of Appeal refers to the refusal of the judge to grant
    an adjournment because of the  late  service  of  a  letter  from  Miss
    Namazibwe and thereafter the judge's decision to exclude  that  letter,
    thus it is said depriving both the Appellant and the Respondent of that
    evidence.  The judge was aware that he was to hear oral evidence from a
    number of witnesses on behalf of the  Appellant,  whose  statements  or
    letters were within both the Respondent's bundle  and  the  Appellant's
    bundle which had been properly served.  He accepted at paragraph 6 that
    the statement of Miss Namazibwe had not been served in accordance  with
    directions.  He was also aware that she was not present nor  was  there
    any intent to call her to give oral evidence.  Firstly  the  judge  was
    entitled to reject a statement put in, on behalf of the  Appellant,  if
    it had not been served in accordance with  directions.   Secondly,  and
    perhaps in reinforcement of the first point, given that person was  not
    providing oral evidence or being  subject  to  cross-examination  there
    would have been  potentially  little  weight  to  be  attached  to  her
    statement.  The fact that the statement  may  have  superficially  have
    appeared  very  similar  to  the  Appellant's  account  was  of  little
    evidential value to anyone if that individual did  not  give  evidence,
    adopt  her  statement  or  have  her  evidence  tested   under   cross-
    examination.  Accordingly the statement of Miss Namazibwe had little or
    no evidential weight, was  served  late  and  not  in  accordance  with
    directions and the judge was therefore justified in those circumstances
    in neither granting an adjournment nor admitting it  in  evidence.   He
    had a substantial body of evidence to consider and  its  exclusion  was
    not unfair to either side and indeed the Appellant did not argue at the
    hearing that its exclusion was unfair.

12. In summary therefore the judge made no error of law in respect  of  his
    decision not to grant an adjournment for  either  of  the  reasons  put
    forward by the Respondent nor in his decision to  exclude  a  statement
    and in so doing he acted properly in the interests both of justice  and
    the overriding objectives of the Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

13. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

14. Anonymity direction is not made.






Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

.



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.









Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

