
[pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/05290/2015
                                                               AA/05295/2015
                                                               AA/05296/2015
                                                               AA/05304/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 June 2017                               |On 29 June 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                            GT (First Appellant)
                            LT (Second Appellant)
                            MMG (Third Appellant)
                         refugee (Fourth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Bronwen Jones of Counsel instructed by The
                    Tamil Welfare Association
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first two appellants are husband and wife born  in  July  1986  and
    November 1989 respectively.  The third and fourth appellants are  their
    daughter and son born in 2011 and 2014 respectively.  They are citizens
    of Sri Lanka.  The first three appellants entered the United Kingdom on
    28 June 2013 as visitors.  The first appellant  claimed  asylum  on  23
    November 2013 with the second and third appellants as  his  dependants.
    The fourth appellant was born in the UK in March 2014.  The  appellants
    appeal the determination of a First-tier Judge following a hearing on 6
    February 2017.  The summary of the claim made by the first appellant is
    set out in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the decision of the  First-tier  Judge
    as follows:

         "4.  In brief the first appellant claims that he has a well-founded
             fear of persecution in Sri Lanka by reason  of  his  political
             opinion as a supporter of the LTTE.  The appellant claims that
             he worked as a medical representative and because of this work
             he provided LTTE with medicines  and  medical  equipment  from
             2006 to 2008.  The appellant speaks  Sinhala  and  because  of
             this he also carried out translation  work  for  the  LTTE  on
             three occasions in 2008.


         5.   In 2011 the appellant claims he was arrested and detained  for
             11 days.  He was kept in detention where the  conditions  were
             bad and he was denied food.  He was  tortured  twice  and  was
             beaten and kicked in the groin.  He was released on  reporting
             conditions because a lawyer intervened  on  his  behalf.   The
             appellant has some scarring from the torture and  has  medical
             treatment in the UK to correct  a  narrowing  of  his  urethra
             which the appellant believes occurred due to  the  kicking  in
             that area during his detention."

2.   There had been a previous hearing before First-tier Judge Hembrough  in
    July 2016 where the judge had reservations about the first  appellant's
    account in the light of numerous inconsistencies in it However  he  had
    gone on to resolve his concerns on  matters  such  as  the  appellant's
    claimed ill-treatment in detention in favour of the appellant  and  had
    allowed the appeal.  However, the  respondent  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge found the  determination  to
    have been inadequately reasoned and  set  the  decision  aside  in  its
    entirety and a de novo hearing was directed.

3.   The First-tier Judge heard oral evidence from the first  appellant  and
    his wife.  Like Judge Hembrough, the judge accepted the first appellant
    had worked for pharmaceutical companies and was able to name the  drugs
    that he supplied to the LTTE and  displayed  appropriate  knowledge  of
    these drugs.  He further accepted that the first appellant  would  have
    been approached by the LTTE for assistance.  He had initially  provided
    medicines and equipment for money but later supplied medicines from the
    free samples he had received during the course of his employment.   The
    judge accepted that the first appellant had travelled in the course  of
    his occupation as a medical representative.  He had  travelled  between
    Government controlled areas and the LTTE controlled areas in the  north
    of Sri Lanka.  He accepted that the first appellant  had  been  stopped
    once in 2009 when he showed is work credentials and he was released  at
    the checkpoint.

4.   However, the judge did not accept the first appellant's claimed  arrest
    and detention in 2011.

5.   The principle arguments  in  this  case  revolved  around  the  judge's
    treatment of the medical evidence.  There was before the judge a report
    by Dr Saleh Dhumad, a consultant psychiatrist.  There was also a medico-
    legal report prepared by Dr E Clark in 2015.

6.   In paragraph 36 of her decision the judge states as follows:

     "In relation to the appellant's claim that he was arrested  in  January
         2011 and detained and tortured I find it unbelievable.   The  dates
         for this incident  varied  as  between  the  appellant's  different
         witness statements.  The appellant had problems with dates.   I  am
         persuaded by Ms Jones' arguments today that his inability to recall
         dates correctly is credible.  Dr Durmah (sic) has also referred  to
         the effect of PTSD on the appellant's ability to recall events with
         precision.  Dr Clark has also confirmed this diagnosis of  PTSD  in
         the socio medical report prepared by the Helen  Bamber  Foundation.
         Notwithstanding the discrepancies in the dates of  the  appellant's
         detention, I do not find it credible that the authorities  suddenly
         expressed an interest in the appellant and detained him in 2011."

7.   The judge notes that the war in Sri Lanka had ended  in  2009  and  the
    first appellant's account was discrepant.  The judge  further  rejected
    the claim that the police had visited his parents' house in 2013.

8.   In paragraph 39 the judge noted that the first  appellant  had  claimed
    in his asylum interview that his wife had come to  secure  his  release
    after detention, but at the hearing he claimed that it was  his  sister
    who came to release  him.   This  undermined  his  claim  that  he  was
    detained "as he is not even able to say who released him.   His  memory
    should have no impact on this as I would expect him to know if  it  was
    his wife or  his  sister".   There  was  an  issue  whether  the  first
    appellant was beaten in detention or only pushed by the police.

9.   In paragraphs 42 to 47 of her decision the judge  makes  the  following
    observations in relation to the medical evidence:

         "42. I  accept  that  Dr  Clark  is  a  recognised  expert  in  the
             assessment of  physical,  psychological  and  psychiatric  and
             social effects of torture.  Dr Clark, in the detailed and well
             researched report, notes that the appellant had 14 lesions  of
             which he attributed 5 to ill treatment  whilst  in  detention.
             The  remainder  were   attributed   to   childhood   injuries,
             operations scars etc.


         43.  What is of significance is that in each case attributed to ill
             treatment of the appellant  the  appellant  was  not  able  to
             identify the precise mechanism of  injury  and  Dr  Clark  was
             unable  to  demonstrate  a  degree  of  consistency  with  the
             Istanbul protocol.  Dr Clark's assessment, I find  engaged  in
             speculation as to the possible cause and Dr Clark did not rule
             of  accidental  injury.   Dr  Clark  has  assumed   that   the
             appellant's inability to describe how the injuries were caused
             as an indicator of truth.  The alternative that the  appellant
             may be lying or does not wish to be exposed to inconsistencies
             has not been explored by Dr Clark.


         44.  The doctor did not examine the appellant's penis and so she is
             not in a  position  to  make  any  findings  on  this  injury.
             Despite this she accepts at paragraph 56 that the injuries are
             highly consistent with a blunt trauma  injury  to  his  groin.
             This aspect of the finding leads me to place little weight  on
             Dr Clark's report.  One of the appellant's hobbies earlier  on
             was martial arts but Dr Clark gives no opinion on whether  the
             injuries might be caused during those activities.


         45.  Dr Clark has not considered the  appellant's  lifestyle  since
             his claimed attack in 2011 whereby he was able to switch  jobs
             ... and that he did not seek any psychological or  psychiatric
             help in Sri Lanka.


         46.  Dr Clark has made no mention of cigarette burn injuries in her
             report.  More significantly, the appellant claimed that he has
             lost interest in sex and yet  he  has  gone  on  to  have  two
             children.  Dr Clark's report is silent on this.  Dr Clark  has
             given no  opinion  on  the  age  of  the  scars.   My  overall
             impression therefore of Dr Clark's report  is  that  it  lacks
             objectivity.


         47.  Dr Dhumad's report  also  does  not  deal  with  the  loss  of
             interest in sex and the fact that the appellant did in fact go
             on to have two children.   Dr  Dhumad  records  the  appellant
             suffering from nightmares but the appellant made no mention of
             this in is AI or SI.  Dr Dhumad saw the appellant three  times
             and has missed vital matters  from  his  report.   Despite  Dr
             Clark's prognosis Dr Dhumad does not prescribe any  medication
             to the appellant.  There is very little detail to  demonstrate
             why the appellant could not be malingering.  In particular, as
             outlined in BN (psychiatrist) 2010 UKUT 279, paragraphs 31, 41
             and  54  the  psychiatrist  is  charged  with  providing  such
             details."

10.  The judge found that the  first  appellant  was  speculating  that  the
    authorities were interested in him.  She  also  found  that  the  first
    appellant's account was inconsistent with the country  guidance  in  GJ
    (Sri Lanka) CG [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC).   It  was  argued  that  the
    categories in GJ were  not  exhaustive  which  the  judge  accepted  in
    paragraph 50 of her decision.  However, she did not find that the first
    appellant was or is perceived to be a threat to the  integrity  of  Sri
    Lanka as a single state and at its highest the first  appellant  was  a
    low-level supporter of the LTTE.  There was no reason for his  name  to
    appear on a stop list and there was no arrest or  court  order  against
    the first appellant.  He had  managed  to  travel  safely  out  of  the
    airport on his journey to the UK and there was no reason to suspect  he
    would not be able to return to Sri Lanka safely  on  his  own  national
    passport.  The judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

11.  There was an application for permission to appeal  which  was  rejected
    by the First-tier Tribunal on 21  March  2017.   The  First-tier  Judge
    observed that the grounds were unnecessarily long and ran  to  nineteen
    pages - longer than the judge's decision.  The judge correctly observed
    that grounds should be succinct and to the point.

12.  The renewed grounds of appeal were happily shorter and settled by  Miss
    Jones.  She had  appeared  as  Counsel  before  the  First-tier  Judge.
    Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Keki?  who  found  it  was
    arguable that the judge had erred in her approach to, and findings  on,
    the medical evidence adduced by the first appellant.  All  the  grounds
    were found to be arguable.  Dealing with the  renewed  grounds  it  was
    argued that the judge had not made an explicit finding on vulnerability
    despite being invited to  do  so  in  the  first  appellant's  skeleton
    argument before her.  Reference in the original grounds had  been  made
    to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable
    adult and sensitive appellant guidance.   The  judge  had  unreasonably
    failed to apply the  guidance  in  the  Guidance  Note  when  assessing
    credibility.

13.  Miss  Jones  referred  to  this  point  and  accepted  that  issues  of
    vulnerability should ideally be  dealt  with  at  the  case  management
    stage.

14.  Both the  doctors  had  agreed  that  the  first  appellant  had  post-
    traumatic stress disorder.  This would make him an  unreliable  witness
    and it would not be limited to the issue of recall of dates.

15.  Counsel criticised the reference to Dr Clark's assessment  being  based
    on an assumption in paragraph 43.  The judge had accepted that Dr Clark
    was a recognised expert.  She had found that her  report  was  detailed
    and well-researched, so it was difficult to identify why  it  was  said
    that she had speculated.  Reference was made to the  skeleton  argument
    before the First-tier Judge.  The first appellant's arguments had  been
    set out in paragraphs 16 to 21 of  the  skeleton  argument  before  the
    judge.  In relation to the findings in paragraph 44 the point had  been
    made in the initial grounds of appeal.  It was submitted that Dr  Clark
    was adhering to the Istanbul Protocol  in  not  examining  the  genital
    area.

16.  The statement in paragraph 46 that Dr Clark  had  made  no  mention  of
    cigarette burn injuries in her report was wrong.  Dr  Clark  had  dealt
    with this in paragraph 49 of her report.  The reference  to  the  first
    appellant claiming to have lost interest in sex and yet "he has gone on
    to have two children" could not be reconciled with the dates  of  birth
    of the children.  As noted in paragraph 15 of the renewed  grounds,  it
    had been pointed out that the respondent had made the point in  closing
    submissions at the hearing, but the argument had been made to the judge
    that both children had been conceived before the first  appellant  came
    to the UK and begun to experience acute symptoms.  The first child  had
    been conceived before the first appellant had even been detained -  his
    wife had been pregnant during his  detention.   The  second  child  was
    conceived in Sri Lanka and born in the UK.  It was submitted  that  the
    judge  had  adopted  the  respondent's  position   uncritically.    The
    respondent had relied on  BN  (psychiatric  evidence  -  discrepancies)
    Albania [2010] UKUT 279 and had  not  noted  the  submissions  made  on
    behalf of the first appellant which were summarised in paragraphs 19 to
    22 of the renewed grounds.  Dr Dhumad had plainly dealt with the  issue
    of malingering in paragraph 17.8 of the report set out on page 7 of the
    renewed grounds.  There was no basis for saying there  was  a  lack  of
    objectivity in the medical evidence.  In relation to the age  of  scars
    reference was made to paragraph (g) on page 12 of the original grounds.
     In paragraph 36 the judge had accepted that the  first  appellant  had
    problems with dates.  In relation to the authorities  renewed  interest
    in him in January 2011 it had been argued in the original grounds  that
    there had been improved intelligence gathering in January 2011.

17.  Mr Avery submitted that the issue of whether the first appellant was  a
    vulnerable witness did not add much to the issues raised by the medical
    evidence.  The judge recorded what she had accepted in paragraph 36  of
    her determination.  She had referred to the  first  appellant's  memory
    issues.  She had properly considered the evidence in the light  of  his
    medical condition.  She had taken the medical  evidence  into  account.
    She had not accepted all the  medical  evidence.   She  had  identified
    discrepancies in several areas.  He accepted the point made  about  the
    cigarette burns.  However, she had  had  to  look  back  to  the  first
    appellant's SEF.  Dr Clark  had  noted  inconsistencies  in  the  first
    appellant's account.  She had said that  his  difficulty  in  giving  a
    consistent account was "clinically plausible" but  Mr  Avery  submitted
    that the first appellant might alternatively be  lying.   It  had  been
    open to the judge to find  as  she  did  on  the  issue  of  the  first
    appellant's injury being caused by martial arts.  The grounds expressed
    disagreement with the findings of the  judge  who  had  comprehensively
    disbelieved his account of detention and ill-treatment.  The  reference
    by the judge to Section 8 in paragraph 32 of her decision did not  take
    matters any further.  He acknowledged he could say  nothing  about  the
    point made in relation to the findings in paragraphs 46 and 47  of  the
    decision about the first appellant having gone to have two children.

18.  In reply Counsel submitted that the medical expert had  properly  taken
    into account the first appellant's lesions and scarring.  Dr Clark  had
    not found the first appellant likely to be lying.  Dr Dhumad had  dealt
    with the issue of malingering properly.  If there was a material  error
    of law a fresh hearing was required.

19.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.

20.  I have carefully considered all  the  material  before  me.   I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge if it was materially flawed in law.

21.  The determination of this case was not facilitated by the prolixity  of
    the initial grounds of  appeal.   Although  Counsel  helpfully  reduced
    these grounds by ten pages it was still felt necessary to refer to  the
    original grounds as well as the skeleton argument that had been  placed
    before the First-tier Judge.  Standard directions had been  issued  for
    the hearing and a short  bundle  would  have  greatly  facilitated  the
    disposal of this appeal.

22.  That said, I have to examine whether the grounds  disclose  a  material
    error of law.  The particular point raised  was  the  approach  of  the
    judge to the medical evidence.  The particular focus of  the  challenge
    is centred on paragraphs 42 to 47 of the determination.

23.  In paragraph 43 the judge refers to Dr Clark acting  on  an  assumption
    and that "The alternative that the appellant may be lying or  does  not
    wish to be exposed to inconsistencies  has  not  been  explored  by  Dr
    Clark."  The judge does not refer to what is said at  paragraph  71  of
    the report in relation to whether the first appellant might be feigning
    or exaggerating his physiological symptoms.  She noted that he appeared
    to understate rather than overstate his distress  and  that  he  denied
    having suicidal ideation, recurrent intrusive memories and  exaggerated
    startle response which he could have claimed had he wished to feign  or
    exaggerate any psychological distress.  The doctor concludes  "Overall,
    I found nothing to suggest that he was trying to  exaggerate  or  feign
    any psychological distress."  In relation to  the  point  made  by  the
    judge at paragraph 44 of her  decision  that  Dr  Clark  had  given  no
    opinion on whether the first appellant's injuries might  be  caused  by
    his earlier hobbies such as martial arts, the initial grounds of appeal
    make the point that the doctor had  referred  to  the  first  appellant
    playing rugby and martial arts in paragraph 1 of her report - the first
    appellant said he had no injuries from participating in  these  sports.
    I also note in paragraph 53 she said that  it  was  unlikely  that  the
    various scars and  lesions  that  she  had  observed  could  have  been
    acquired during his reported activities which include  his  involvement
    in sport at school or his work as a medical representative.  She  noted
    that the first appellant was careful to identify the  majority  of  his
    scars as having been due to a childhood accident, surgery or of unknown
    cause.  I appreciate that the judge was dealing with a  specific  issue
    in paragraph 44 of injury to his groin.

24.  Paragraphs 46 and 47 do raise  problems  in  my  view.   Dr  Clark  did
    indeed deal with the issue of cigarette burn injuries in  paragraph  49
    of her report.  A reference to the first appellant having lost interest
    in sex but  yet  has  "gone  on  to  have  two  children"  ignores  the
    chronology.  The first  appellant's  first  child  had  been  conceived
    before he had gone to prison.  The criticism that Dr Clark had given no
    opinion on the age of the first appellant's scars appears  to  overlook
    what she said at paragraph 42 of her report:

     "The appearance of  scars  seldom  changes  significantly  after  about
         twelve months and so it is not usually possible to date scars  more
         accurately after this time.  All [the first appellant's] scars were
         quiescent (not inflamed and fully healed) in appearance,  and  they
         are therefore in keeping with the chronology of his account."

25.  The judge's assessment in paragraph 46 that her overall  impression  of
    Dr Clark's report was that it lacked objectivity is in my opinion based
    on a flawed understanding of it.

26.  The point about the dates of birth of the children is of  relevance  in
    the judge's assessment of Dr Dhumad's report.  In  stating  that  there
    was very little detail to demonstrate why the first appellant could not
    be malingering, the judge appears to have overlooked what was  said  in
    paragraph  17.8  of  Dr  Dhmad's  report.   Dr  Dhumad  states  he  has
    considered the possibility that the first appellant might  be  feigning
    or exaggerating his mental illness and that he had not taken the  story
    at face  value.   He  had  carefully  examined  the  first  appellant's
    symptoms and emotional reactions during the interview and had  reviewed
    the opinions of other professionals who had seen him such as Dr  Clark.
    He adds:

      "It  is  my  clinical  opinion  that  his  clinical  presentation   is
         consistent with a diagnosis of a cognitive impairment -  likely  to
         be a learning disability, moderate  depression  and  post-traumatic
         stress disorder.  In my experience it  is  extremely  difficult  to
         feign  a  full-blown  mental  illness  (as  opposed  to  individual
         symptoms)."

    Having referred to  the  Istanbul  Protocol  Dr  Dhumad  continues  "My
    impression is that his clinical presentation  is  compatible  with  the
    experience of intense fear of expected threat to life.

27.  The points made in the grounds about  the  distinguishing  features  of
    the case of BN referred to by the judge appear to be well-made.

28.  Having very carefully considered the various criticism of the  judge  I
    find that there are too many apparent mistakes in the assessment of the
    medical evidence.  I appreciate that this is a difficult case, but if a
    judge is to find that a medical expert's report lacks objectivity or is
    based on speculation, then  it  behoves  the  judge  to  be  especially
    careful when considering the medical evidence.  In my  view  there  are
    serious problems with the considerations that the First-tier Judge gave
    to the medical evidence and that these  errors  amount  to  a  material
    error of law.

29.  Counsel submitted at the hearing that if I found a  material  error  of
    law a fresh hearing would be required.

30.  I am conscious of the fact that  there  has  already  been  a  previous
    hearing.  However, I can see no alternative in the present  case  given
    the errors that I have identified in directing a further fresh  hearing
    as Counsel requested.  I agree  that  the  appeal  should  be  a  fresh
    hearing, though it does not now appear to be in dispute that the  first
    appellant had been working as a medical representative in Sri Lanka  as
    recorded in paragraph 33 of the decision of the First-tier Judge -  she
    records that the respondent did not challenge  the  assertion  that  he
    worked for the companies at the hearing. The finding does not appear to
    be affected by the error of law.  Accordingly, apart  from  this  there
    should be a fresh hearing de novo before a different First-tier  Judge.



31.  For the reasons  I  have  given  I  allow  the  appeal  to  the  extent
    indicated.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or is payable.


Signed                                  Date 28 June 2017

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
