
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05408/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On              the               13th               July               2016
                    On the 26th July 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                    [S B]
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
Representation:
For the Claimant: Miss Fielden (Counsel)
For the Secretary  of  State:  Mr  Norton  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Steer promulgated on the 19th April 2016, in which
      he allowed the Claimant's appeal on  humanitarian  protection  grounds
      and on Human Rights grounds under Article 3 of the ECHR.

   2. The Secretary of State has sought to appeal against that decision  for
      the reasons set out in full within the Grounds of Appeal.  This  is  a
      matter of record and is therefore not  repeated  in  full  here.   The
      Claimant's claim that he feared persecution in  India,  instigated  by
      the father of his sister [R]'s previous female partner  [S],  who  had
      threatened to kill the Claimant,  as  he  had  assisted  his  sister's
      escape to the UK, was accepted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Steer.
      Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that it was not clear as  to
      why the Judge had concluded  that  [S]'s  father  would  currently  be
      interested in the Claimant, given that he had not lived in India since
      2006, or as to how the Claimant would be known to [R]'s brother or  as
      to why the Indian police or anybody  else  in  India  would  have  the
      slightest interest in him.  It is argued that  India  is  one  of  the
      largest countries and the second most populous country  in  the  world
      and that the Claimant could safely internally relocate anywhere within
      the country.  It is said that the Judge's finding at [88] the Claimant
      would have to visit the Mumbai Police Station in order  to  renew  his
      passport is inadequately reasoned and is based upon  supposition  that
      the Claimant would not be able to obtain an Indian passport in the UK.
       It is argued that this point has been inadequately dealt with by  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It is further argued that  the  suggestion
      that there may be a "lookout circular" for the Claimant is  also  mere
      speculation and that  the  expert  simply  stated  that  this  may  be
      "possible", and that there was further no  evidence  to  suggest  that
      even if [S]'s father had succeeded in getting a Lookout  Circular  for
      the Claimant, or that the Claimant somehow had to go to Mumbai  Police
      Station, that the Claimant would not have recourse to a  legal  remedy
      given that the Rule of Law does operate in India.

   3. Permission to appeal has been granted by Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Taylor on the 8th June 2016,  in  which  she  found  that  whilst  the
      original grounds at first sight  might  have  had  the  appearance  of
      attempting to reargue the Secretary of State's case, the point made in
      the renewed grounds in relation to internal relocation has merit.  But
      for the avoidance of doubt she found that all grounds may be argued.

   4. It was on this basis that the case proceeded to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
      Before the appeal hearing before me commenced, Miss Fielden handed  up
      her brief written submissions, which I have fully taken into  account.
      However, at the oral appeal hearing, Miss Fielden  on  behalf  of  the
      Claimant  conceded  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Steer  had  not
      adequately considered the possibility of  the  Claimant  obtaining  an
      Indian passport whilst still in the United Kingdom, such that he would
      not be entering India on emergency  travel  documents.   She  conceded
      further that in such circumstances the  ability  of  the  Claimant  to
      safely internally relocate, if he had entered on a passport,  has  not
      been considered by the  Judge  and  that  in  such  circumstances  the
      question of internal relocation  had  not  properly  been  considered.
      Miss Fielden on behalf of  the  Claimant  conceded  that  this  was  a
      material error of law and she did not oppose the  decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Steer being set aside and the case  remitted  back
      to the First-tier Tribunal.

   5. However, she asked that there be preserved findings of fact in respect
      of the threat faced by the Claimant from [S]'s father  and  family  in
      Mumbai.  Mr Norton on behalf of the Secretary of State agreed that the
      case should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal in respect  of
      the internal relocation issue, and  that  there  should  be  preserved
      findings of fact in respect of the threat from [S]'s father and family
      in Mumbai, but he argued that the ability of the Claimant to  live  in
      his home area notwithstanding such threat, given what he argued  would
      be a sufficiency of protection from the authorities in Mumbai and also
      the question of internal relocation, needed to be  dealt  with.   Miss
      Fielden conceded that although First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Steer  had
      mentioned the previous findings of Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Reeds
      in respect of the ability of [S]'s father  to  bribe  the  police  and
      detention centre wardens in respect of [R],  were  she  to  return  to
      India, that First-tier Tribunal Judge Steer had not specifically dealt
      with the question of sufficiency of protection for the  Claimant  from
      the authorities in Mumbai itself.

   6. In light of the above concessions, I  do  accept  and  find  that  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Steer  does  contain  material
      errors of law, in respect of his failure to  properly  deal  with  the
      question as to whether or not the  Claimant  could  obtain  an  Indian
      passport whilst still in the UK, such that he would not  be  returning
      to India on emergency travel documents, and that  the  Learned  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge has not adequately dealt with the  questions  both
      of sufficiency of protection for this Claimant by the  authorities  in
      Mumbai, and further, the question as to whether or  not  the  Claimant
      could, if having entered India on a passport obtained in  the  UK,  or
      otherwise, safely internally relocate within India.

   7. I therefore do set aside the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Steer, but as agreed between  the  parties,  but  I  do  preserve  his
      findings in respect of the risk that  the  Claimant  would  face  from
      [S]'s  father  and  family  in  Mumbai.  However,  the  questions   of
      sufficiency of protection and internal relocation, do need to be dealt
      with again.  Given the degree of fact finding that would  be  required
      in this regard, it is appropriate, as was agreed with the parties, for
      the case to be remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
      questions of sufficiency of protection and internal relocation  to  be
      dealt with by a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal,  so  that
      the re-hearing is before any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Steer.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Steer  does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside.  I do  preserve  the  findings  of  facts  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Steer in  respect  of  the  threat  faced  by  the
Claimant from [S]'s father and family in Mumbai.

The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard  before
any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Steer.

Signed
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 17th July 2016

