

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/05547/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 17 October 2017                     |        On 19 October 2017          |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                     MO
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Brown of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncz a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify MO. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,
       all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
       rise to Contempt of Court proceedings. I do so in order to  preserve
       the anonymity of MO whose asylum claim remains outstanding.

    2. The Respondent refused MO's  application  for  asylum  or  ancillary
       protection on 1 August 2014. His appeal against this  was  dismissed
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie following  a  hearing  on  11
       August 2014 under the "Fast Track  Rules".  That  decision  was  set
       aside by the  President  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  following  a
       determination that the "Fast Track Rules" was inherently unfair. His
       appeal was relisted  and  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Hussain ("the Judge") following a hearing on 26 January 2016.

The grant of permission


   3. Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins granted permission  to  appeal  (14  June
      2017). He said it is arguable that


       "by stating that he "found no basis on which to interfere  with  the
       findings of the earlier first-tier judge" First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       Hussain showed that he was  not  making  up  his  own  mind  on  the
       evidence but was reviewing an earlier decision.  Arguably,  as  that
       earlier decision had been set aside, Judge Hussain should  not  have
       had any regard to  that  decision.  The  point  is  that  the  first
       decision was under the  "Fast  Track  Rules"  and  was  procedurally
       flawed. However experienced and careful the Judge may have  been  he
       was operating within the constraints of an unfair system."


Respondent's position

    4. It was submitted in the rule 24 notice (7 July 2017) that the  Judge
       did not err by not adjourning the  proceedings  for  him  to  obtain
       representation. I note that  no  mention  was  made  of  the  ground
       relating to the "Fast Track Rules" point, or  the  third  ground  of
       application which related  to  the  lack  of  reference  to  medical
       evidence  that  had  not  previously  been  considered.  Mr  Dywnicz
       conceded that the "Fast Track Rules" point was the best. I indicated
       that not only was it the best, but that it was  also  one  that  was
       hard to argue against. He agreed  and  indicated  that  he  did  not
       intend to.  No  further  submissions  were  therefore  necessary  in
       relation to the other grounds in support of the application.


Discussion

    5. Given the obvious material error of law in relation to the  reliance
       placed on findings made in an unfair hearing where the decision  and
       findings had been set aside, I was satisfied I must set aside  Judge
       Hussain's decision and findings.


    6. I was also satisfied having heard  from  the  representatives  that,
       despite this  matter  have  been  set  aside  once  already,  it  is
       appropriate to remit the matter de novo  as  the  errors  go  beyond
       those contained within the Presidential Guidance  for  retention  in
       the Upper Tribunal.


Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo  hearing
    with no findings from any previous hearing being preserved, not  before
    Judge Hussain or Judge Gillespie.










Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
18 October 2017
