
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05962/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Sent           |
|On 3rd February, 2014                         |On 20th February, 2014       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mr aimen ra am gwisha

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Nicholson of Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and  in
    this determination I refer to the Secretary of State as the "claimant".
     The respondent is a citizen of Libya, born on 26th  March,  1983.   He
    entered the United Kingdom by aeroplane at  Heathrow  Airport  on  30th
    November, 2011, having used his own national passport, endorsed with  a
    valid visa, from 12th  November,  2012,  until  12th  May,  2013.   The
    respondent claimed asylum some five months later on 9th May, 2013.

2.   The claimant considered and refused the respondent's asylum  claim  and
    on 7th June last year decided to remove the respondent  as  an  illegal
    entrant.  The respondent appealed that  immigration  decision  and  his
    appeal was heard in Manchester by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holt  on
    17th October, 2013.

3.   In her determination, promulgated on 25th  October,  2013,  Judge  Holt
    allowed  the  respondent's  asylum  appeal   and   also   allowed   his
    humanitarian appeal and allowed his  appeal  under  Article  3  of  the
    European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental
    Freedoms.

4.   Dissatisfied with Judge Holt's decision, the  claimant  challenged  the
    decision on several aspects.  First, it was  suggested  that  generally
    the judge had failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  finding  the
    respondent's claim to be credible and for finding that he would  be  at
    risk on his return to Libya.  It was asserted on behalf of the claimant
    that the respondent had failed to demonstrate a sufficient knowledge of
    Taworghan tribe during his asylum interview and the Tribunal had failed
    to provide adequate reasons as to why he was found  to  belong  to  the
    Taworghan tribe.

5.   The Secretary of State also suggested that the Tribunal had  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for relying on  an  expert's  report  as  to  the
    respondent's ethnicity when  the  expert  failed  to  provide  adequate
    sources in the report to support findings.

6.   The grounds also suggested that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding an expert medical report relating to an injury  the
    respondent claimed to have credible and suggested that the judge failed
    to  consider  whether  there  might  be  some  other  cause   for   the
    respondent's injury.  It was also  asserted  that  the  respondent  had
    delayed claiming asylum for five months  and  not  given  any  credible
    reason and had also failed to give a credible explanation as to why  he
    was able to obtain release from his detention.

7.   I indicated to Mr McVeety that without having formed any  firm  opinion
    it appeared to me at first blush that the grounds  failed  to  identify
    any error of law on the part of the  judge.   Mr  McVeety  acknowledged
    that he was in some difficulty.

8.   I explained that I was more than happy to  listen  to  his  submissions
    and be persuaded otherwise and he asked me to consider what  the  judge
    had said in paragraph 54 concerning the respondent's accent.  She  said
    there:-

         "Given the natural way in which the respondent gave his evidence  I
         am satisfied that he spoke Arabic with an accent which was  typical
         of someone from Tripoli, as claimed, but he  said  he  would  still
         stand out to locals  in  Libya  as  someone  who  had  also  had  a
         Taworghan accent as he was someone used certain  words  which  were
         typically used by people from Taworgha."

9.   Mr McVeety quite properly pointed out that  there  appeared  to  be  no
    evidence recorded in the  determination  identifying  the  respondent's
    accent as being typically like someone from Tripoli.  Mr Nicholson, who
    had represented the respondent before the judge, recalled that  it  was
    the respondent's own claim that  he  had  an  accent,  because  he  had
    regularly spoken to others  who  did  have  an  accent.   Mr  Nicholson
    suggested that what the judge had said at paragraph 54 was, in  effect,
    the judge staying within the context of the credibility  findings  made
    by her his account that he would stand out  as  having  an  accent  was
    credible.

10.  I have carefully read the judge's determination in  the  light  of  the
    grounds.  The judge made  clear  findings  at  paragraph  14  that  the
    respondent was, until 2011, a low level supporter of the Gaddafi regime
    in Libya and a low level political activist as he claimed to  be.   Her
    reasons are clear, logical and supported by the evidence.  At paragraph
    15, the judge identified the need to make  clear  findings  as  to  the
    respondent's ethnicity and did so.  She noted that while he had  always
    claimed to be from the Taworghan tribe, he had explained  that  he  was
    brought up in Tripoli, although his father was of  Taworghan  ethnicity
    and that members  of  the  tribe  historically  supported  the  Gaddafi
    regime.  Their loyalty was, as she points out, rewarded by  the  former
    regime offering construction projects and providing extra civil service
    facilities.  Criticism is made of the judge for accepting the report of
    the expert as to the respondent's injury.  At paragraph  16  the  judge
    accepted the respondent's account of being imprisoned and tortured  and
    gives her reasons.  She found that the account was  broadly  consistent
    and that the respondent had not embellished his  account.   He  clearly
    admitted that his detention lasted for a week and  the  medical  report
    found that scars were consistent  with  the  respondent's  claim.   The
    judge was satisfied that the respondent's account as to how he came  to
    have a wrist scar was credible at paragraph 17 and at paragraph 21  she
    deals at some length with the respondent's delay in claiming asylum.

11.  When the determination is read as a whole, I believe that it is a  fair
    and thorough determination which deals  with  the  claimant's  concerns
    about the respondent's credibility and there is nothing in it which can
    properly be described as being perverse in the public law  sense.   The
    judge made clear findings on evidence which was placed before  her.   I
    believe that she was entitled to make the findings she did and I do not
    believe that the determination contains any error of law.  I uphold the
    judge's decision.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


