
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/05314/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decisions & Reasons                  |
|On August 25, 2016                   |On August 30, 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                        MR HOSHANG JAHANGIR ANBARDAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Broudie, Jackson and
Canter
Respondent  Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant, citizen of Iran,  applied  on  April  29,  2014  for
         asylum. The respondent refused this application on  June  28,  2014
         and removal directions were served on July 16, 2014. The  appellant
         appealed on July 29, 2014 under section 82(1) of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

      2. The appeal came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lowe
         (hereinafter referred to as "the Judge") on November 20,  2015  and
         he dismissed the appellant's appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on
         December 16, 2014. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  that
         decision on January 2, 2015 on the ground the Judge  had  erred  by
         making incorrect findings  on  the  evidence  and  making  findings
         without any evidence to support the findings. Permission to  appeal
         was refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchinson on
         January 14, 2015 but following a renewed permission  to  appeal  to
         the Upper Tribunal permission was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Allen on May 5, 2015 on the ground that it was  arguable  a  person
         who exited Iran illegally as a failed asylum  seeker  would  be  at
         risk. He found the original grounds raised to be of less weight but
         granted permission on all grounds.

      3. The matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge King TD on May 9,  2016
         and he adjourned the  appeal  pending  the  outcome  of  a  country
         guidance case. The case was listed before me on the above date  and
         on that date the parties were represented as set out above.

      4. It was agreed that the Tribunal decision of  SSH  and  HR  (Illegal
         exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) applied
         and that in order to succeed the appellant would have  to  show  an
         error in the Judge's approach to the factual issues in the case  as
         being a failed asylum seeker and a person who  left  illegally  was
         insufficient to place the appellant at risk of persecution.

      5. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction  and
         pursuant to Rule 14 of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 I make no order now.

         SUBMISSIONS

      6. Mr Nicholson adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted there were
         three strands to his submissions. Firstly, he submitted the Judge's
         approach from paragraph [20] onwards  were  bizarre.  Secondly,  he
         referred me to paragraphs [20] and [21]  and  submitted  the  Judge
         erred by putting his own view without any  supporting  evidence  to
         support his finding. Thirdly, he submitted the Judge's finding  the
         appellant would not have taken  the  risk  of  downloading  a  book
         failed to take into account that people often took risks regardless
         of  the   consequences.   The   appellant's   actions   were   both
         credible/plausible and if accepted would have placed the  appellant
         at risk and consequently he would still be at  risk  following  the
         recent country guidance case.

      7. Mr McVeety accepted some  of  the  Judge's  comments  were  written
         strangely but submitted that reading the decision as a whole it was
         clear that the  appellant's  account  had  not  been  accepted  and
         numerous findings had been made against him  and  adequate  reasons
         for those findings had been given. As the findings were open to the
         Judge on the evidence there was no  error  in  law  because  merely
         being a failed asylum and/or having left  illegally  did  not  give
         rise to a refugee claim.

      8. Mr Nicholson reminded me that it was a  low  threshold  and  as  Mr
         McVeety conceded parts of the decision were strange there  must  be
         an error in law.

      9. Having heard these submissions, I reserved my decision.

         DISCUSSION AND FINDING ON ERROR IN LAW

     10. In considering the appellant's claim the Judge had the  benefit  of
         both oral and written evidence from the  appellant.  No  issue  was
         taken  with  the  Judge's  recital  of  the  appellant's  claim  in
         paragraphs [7] to [9] and [13] to  [14]  of  his  decision  and  at
         paragraphs [10] and [12] he  summarised  the  respondent's  refusal
         letter and evidence. At paragraph [15] he summarised the additional
         oral evidence that arose at  the  hearing  before  summarising  the
         representatives' submissions at paragraphs [16 and [17].

     11. The Judge reminded himself that possession of banned articles could
         lead to a sentence of between six  months  and  two  years  and  if
         convicted of apostasy the sentence could be execution.

     12. Having considered his account, he rejected  his  claim  because  he
         found a number of inconsistencies.

     13. Mr Nicholson's submission is that  the  Judge's  approach  to  that
         evidence in paragraphs [20] and [21] amounts to an error in law. Mr
         McVeety argues that whilst there may be errors in his  approach  in
         those  paragraphs  the  Judge  made  significant  adverse  findings
         against the appellant in paragraphs [22] and [23] and there was  no
         challenge made to those findings  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
         submitted to me that any possible error in approach  in  paragraphs
         [20] and [21] was not material.

     14. In paragraph [20] the Judge found that the appellant would be aware
         that his secular outlook was not  the  normal  in  Iran  and  would
         therefore be aware that there were dangers  in  being  seen  as  an
         apostate. This finding is an obvious finding and  clearly  open  to
         the Judge. Mr Nicholson submits that the failure by  the  appellant
         to mention religious concerns is not something that should be  held
         against the appellant  because  it  is  not  a  real  inconsistency
         because the appellant was not inconsistent by  failing  to  mention
         the heads of his claim when spoken to by the authorities. Whilst Mr
         Nicholson may have a point  I  fail  to  see  how  this  materially
         affected his claim because the Judge spent the  rest  of  paragraph
         [20] explaining why he found his evidence on  this  issue  to  lack
         credibility bearing in mind his own brother had  fled  due  to  the
         same problem. Such a finding ultimately was open to him.

     15. In paragraph [21] the Judge does make findings that  appear  to  be
         based on his own opinion but the nature of  those  findings  whilst
         clearly relevant do not ultimately lead the  Judge  to  reject  his
         claim. His findings on the  amount  of  books  downloaded  and  the
         circumstances of  his  downloading  are  clearly  findings  he  was
         entitled to make in light of the fact he heard the  appellant  give
         his evidence. The Judge found he displayed a limited  knowledge  of
         his favourite book and whether  that  book  was  one  of  the  most
         famously cited banned books or  not  does  not  alter  the  Judge's
         findings on the appellant's own actions.

     16. Mr McVeety accepted that there was some speculation in the  Judge's
         findings but significantly there has been no challenge  brought  to
         any of the findings in paragraphs [22]  and  [23].  Those  findings
         reject the appellant's claim of his departure, the  search  of  his
         business address and brought into question the actions taken or not
         taken as the case maybe.

     17. Taking the decision as a whole and noting the adverse findings I am
         satisfied that the matters raised by Mr Nicholson were not material
         to the subsequent findings that led to the rejection of the  claim.
         I accept the Judge makes adverse findings in  paragraphs  [20]  and
         [21] but major parts of his claim are rejected in  paragraphs  [22]
         and [23] and I am satisfied that the adverse  credibility  findings
         were open to him. The Judge concluded he had no adverse profile  in
         Iran and following  the  latest  country  guidance  decision  I  am
         satisfied there was no risk of persecution.

         DECISION

     18. There was no material error and I uphold the original decision.




    Signed:      Dated:


    [pic]
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD

    No fee award is made.




    Signed Dated


     [pic]
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
