
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/05833/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th May 2016                              |On 1st June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            MR MAKINTHAN PALKANES
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grimmett, promulgated on 15th March 2016, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 11th March 2016.  In the determination, the
    judge allowed the appeal of the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was born  on  30th
    August 1991.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated
    13th March 2015, to refuse to grant him asylum and to remove  him  from
    the United Kingdom under Section 10 of the immigration and  Asylum  Act
    1999.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he left Sri Lanka on 22nd  November  2013
    and arrived in the UK some eleven days later using  a  false  passport.
    He states that in January 2009 he was taken by force by  the  LTTE  who
    required one member from each household to join them.  The  Appellant's
    elder brother had been told to join but he ran away from the  LTTE  and
    the Appellant was taken instead.  He underwent basic training.  He  was
    content to provide food, weapons and carry those who were injured.   He
    ran away in March 2009 because he saw people  being  injured.   He  was
    shot at but managed to escape and returned home.   He  had  no  further
    involvement with the LTTE but in October 2013 he was  arrested  by  the
    authorities because his father had had an argument with a neighbour and
    as a result of  which  the  neighbour  alleged  to  the  CID  that  the
    Appellant had been in the LTTE.  The Appellant was detained for a month
    and questioned about the LTTE.  He denied being with the LTTE until  he
    was tortured where he admitted it after about ten  days  in  detention.
    He was seriously ill-treated.  He was released after his uncle paid the
    CID 2,000,000 rupees.  The Appellant had scars on his  back  from  ill-
    treatment.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge, in what  is  a  comprehensive  and  detailed  determination,
    considered the refusal letter  and  observed  how  the  Respondent  had
    accepted that there was  external  evidence  to  suggest  that  if  the
    Appellant's brother escaped from the LTTE then the Appellant would have
    been recruited.  Curiously, the refusal letter goes  on  to  say  that,
    nevertheless, there should be "particular information relating  to  the
    circumstances you describe" (paragraph 10).  The judge held  that  "the
    Secretary of State overlooks the detailed information provided  by  the
    Appellant in his interview" (paragraph 10), and that the refusal letter
    was "poorly drafted" (paragraph 11).  The judge then added substance to
    this conclusion by observing that the  Secretary  of  State  "makes  no
    reference to the interview and the detailed information provided by the
    Appellant of how he got to the place where he was detained,  the  state
    of the room he was in, the time he was there, what  he  was  asked  and
    what was done to him" (paragraph 12).  The judge also had regard to the
    fact that the Appellant

         "has now produced a scarring injury report from Professor Lingam in
         which he says that although the Appellant did  not  claim  to  have
         been burnt there were scars that were from burning and it is  usual
         for a patient not to be aware when being burned and beaten in  view
         of the agony" (paragraph 13).

    The judge recorded the Appellant's GP stating that  the  Appellant  was
    "having  nightmares  in  which  he  saw  his  parents  being  tortured"
    (paragraph 14).  A psychiatrist's report was also  taken  into  account
    (paragraphs  16  to  17).   The  evidence  of  the  two  witnesses  was
    significantly noted (paragraphs 18 to 19).  In the end, the judge  took
    the view that, "looking at the evidence in the round" it was clear that
    the Appellant had been forcibly recruited and ill-treated, and whatever
    was stated by the Respondent as forming the basis of the  rejection  of
    the claim, "the Appellant has however  dealt  with  ...  those  matters
    explaining that he was forcibly  recruited  to  the  LTTE  because  his
    brother ran away and his  claim  is  supported  by  his  witness  whose
    evidence was unchallenged" (paragraph 20).  In the end, the judge  came
    to the firm view that, "I am satisfied that were the  Appellant  to  be
    returned it is likely that he would be detained on  arrival  not  least
    because of his current fragile mental state which would  bring  him  to
    the attention of those at the airport" (paragraph 20).

 5. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    give any reference to the country guidance case of GJ (Post  Civil  War
    Returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.

 7. On 6th April 2016, permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that,
    "it is generally an error of law to fail  to  follow  country  guidance
    case ..." (paragraph 4).

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 20th  May  2016,  Mr  Tufan,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State stated that  there  was  no
    evidence provided that the Appellant  came  within  a  particular  risk
    category as set out in GJ (Sri Lanka) and the  judge  herself  did  not
    decide what particular risk of categories the  Appellant  fitted  into,
    and in these circumstances there had to be a finding  of  an  error  of
    law, such that the decision could be set aside, for a  re-making.   The
    very  fact  that  the  authorities  maintained   a   computerised   and
    intelligence-led "watch" list did not mean that the Appellant would  be
    at risk.  All that the watch list meant was that he will

         "Be monitored by the authority services after his  or  her  return.
         If that monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a  Tamil
         activist seeking to destabilise the unitary  Sri  Lankan  state  or
         revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in  question  is
         not, in general, reasonably likely to be detained by  the  security
         forces" (see head note 9 of GJ).

 9. Therefore, simply to have allowed the appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant would come to attention on return, given his  fragile  mental
    state, did not lead to compliance with the risk categories in GJ.

10. For his  part,  Mr  Coleman  submitted  that  this  was  a  very  sound
    determination and there was no error of law at all.  There is  no  rule
    of law that a country guidance case needs to be referred  to  in  name.
    What is important is that the judge has followed the guidance  set  out
    in the country guidance case.  There was nothing in  the  determination
    to suggest that the judge had done anything other  than  to  apply  the
    guidance in GJ.  Certainly, it could not be said  that  the  judge  had
    gone contrary to the guidance in GJ.  The judge had observed  early  on
    (at paragraph 5) that the Appellant was  "a  low-level  member  of  the
    LTTE."  The judge had then proceeded along a root and  branch  analysis
    of the evidence before her.  Eventually she had concluded (at paragraph
    20) that the Appellant's claim that he had been forcibly  recruited  to
    the LTTE because his brother ran away, was supported by a witness whose
    evidence was unchallenged.  In  2013,  well  into  the  ceasefire,  the
    Appellant had been subjected to a five week detention period, with  ten
    days of torture (see  paragraph  20).   The  evidence  comes  from  the
    interview and it was summarised in  the  refusal  letter  itself.   The
    Appellant was then released upon payment of a bribe from his uncle of a
    very substantial amount of money.  There were  two  witnesses,  one  of
    whom was  a  member  of  the  LTTE,  and  his  evidence  had  not  been
    contraverted.

11. As far as the interview was concerned, at question  186  the  Appellant
    stated that he signed a blank piece of paper  and  the  judge  accepted
    this.  At questions 203 to 205, the authorities were said to be looking
    for the Appellant, and they visited his home some five  or  six  times,
    and arrested his father, and this is ample proof that there was ongoing
    interest in the Appellant.  This evidence was accepted  by  the  judge.
    All of this is set out at paragraph 21 of the  determination.   Another
    way of looking at this is to say whether there would be any  difference
    at all if the judge had expressly referred to the country guidance case
    of GJ, but had not believed a word of  what  the  Appellant  had  said,
    because the judge could  not  then  have  allowed  the  appeal,  simply
    because reference was made to the country  guidance  case  of  GJ.   It
    might have been desirable for the judge to have referred to  GJ  but  a
    failure to do so was not an error  given  that  the  substance  of  the
    decision had been followed.

12. Finally, what was clear was that the Appellant would be stopped at  the
    airport because of his fragile condition and the fact  that  he  is  so
    distracted and so disorientated.  The judge gives reasons for  why  the
    Appellant would be stopped at the airport.  If that is the case then he
    is clearly going to be on a stop list  and  all  of  this  is  set  out
    property by the judge at paragraph  21.   Indeed,  the  judge  ends  by
    making it quite clear why the Appellant would be at specific risk  when
    she observes that, "it is reasonably likely that he would be questioned
    on arrival and if questioned in the light of his previous ill-treatment
    it is reasonably likely he would be detained  and  further  ill-treated
    ..."

13. The reason for this is that it is particularly the case that,  "at  the
    current time he finds it very difficult to give an account  of  himself
    because of his mental health issues" (paragraph 21).  No one could say,
    and no one has so done, that this was a conclusion that the judge could
    not properly have arrived at.  My attention was drawn to paragraphs 49,
    57, and 65 of the refusal letter which shows how the case of  GJ  would
    fit into the circumstances of this particular Appellant's case.

14. In reply, Mr Tufan submitted that previous membership of the  LTTE  did
    not put a person at risk.  In order to be on the stop list there had to
    be an extant government order and there had to be  an  arrest  warrant.
    Neither of these were present in this case.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA [2007] such that I should set aside the decision).  My reasons are
    as  follows.   In  what  is  a  careful,  detailed,  and  comprehensive
    determination, the judge has clearly applied the substance  of  GJ,  as
    the country guidance case to the circumstances that the  Appellant  now
    finds himself in.  It is not the  case,  as  the  grant  of  permission
    states, that "it is generally an error of law to  fail  to  follow  the
    country guidance case" (paragraph 4) because there is  no  evidence  at
    all that this is a case where the judge has so done.  In fact no aspect
    of the judge's findings on the facts here can be said to be at variance
    with the risk factors set out in GJ.

16. First, the Appellant's evidence that he was visited five or  six  times
    at his home, with  his  father  being  arrested,  formed  part  of  the
    interview record (which was never referred to in  the  decision  making
    process), and which the judge finds to  be  incontrovertible  evidence.
    Second, the evidence that has been given has  been  backed  up  by  two
    witnesses and by other objective evidence that has  been  put  forward.
    Third, the essence of the claim that the Appellant's brother  ran  away
    leading to  the  Appellant's  forcible  recruitment  to  the  LTTE,  or
    supported by his witness, and  that  evidence  was  unchallenged.   The
    judge's clear findings (at paragraph 21) was  that  the  Appellant  was
    likely to be questioned "in light of his previous ill-treatment" and it
    was then likely that he would be detained and "further  ill-treated  on
    return" and this was particularly because "he finds it  very  difficult
    to give an account of himself because  of  his  mental  health  issues"
    (paragraph 21).  This would fit in with the risk factor in GJ  set  out
    at head note 4 which reads that, "if a person is detained  by  the  Sri
    Lankan security services there remains a real risk of ill-treatment  or
    harm requiring international protection."  The judge's finding was that
    the Appellant would likely be detained quite simply because he would be
    unable to give an account of  himself  because  of  his  mental  health
    issues, on account of his previous ill-treatment,  and  this  being  so
    there would remain according to GJ "real risk of ill-treatment or  harm
    requiring international protection."  The Appellant  is  also  at  risk
    under head note 7(a) because he is an individual who would be perceived
    to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state  because
    he will be

         "Perceived to have a significant role in relation to  post-conflict
         Tamil separatism within the diaspora ...,"

    quite simply because he would be unable to give an account  of  himself
    upon return  from  the  United  Kingdom,  in  circumstances  where  the
    authorities would know that he had been ill-treated previously, and  on
    a lower standard of proof, he would be covered by the risk  factors  in
    GJ (Sri Lanka).

17. There are, therefore, a number of ways in which the  Appellant  plainly
    fell within the risk factors set out in GJ and if this matter  were  to
    be returned back to the First-tier Tribunal, upon a finding of an error
    of law, it is difficult to see how, with Judge Grimmett's  findings  on
    credibility being what they are,  that  another  judge  was  likely  to
    conclude that, upon application of the case of  GJ  (Sri  Lanka),  this
    appeal fell to be refused.  On  the  contrary,  it  would  be  allowed.



Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 31st May 2016


