
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05951/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, Newport                 |Date Sent                    |
|On 3 September 2013                           |On 15 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     bV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M C Benitez instructed by Howe & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.   This  direction
      applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and a  failure  to
      comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   Contempt   of   Court
      proceedings.



Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 31 July 1994.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 January 2012  and  claimed  asylum.
    On 2 June 2012, the Secretary of State refused to grant  the  appellant
    asylum under para 336 of Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules  (HC
    395 as amended) and on 8 June 2012 made a decision  to  remove  him  to
    Albania as an illegal entrant by way of directions under paras 8-10  of
    Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

 3. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and,  following  a
    hearing on 10 December  2012  Judge  Sharp  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and under Arts  2,
    3 and 8 of the ECHR.  On  26  February  2013  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Sommerville) granted the appellant permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 4. The appeal first came before me on 17 April 2013.  In a decision  dated
    26 April 2013, The judge had accepted the appellant's account  that  he
    was the subject of a blood feud as the result of a land dispute in  his
    home area and I concluded that that decision  should  stand.   However,
    the judge had  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the  appellant  could
    internally relocate to Tirana  where  the  Albanian  authorities  would
    provide a sufficiency of protection.  My reasons are fully set  out  in
    my written decision and I do not repeat them here.

 5. The appeal was adjourned to be relisted for a resumed hearing to remake
    the decision in respect of internal relocation.  Thus, the appeal  came
    before me on 3 September 2013.

The Resumed Appeal Hearing

 6. At the hearing, the appellant gave evidence in  which  he  adopted  his
    statement signed at the hearing on 3 September 2013.  In  addition,  Ms
    Benitez, who represented the appellant, relied upon  an  expert  report
    prepared by Antonia Young dated 31 July 2012  (at  pages  9-34  of  the
    appellant's bundle).  Ms Benitez also referred me to a  Report  of  the
    Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary and  arbitrary  executions
    report on Albania dated 23 April  2013  and  an  extract  from  the  US
    Department of State 2012 Country  Report  on  Human  Rights  Practices:
    Albania  (19  April  2013).   Both  Ms  Benitez  and  Ms  Everett  (who
    represented the respondent) referred me to the country guidance case of
    EH (Blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC).

    1. The Claim

 7. The basis of the appellant's claim was summarised in paragraph 2 of  my
    decision dated  26  April  2013  as  follows  (I  have  anonymised  the
    appellant and other potentially identifying information):

         "The appellant's claim for  asylum  is  based  upon  a  blood  feud
         between his family and a neighbouring family (the N family) in  his
         village in [ ] District in Albania.  The appellant and  his  mother
         lived with his uncle and family.  The appellant's father  had  died
         shortly after the appellant was born.  The appellant claimed that a
         dispute had arisen between his family and  the  N  family  who  had
         bought land next to theirs at the end  of  2009.   In  2010  the  N
         family had built a house on the land and wanted to build more.  The
         appellant's family  claimed  that  the  land  was  theirs  and  the
         appellant's family confronted  members  of  the  N  family.   In  a
         confrontation the appellant's uncle stabbed and killed one of the N
         family.  A few days later the N family announced a blood  feud  and
         that the appellant was a target.  Attempts were made to exclude the
         appellant from the feud involving a reconciliation organisation and
         offers of land.  These were, unsuccessful  and  the  appellant  was
         required to stay indoors at all times.   The  family  continued  to
         received threats and his uncle's wife decided at the  beginning  of
         2011 to return to her parents' home with her daughter.  At the  end
         of 2011, they decided to leave and the appellant was taken  to  his
         maternal uncle's home in Tirana.  He stayed there for about a month
         when his uncle told him that he had seen a member of the  N  family
         near the house.  His uncle said that  the  appellant  should  leave
         Albania and on 20 January 2012, he travelled  by  van  and  car  to
         France.  He arrived in the  UK  on  23  January  2012  and  claimed
         asylum."

 8. In his most recent statement, the appellant repeated his fear that  his
    life would be at risk in Tirana.  As  regards  the  continuing  claimed
    threat from the N family, the appellant says this at paras 3-5  of  his
    statement as follows:

         "3.  With regard to the question of  commitment  and  determination
             and reach of the N family, I  confirm  that  I  have  recently
             spoken to my mother and she advises me that she has heard from
             her neighbours that the N family are still determined to  seek
             out my whereabouts if I am returned  and  indeed  that  of  my
             uncle.  My mother has assured  me  that  my  life  remains  in
             danger if I am returned to Albania.

         4.   With regards to the final point as to whether my uncle  saw  a
             member of the N family near his home, I can only confirm  what
             I have been told.  My mother informed me  that  my  uncle  had
             seen a member of the N family near his home and that  he  went
             to the police on this matter and was  advised  by  the  police
             that the N family member was entitled to drive where he  chose
             in Albania.  He was breaking no law.  That  may  well  be  the
             case but my opinion is that the whole purpose of the member of
             the N family driving close to my uncle's home was  clearly  to
             intimidate.

         5.   I just wish to maintain that as a young man I fear that  if  I
             am returned to my country of origin that my life will  be  cut
             short and I simply ask that the Court  recognise  my  fear  of
             persecution and grant me status accordingly."

 9. In his oral evidence-in-chief the appellant said that the N family were
    very rich people with lots of money who controlled a lot of  businesses
    and had shops and  beautiful  homes.   He  said  that  the  family  had
    contacts with people in the state.  He said that his  mother  had  seen
    them drinking and having meals and lunches in restaurants  with  people
    from the police and from the local municipality.  He confirmed that  no
    one knows where his uncle now is.

10. In cross-examination, he said that his mother had  seen  the  N  family
    drinking in restaurants with others two or one month ago.  He was asked
    why he had not mentioned this earlier and he said that he had not  been
    asked specifically about the contacts.  It was put to him that  in  his
    asylum interview at questions 153 and 154 he was asked whether he  knew
    anything else about the N family and had said, "I do not know  a  lot",
    why had he not referred to their contacts?  The appellant replied  that
    maybe he had not understood the question.  He said that  the  N  family
    bought and sold food.  They bought food from  abroad  and  sold  it  in
    Albania.  He  said  that  his  mother  had  told  him  this  and  their
    businesses were in a place which was about twenty minutes by  car  from
    his family home.

11. The appellant confirmed that his uncle had seen members of the N family
    in Tirana. He had not seen them  because  he  was  inside  his  uncle's
    house.  His uncle had seen them "wandering about in the car".  He  said
    there were two people.  The appellant said that  his  uncle  knew  they
    were members of the N family because his  uncle  knew  them  very  well
    because they were neighbours with that family.   He  said  that  the  N
    family were still "wandering about" and that  the  last  time  he  knew
    about was two weeks ago.  When asked whether the N family knew  he  was
    in the UK, the appellant doubted whether they knew that otherwise  they
    would not be wandering about outside his uncle's home.  He  said  there
    was nowhere else in Albania he could go where they would not find him.

12. In re-examination, the appellant said he was not sure how  many  people
    his uncle had seen - two or three - he was not sure but his  uncle  had
    seen them.

    2. The Law

13. The burden of proof in this appeal is upon the appellant  to  establish
    that there is a real risk of persecution for  a  Convention  reason  or
    serious ill-treatment falling within Art 3  of  the  ECHR  or  a  death
    prohibited by Art 2 of the ECHR if he is returned to Albania.

14. In relation to internal relocation the burden of proof is also upon the
    appellant.  Internal relocation is only  an  option  if  the  appellant
    would not be at risk of being persecuted or at real risk  of  suffering
    serious harm (or death) in another part of  Albania  and  it  would  be
    reasonable (or not unduly harsh)  for  him  to  live  there.   In  this
    appeal, the Secretary of  State  proposes  that  the  appellant  should
    relocate to the capital of Albania, namely Tirana.

15. Here, the risk, if any, to the appellant in Tirana arises as  a  result
    of non-state  actors,  namely  the  N  family.   In  that  regard,  the
    appellant must establish that the Albanian state would not be  able  or
    willing to provide protection against any persecution or serious  harm.
    Article 7 of the Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83-EC)
    states that:

         "7(2).   Protection is generally provided when the actors mentioned
             in  paragraph  1  take  reasonable  steps   to   prevent   the
             persecution or suffering  of  serious  harm,  inter  alia,  by
             operating  an  effective  legal  system  for  the   detection,
             prosecution and punishment of acts constituting persecution or
             serious  harm,  and  the  applicant   has   access   to   such
             protection."

     3. The Submissions

16. I turn first to my assessment of the evidence and my factual findings.

17. On behalf of the respondent, it was submitted that  the  only  evidence
    concerning the N family pursuing the appellant was his own.  Ms Everett
    submitted that  the  trend  in  his  evidence  was  for  it  to  become
    increasingly exaggerated.  Whilst she accepted that  the  questions  in
    the asylum interview  had  not  expressly  pursued  the  issue  of  the
    contacts of the N family, the appellant's evidence was  now  that  they
    were connected  with  the  police  and  that  was  not  credible.   She
    submitted that  at  best,  I  should  accept  that  the  families  were
    neighbours and that the N family bought and sold goods.  There  was  no
    reason to believe that their reach extended to Tirana and that internal
    relocation was not an option.  She relied upon EH at [70].

18. As regards the appellant's evidence that the N  family  had  been  seen
    near his uncle's home, Ms Everett submitted that that evidence was  not
    plausible.  It was not plausible that they would continue to visit  his
    uncle's home and not realise that he had left Albania.   She  submitted
    that I should not rely upon the expert  report  of  Antonia  Young  (at
    pages 29 and 30 of the bundle) who had given  no  reasons  for  stating
    that the ability of the N family to locate the appellant within Albania
    was "high".

19. As regards the Albanian state providing a "sufficiency  of  protection"
    Ms Everett accepted that this  was  a  somewhat  trickier  issue.   She
    accepted that there was a tension in EH between what was said  at  [70]
    and [74(c)] of the determination.

20. Ms Benitez on behalf of the appellant submitted  that  the  appellant's
    evidence should be accepted in respect of the contacts and reach of the
    N family.  She reminded me that the appellant's  credibility  had  been
    accepted by Judge Sharp and the finding that there  was  a  blood  feud
    preserved.  She also reminded me that the appellant was a minor at  the
    time he claimed asylum and was interviewed and that his evidence had to
    be seen in that light.  She submitted that it  was  perfectly  possible
    that a trading,  wealthy  family  such  as  the  N  family  would  have
    connections in local government given that corruption  in  Albania  was
    pervasive.  She referred me to the US Department of State  Report  2013
    at page 2 to support that submission.  She also relied upon the  report
    of Antonia Young at page 33 of the bundle  where  it  was  stated  that
    "everyone knows everyone".  She  referred  me  to  the  report  of  the
    Special Rapporteur at  paras  12,  13,  18  and  22  on  the  continued
    existence of blood feuds and killings as a result.

21. In relation to sufficiency of protection, Ms Benitez  relied  upon  the
    Special Rapporteur's report and also  EH  at  [70]  and  [74(c)].   She
    submitted that if the N family's reach extended to Tirana then  on  the
    basis of EH, the state would not provide a sufficiency of protection.

    4. Discussion and Findings

22. In reaching my findings in this appeal, I have taken into  account  all
    the evidence to which I have been referred, both documentary and  given
    orally at the hearing.  I have also taken into account  the  background
    material to which I was referred  and  the  expert  report  of  Antonia
    Young.  These are my findings.

23. First, the appellant has already been found generally to be credible in
    that his account of the blood feud and his flight to  Tirana  to  avoid
    the N family has been accepted.

24. Secondly, in assessing the appellant's evidence I  bear  in  mind  that
    when he claimed asylum and was interviewed in  March  2012  he  was  17
    years of age.  Ms Everett did  not  identify  any  or  any  significant
    inconsistencies in the appellant's account given since his  arrival  in
    the UK.  Put at its highest, in relation to the  appellant's  evidence,
    her submission was that  it  has  become  increasingly  exaggerated  in
    particular, in relation to the connection that the N family are claimed
    to have with the police and local officials.  Throughout, the appellant
    has claimed that the N family are "businessmen doing a lot  of  trading
    in goods" (see question 153 of his asylum interview).  In his statement
    dated 4 July 2012 he states that:

         "The N family are quite wealthy and have contacts in  a  number  of
         places; as I said in my statement, they are dealers in  goods,  and
         it would therefore be easy for them to trace me." (para 9).

25. As I say, that has been the core of his claim  in  relation  to  the  N
    family's position throughout.  As the US  Department  of  State  Report
    notes at page 2:

         "Pervasive  corruption  in  all   branches   of   government,   and
         particularly  within  the  judicial  system,  remained  a   serious
         problem."

26. The Report goes on:

         "Government efforts to prosecute  officials  who  committed  abuses
         were sporadic and  inconsistent.   Many  government  officials  and
         politicians in general, as well as judges,  enjoyed  immunity  from
         prosecution, and those with powerful business interests often  were
         able to avoid prosecution." (my emphasis).

27. I accept Ms Benitez's submission that  this  supports  the  appellant's
    evidence concerning the claimed contacts between the N family and local
    officials  if  the  N  family  are,  as  the  appellant  claims,  local
    businesspeople buying internationally and selling in Albania.

28. Thirdly, the appellant's evidence throughout has been  that  his  uncle
    saw members of the N family near his  home  whilst  the  appellant  was
    living there in  Tirana.   No  inconsistencies  were  suggested  by  Ms
    Everett to detract from the reliability of the appellant's evidence and
    I do not consider it to be so  implausible  that  the  N  Family  would
    continue to look for the appellant in Tirana without  apparently  being
    aware he has left the country.

29. The possible reach of the N family to Tirana is  discussed  by  Antonia
    Young in her report.  At page 22 of her report, she  states  that:   "I
    believe that the ability of N family members to locate [the  appellant]
    is high within Albania." I do not accept Ms Everett's  submission  that
    Antonia Young offers no reasons for this conclusion.  At page 25 of her
    report she deals with the ability of the accusers in a  blood  feud  to
    locate members of the other family in Albania given its  size  and  the
    nature of its society as follows:

         "Although legally there is freedom of movement around  Albania,  it
         is a very small country with a total population of less  than  half
         that of London.  The size of the country is approximately only that
         of Wales.  With such a sparse population, it is not surprising that
         identities are hard to hide.  It is extremely hard  for  anyone  to
         find  a  home  and  work  without  family  support,  and  virtually
         impossible for anyone living a 'closed'  life.   Therefore,  should
         [the appellant] manage to life elsewhere he would  be  in  constant
         fear that he would be found by N family members.   [The  appellant]
         was only safe while he remained 'closed', a situation  which  would
         not be satisfactory for a lifetime.  If  [the  appellant]  were  to
         return there it is highly likely that N family members  would  find
         him.  Word would quickly spread that he was back in the country.

         In Albania, both the rural and the urban populations are  based  on
         networks of kin and neighbours, in which literally 'everyone  knows
         everyone'.  In a society which is only  just  emerging  from  being
         clan-based, all affiliations and support come only through extended
         family membership.  Outside that, as an Albanian,  it  is  hard  to
         find moral  support.   Because  of  a  high  reliance  on  personal
         networks of support, any Albanian person would be generally  highly
         visible if  dislocated  from  his  local  home  area.   People  are
         socially positioned through inquiries and additionally,  there  are
         strong dialectical differences throughout Albania making it easy to
         locate anyone.   Within  all  towns,  such  information  is  easily
         transmitted by word of mouth, making  it  easier  for  a  bloodfeud
         target to be located.  Such networks are now further facilitated by
         the very extensive use of mobile phones.  Furthermore on relocating
         to any other area of Albania, there  is  the  requirement  that  an
         individual registers with their municipality  of  last  habitation.
         Thus [the appellant] could easily be found.  I would consider  that
         were [the appellant] returned to his home, or that of any relative,
         he would feel forced, from fear, to live  a  'closed'  life.   From
         this point of view, he could be considered to be a member  of  that
         part of  Albanian  society  who  live  'closed'.   I  suggest  that
         bloodfeud targets who are forced to live 'closed' lives in Albania,
         form a very significant social group.  There are even  sections  of
         some towns in which many such families live in close proximity  (as
         mentioned in Section 3, p.16)."

30. Fourthly, at page 30 of  her  report,  Antonia  Young  deals  with  the
    sustainability of such blood feuds, bearing in mind that the  appellant
    left his home village at the end of 2011 and lived in Tirana until  the
    end of January 2012 when he claims family members of N were  seen.   At
    page 22 she says this:

         "The feud has been ongoing for two years, since the  murder  of  N.
         It is very common for low level conflict between  two  families  to
         last for decades before escalation to further murder.  I personally
         have spent time with a family living  'closed'  under  threat  from
         retaliation of a murder 17 years previously; I saw  their  fear,  I
         felt their impoverished lives.  Although the  original  killer  had
         died over 10 years before, the avenging family were still  able  to
         have such a grip on the family that the eldest  son  had  fled  the
         country and  the  other  children  were  prevented  from  attending
         school.  In the recent notorious bloodfeud killing of  the  priest,
         DP on 8th October, 2010 (described above, p.15),  it  was  5  years
         since the previous murder was  committed  (by  a  relative  of  the
         priest)."

31. That evidence is, therefore, consistent with the N family pursuing  the
    blood feud to Tirana in early 2012 and indeed the  evidence  that  they
    continue to pursue that blood feud to the present.

32.  Taking  all  the  evidence  into  account,  including  the  background
    material, I find that the N family is engaged in buying and selling  in
    the appellant's home area.  I accept that  as  local  businessmen  they
    maintain contacts with local officials including the police.  I  accept
    that a member or members of the N family were seen close to the home of
    the appellant's uncle where the  appellant  was  living  in  Tirana  in
    January 2011.  They were searching for the appellant  as  part  of  the
    blood feud which it is  accepted  exists.   I  also  accept  that  they
    continue to pursue the appellant and continue to search for him in  and
    around the area of his uncle's home.  I accept  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before me that there is a real risk that the N  family  would,
    if the appellant  returned  to  Tirana,  discover  him  and  carry  out
    retribution for the death of their  family  member  pursuant  to  their
    blood feud.

33. For these reasons, I am satisfied that there is  a  real  risk  to  the
    appellant of being persecuted as a member of a particular social  group
    (namely a family subject to a  blood  feud)  or  of  being  subject  to
    serious ill-treatment contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR or of being  killed
    contrary to Art 2 of the ECHR.

34.  The  sole  remaining  issue  is,  therefore,  whether   the   Albanian
    authorities would provide a sufficiency of protection.

35. In EH, the Upper Tribunal stated at [70]:

         "Internal relocation will be effective to protect an appellant only
         where the risk does not extend beyond the  appellant's  local  area
         and he is unlikely to be traced in  the  rest  of  Albania  by  the
         aggressor clan.  A crucial factor in establishing whether  internal
         relocation is a real possibility is the geographical and  political
         reach  of  the  aggressor  clan;  where  the  clan  has  government
         connections, locally or more widely, the  requirement  to  transfer
         civil registration to a new area ... would appear  to  obviate  the
         possibility of 'disappearing' in another part of the  country,  and
         would be likely to drive the male members of a victim clan to self-
         confinement in the home area as an alternative.   Whether  internal
         relocation is reasonable in any particular appeal will always be  a
         question of fact for the fact-finding Tribunal."

36. Before me, there was some discussion as to the proper  meaning  of  the
    first sentence of [70].  On the face of it, the  Upper  Tribunal  would
    appear to have concluded that an individual may  only  safely  relocate
    where

         (1) the risk does not extend beyond the applicant's local area; and



         (2) he is unlikely to be traced in  the  rest  of  Albania  by  the
         aggressor clan.

37. In truth, requirement (1) appears to follow from requirement (2).  They
    are, in effect, opposite sides of the same coin.  The risk  beyond  the
    appellant's local area will not exist if it is unlikely that he will be
    traced.  The latter requirement is simply one factual basis  why  there
    would be no risk beyond the applicant's local area.   It  may  well  be
    that the word "and" should (at least in many instances)  be  understood
    as "because" so that the crucial issue becomes whether the risk extends
    beyond the local area because it is unlikely that the  individual  will
    be  traced  elsewhere  in  Albania.   There  must,  however,  be  other
    situations where the risk would no exist beyond the home area for other
    reasons besides the absence of the feuding family's reach.

38. That slight grammatical amendment fits well with what the Tribunal said
    at [74(c)] that:

         "The Albanian state has taken steps to  improve  state  protection,
         but in areas where Kanun law predominates (particularly in northern
         Albania) those steps do not yet provide sufficiency  of  protection
         from Kanun-related  blood-taking  if  an  active  feud  exists  and
         affects the individual claimant.  Internal relocation to an area of
         Albania less dependent on the  Kanun  may  provide  sufficiency  of
         protection, depending on the reach, influence,  and  commitment  to
         prosecution of the feud by the aggressor clan." (my emphasis)

39. In my judgment, the reach of the N family extends to Tirana.  They  are
    pursuing the blood feud with the appellant's  family  directed  against
    the appellant himself.  Ms Everett did not direct my attention  to  any
    background material which suggests that the Albanian state provided  in
    general or in particular to this appellant a sufficiency of protection.
     Clearly, in EH, the Upper Tribunal took the view that despite steps to
    improve state protection in areas where Kanun law  predominates,  those
    steps did not amount to a sufficiency of protection  for  international
    protection purposes.  Of course,  Tirana  does  not  fall  within  that
    description.  It is the capital  of  Albania  and  is  not  a  northern
    Albanian town or village.  The US State Department  Report  notes  that
    for 2012 the "incidents of societal killings ... appeared to increase".
     That report continues that:

         "The ombudsman reported some cases in which authorities refused  to
         protect families or prevent blood feud killings."

40. In her report, Antonia Young deals with the "attitude of the police and
    others" to the feud as follows:

         "The police reportedly responded  immediately  following  both  the
         attack, by [the appellant's] uncle and again following the death of
         his victim, Mr N, but to very little effect.  Aside from whether or
         not they were corrupt, they would not make any effort at protection
         without first there being a serious attack (or  even  attempted  or
         successful murder).  Such protection would be  too  late  for  [the
         appellant].    The   police   are   already   overstretched    with
         straightforward  crime.   They  are  very  cautious  to  avoid  the
         complications involved in bloodfeud  cases.   Although  there  have
         been several national conferences at which there  has  been  police
         discussion concerning how to deal with  bloodfeuds,  this  has  not
         resulted in helpful action on the part of the police.  The measures
         currently being undertaken to address the situation  of  bloodfeuds
         are insufficient concerning the protection of potential retaliation
         targets.   See  also  Section  4  above.   I  should  mention  that
         institutions of the state do not function in Albania as they do  in
         the UK.  It can be extremely difficult even to  obtain  records  or
         receipts, especially from the police.

         [The appellant] would be fearful of approaching the police  or  any
         other authority figure to request such protection, in any  area  of
         Albania, for several reasons:

         i)   He knows how little regard anyone would have of  him  and  his
         claims

         ii)  He knows that such approaches  on  his  behalf  have  achieved
         nothing

         iii) His word would count for nothing, in face of others older  and
         more powerful

         iv)     He would not wish to draw further attention to  himself  or
             his situation for fear of further reprisal."

41. In this case, the appellant is the subject of a blood feud by a  family
    which, on my findings, has connections with local  officials  including
    the police.  I have already noted the level of corruption said to exist
    in Albania.  There is a specific risk directed against the appellant in
    Tirana.  There is a risk that if the appellant contacted the police  in
    Tirana that word might get back (through corrupt officials)  to  the  N
    family as to his whereabouts.  Likewise,  there  is  a  risk  that  the
    police will not be willing to provide him  with  protection  against  a
    family with such connections.

42. On the basis of all the evidence, and having regard to what is said  in
    EH set out above, I am satisfied that the police would not  be  willing
    or able to provide a sufficiency of protection against  the  real  risk
    that the appellant would face in Tirana from the N family as  a  result
    of the blood feud.  For these reasons, the  appellant  has  established
    that there is no internal relocation option for him to Tirana.

43. Consequently, I am satisfied that the appellant is a refugee  and  that
    his return to Albania would breach the Refugee Convention  and  Arts  2
    and 3 of the ECHR.

Decision

44. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and under  Arts  2
    and 3 of the ECHR involved the making of an error of law.  The decision
    is set aside.

45. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds
    and under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR.




                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
