
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/05710/2015
                                                               AA/05711/2015
                                                               AA/05712/2015
                                                               AA/05713/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16th March 2016                         |On 18th April 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     SM
                                     ZF
                                     LA
                                     FA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Fripp, Counsel, instructed by Lester Dominic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. The Appellants are a mother and her three minor  children.   They  were
    born respectively on [ ] 1974; [ ] 2001; [ ] 2002; and [ ] 1995.   They
    are all citizens of Pakistan.  They all first arrived in the UK on 11th
    October 2013 when they were given leave to enter  as  family  visitors.
    They immediately applied for asylum  as  Ahmadis.   Those  applications
    were refused for the reasons set out in the Respondent's Decision dated
    26th March 2015.  All the Appellants appealed, and their  appeals  were
    heard together by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hussain (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 6th July 2015.   He  decided  to  dismiss  the
    appeals on asylum, humanitarian protection, and  human  rights  grounds
    for the reasons given  in  his  Decision  dated  7th  July  2015.   The
    Appellants sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  9th  September
    2015 such permission was granted.

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge made his decision for the following reasons.   He  found  the
    Appellant and her children had lived in very comfortable  circumstances
    in Lahore.  The adult Appellant had  worked  as  a  teacher.   She  had
    distributed Ahmadi literature to close colleagues and  had  experienced
    hostility at work in the  shape  of  taunts,  insults  and  disparaging
    remarks.  However, she had never been reported to the  police  and  had
    never been arrested.  She had never suffered any physical harm  despite
    living in the midst of the majority Sunni  community.   She  had  never
    been deprived of her employment, and her home had never been  attacked.
    The Appellant had never sought protection from the police.

 4. On the basis that the adult Appellant and her  family  had  not  had  a
    particular  profile  as  Ahmadis,  and  had  never  suffered  any  past
    persecution, the Judge found that the Appellants were not  at  risk  on
    return.  There was no evidence that following such a return  the  adult
    Appellant would behave in any way differently  from  the  way  she  had
    behaved whilst living in Pakistan.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Fripp argued that the Judge had  erred  in
    law in  coming  to  this  conclusion.   The  Judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellants were Ahmadis who had suffered some harassment  in  Pakistan.
    However he had dismissed the appeal on the basis that  based  on  their
    past experience  the  Appellants  would  not  be  at  risk  on  return.
    However, the Judge had failed to consider the Appellants' circumstances
    in the context of the  Country  Guidance  decision  in  MN  and  Others
    (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  389
    (IAC).  Indeed, the Judge had not even referred to this decision.   The
    failure to follow a Country Guidance decision amounted to an  error  of
    law.  In particular, the Judge had  not  appreciated  the  contents  of
    paragraph 3(i) of the head note to MN which states that an  Ahmadi  who
    found it particularly important to his religious identity  to  practise
    and manifest  his  faith  openly  in  Pakistan  would  be  in  need  of
    protection on  return.   The  Judge  had  not  considered  whether  the
    Appellants came within this category of risk even if there  was  not  a
    high profile and the Appellants had suffered no  more  than  harassment
    and discrimination whilst living in Pakistan.

 6. In response, Mr Whitwell referred to his Rule 24 response and said that
    the Judge had  accepted  that  the  Appellants  were  Ahmadis  who  had
    suffered discrimination in Pakistan.  However, there had been  no  need
    for the Judge to consider the current Country Guidance  case  following
    his findings of fact which were essentially that the Appellants had not
    suffered persecution in Pakistan.  The Judge had set out at paragraph 3
    of the Decision an accurate description of the  situation  in  Pakistan
    for Ahmadis and therefore had taken into account the  relevant  country
    information.

 7. I do find an error of law in the decision  of  the  Judge  so  that  it
    should be set  aside.   The  Judge  had  made  his  decision  that  the
    Appellants were not at risk on return to Pakistan solely on  the  basis
    that they had not been persecuted  in  the  past  there  and  had  only
    experienced harassment  and  discrimination.   This  is  not  the  only
    criteria for deciding the risk of future persecution.  It was an  error
    of law for the Judge to fail to consider at all  the  Country  Guidance
    case of MN, particularly bearing in mind that it  was  not  in  dispute
    that the Appellants are Ahmadis.  MN examines in detail  the  situation
    of Ahmadis in Pakistan and decides that in certain  circumstances  they
    are at risk on return regardless of whether or not  they  had  suffered
    past persecution.

 8. Having announced my decision, I agreed to a joint request from Mr Fripp
    and Mr Whitwell not to proceed to remake the decision in the appeal but
    instead to remit the cases to the First-tier Tribunal for the decisions
    to be remade there.  I agreed to that request applying  the  provisions
    of paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements.  Further evidence as to
    future  persecution  of  Ahmadis  in  Pakistan  from  for  example  the
    Appellants themselves and the Ahmadiyya Association is necessary.

Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside that decision.

    I remit the appeals to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision in  the
    appeal to be remade there.

Anonymity

10. The First-tier Tribunal made  an  order  for  anonymity  which  in  the
    circumstances I continue.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
