
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05283/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 February 2016                  |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                    N P Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel instructed by ROCK Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms S  Sreerahman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade dated 20 January 2016.  The
    appeal relates to  a  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Khawar
    whereby a Decision was promulgated on 14 December 2015.  The  Judge  at
    the First-tier Tribunal had dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum  and  all
    other grounds.

2.    The Appellant had appealed against  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision and relied on, in reality, grounds which  can  be  encompassed
    and summarised as follows:
    (1)    The Judge had failed to place the Appellant's claim in the
         context of the background evidence; and
    (2)    The Judge had taken into account irrelevant matters.

3.    In readiness for this appeal the  Respondent  had  lodged  a  Rule  24
    reply dated 3 February 2016.

4.    At the hearing  before  me  today  after  brief  submissions  from  Ms
    Akinbolu, Ms Sreeraman said she relied on the Rule 24 Reply and had  no
    more to add.

5.    The Appellant's  skeleton  argument  in  readiness  for  this  hearing
    highlights that there was an expert report from Dr Kakhki. That  was  a
    specific and detailed report  but  it  was  only  at  the  end  of  the
    decision, once adverse credibility findings had already been made, that
    the Judge then considered the  expert  report.  The  dismissal  of  the
    report in this manner by the Judge is  said  to  be  an  error  of  law
    because in fact the report corroborated the Appellant's  account  of  a
    risk on return of forced marriage and more generally in respect of  the
    plausibility of the account.

6.    In so far as Ground Two was concerned the Judge had  taken  irrelevant
    matters into account, such as the Appellant having been  able  to  take
    weekend trips into account in his decision making.

7.    The Respondent's Rule 24 Reply submits that the Judge  had  looked  at
    the evidence and that it was not likely  that  the  Appellant's  father
    would force the Appellant into  an  unsuitable  marriage  for  his  own
    financial gain. The Appellant's father was wealthy  was  evidence  from
    the Appellant herself. The findings were open to the Judge it was  said
    and her claim was found to run contrary to the background evidence.

8.    I can understand why the stance taken by  the  Respondent  during  the
    hearing before me was taken. In my judgment it is quite clear that  the
    expert report in this  case  was  a  specific  and  relevant  piece  of
    evidence that should  have  been  used  as  a  tool  in  assessing  the
    Appellant's credibility and that it was not sufficient  to  reject  the
    expert report after the fact finding had been  virtually  completed.  I
    agree with the Appellant's submission that it means  that  the  Judge's
    decision and reasons are fundamentally flawed. Even if that was not the
    only error of law, the assumptions made that wealthier  Iranians  would
    not apply tradition,  culture  or  that  they  would  not  follow  more
    orthodox views about the marriage of women does indeed appear  to  have
    been impermissible findings well beyond what was raised in  the  expert
    report and beyond a proper reading of the background material.

9.    Accordingly I conclude that the grounds of  appeal  are  made  out.  I
    therefore set aside the  Judge's  decision.  The  parties  had  jointly
    submitted that the appropriate course, if I had found  there  to  be  a
    material error of law, was for the matter to be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for it to be re-heard by a different Judge.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law and is set aside.

The appeal shall be re-heard at the First-tier Tribunal.

An anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date: 22 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
