
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05755/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Belfast                              |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 25 June 2015                               |On 17 September 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  LING CHEN

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S. McTaggart, Counsel, instructed by John Fahy &
Co Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    I refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of China born  on  12  November  1989.   She
    arrived in the UK in May or June 2012 and claimed asylum on 27 February
    2014.  That claim was refused and a decision taken on 22 July  2014  to
    remove the appellant under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act
    1999.

 3. She appealed against that decision and her appeal  came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S.T. Fox at a hearing  on  20  November  2014.   He
    dismissed the appeal under the Refugee Convention, under Articles 2 and
    3 of the ECHR and under the Immigration Rules.  However, the appeal was
    allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant and her  husband  gave  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  There was evidence that the appellant and her husband have a
    child, born in September 2014 who is a British citizen by reason of the
    appellant's husband having indefinite leave to remain.

 5. It is implicit from the determination at [14] that Judge Fox found that
    the appellant's husband runs a successful business, and  has  done  for
    some years.  He found that the appellant's brother, the  appellant  and
    their child and her husband's family all live together.

 6. He rejected the appellant's claim to fear persecution on account of her
    Christian religion if she were to be returned to China.   His  findings
    in this regard have not been challenged on behalf of the  appellant  by
    way of cross-appeal.

 7. In relation to Article 8 it was found that the  appellant  is  in  good
    health, as is  her  husband  and  child.   Account  was  taken  of  the
    relatively short period of time that the appellant had been married and
    living in the UK as well as what  was  stated  to  be  the  "precarious
    nature of their relationship".  He noted that the  appellant's  husband
    had confirmed that he did not recommend that the appellant should claim
    asylum when the issue of her illegal status  in  the  UK  first  became
    known to him.

 8. It was found that the appellant's husband's immediate family  currently
    live in the UK although he has extended family still in China  whom  he
    visits regularly, that family consisting of uncles, aunts and  cousins.
    In addition, the appellant has family in China.

 9. It was further  concluded  that  the  appellant's  husband  would  have
    difficulty relocating his business to China if he had  to  return  with
    the appellant, and difficulty securing accommodation "and starting over
    again".  It was also found that the appellant  may  have  support  from
    family in China "but there is no guarantee of this".

10. Again, referring to her husband's business it was  noted  that  it  had
    taken at least three years to establish it.

11. So far as the appellant's child is concerned, it was accepted  that  he
    is a British citizen and that his best interests  are  to  remain  with
    both  parents.   He  concluded  that  the  child  has   a   "legitimate
    expectation" of receiving an education in the  UK  as  well  as  having
    access to the medical and social benefits that citizenship brings  with
    it.

12. Ultimately, it was concluded that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be
    disproportionate to  the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  immigration
    control.




    The grounds and submissions

13. In summary, the respondent contends in the grounds that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was wrong to allow  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
    decision in Zambrano [2011] EUECJ  C-34/09,  which  was  seemingly  the
    determinative factor. The grounds rely on the decision  in  Harrison  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1736.  There
    was no reason why the appellant's child would be unable  to  remain  in
    the UK with his father whilst the appellant returned to China  to  seek
    entry clearance as a spouse. The grounds assert that 92% of  settlement
    applications are decided within 30 days.

14. In the absence of  any  legitimate  basis  for  reliance  on  Zambrano,
    inadequate reasons were given for finding that the appellant's  removal
    would be  disproportionate.   A  number  of  factors  at  [26]  of  the
    determination actually point to the opposite conclusion.

15. Furthermore, there is no reference  in  the  determination  to  Section
    117B(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002
    Act") in terms of little weight to be given to  a  private  life  or  a
    relationship formed with a qualifying partner  established  at  a  time
    when the person is in the UK unlawfully.

16. Elaborating on those grounds, Mr Matthews submitted that in fact  there
    was  no  basis  for  the  judge  to  consider  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules in any event.  A  consideration  of  paragraph  EX.1.
    would have dealt with the Article 8 issues.

17. There was no basis for the judge at [25] to conclude that the  decision
    to remove the appellant is "not in  accordance  with  the  law".   That
    error  would  have  coloured  the  judge's  view  on   proportionality.
    Zambrano was an exceptional case and quite different from the one  that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal here.  In this case the child  would
    not be forced to leave the UK.  Paragraph EX.1. is a suitable basis  on
    which to resolve the proportionality issue.  It  is  also  relevant  to
    take  into  account  that  the  relationship  with  her   husband   was
    established when the appellant was in the UK unlawfully.

18. Mr McTaggart submitted that although there was reference to Zambrano in
    the determination, this was not in fact a case where the  decision  was
    made applying the Zambrano principle.  The proportionality balance  was
    therefore not affected by that consideration.

19. Although there is no reference to s.117B(4) in the judge's conclusions,
    at [10] s.117B is referred to and the judge said that he had regard  to
    it and the other relevant sections of the 2002 Act.  At [26] the  judge
    took into account the circumstances in  which  the  appellant's  family
    life was established in the UK.

20. In reply, Mr Matthews submitted that if the decision is to be  re-made,
    it can be done within the Immigration Rules.  The  appellant's  husband
    is a Chinese national and although he has  ILR,  he  has  relatives  in
    China, as the judge found.  The fact that he has a business here is  no
    basis from which to conclude that family life  could  not  continue  in
    China.  The child's best interests would not be affected if he  had  to
    return to live in China.   He  would  be  able  to  have  contact  with
    extended family there. Nationality is in any event not a trump card.

21. It is also important to bear in mind the fact that the appellant had no
    basis of stay in the UK and her relationship was established  in  those
    circumstances.

22. Mr McTaggart submitted that if the decision requires to be re-made, the
    appeal should be allowed under the Immigration Rules as set out in  the
    skeleton argument which was before the First-tier Tribunal.  There  was
    a need to consider the best interests of the child.  I was referred  to
    the decisions in Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules  -  correct  approach)
    [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) as well as MK (best interests of  child)  India
    [2011]  UKUT  00475  (IAC)  and  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4.   The
    appellant's child nationality, as a factor in  itself,  must  be  taken
    into account.  China does not recognise dual nationality,  which  would
    cause problems for him.  It is also relevant to take into  account  the
    appellant's husband's business in the UK.

23. So far as the Immigration Rules are concerned, the appellant would  not
    be able to meet E-LTRPT.2.3. There are good  grounds  to  consider  the
    case outside the Rules and it would be disproportionate to require  the
    appellant to leave the UK in all the circumstances.

    Conclusions

24. Although Judge Fox  stated  in  the  determination  at  [25]  that  the
    appellant has raised an arguable case  for  consideration  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, as a "freestanding Article 8 appeal",  there  is  no
    consideration of the Article 8 Immigration  Rules.   That  should  have
    been the first step to a consideration of Article 8.   The  failure  to
    give consideration to the Article 8 Rules has in my judgement, led  the
    judge into error.

25. Had there been a consideration of the Rules first, as should have  been
    done, the judge would then have been in a position to explain  why  the
    Rules did not cater for the appellant's situation  such  that  a  wider
    Article 8 enquiry was required.   Allied  to  this  is  the  fact  that
    although it is said in the determination  that  an  arguable  case  for
    consideration outside the Rules  has  been  established,  there  is  no
    explanation as to why that  is  the  case.   The  later  assessment  of
    factors under Article 8  proper  is  no  substitute  for  an  analysis,
    however brief, of why the  Rules  do  not  cater  for  the  appellant's
    circumstances.

26. In addition, although it may be simply no more than a technical  error,
    there was no basis for the conclusion at [25] that the determination is
    not in accordance with the law, when it plainly is in  the  sense  that
    there is 'legal colour' to the decision  remove.  That  is  a  separate
    consideration from the proportionality assessment.

27. Furthermore, there is no consideration in the judge's decision  of  the
    possibility of the appellant returning to  China  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance. Whilst a conclusion was reached that it would in the child's
    best interests to remain with both parents, that finding would  not  be
    undermined by a period of temporary separation whilst  entry  clearance
    was sought.  Arguments based on the decision in Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL
    40 do not absolve a judge from an explicit  assessment  of  whether  it
    would be possible and proportionate for an entry clearance  application
    to be made.

28. Furthermore, although the judge relied on  the  decision  in  Zambrano,
    there does not appear to be any recognition of the principle  that  the
    British citizenship of a child is not to be regarded as a 'trump card'.
    The conclusion that the child is "entirely  dependent"  on  his  mother
    does not appear to be based on any evidence.

29. Although at [10] it is stated that regard has been had to  ss.117A-117B
    and 117D of the 2002 Act, there is no apparent factoring  in  of  those
    considerations within the assessment of Article 8.   Thus,  nothing  is
    said about whether or not  the  appellant  is  able  to  speak  English
    (s.117B(2)).  Although at [26] there appears to be recognition  of  the
    uncertain immigration status of the appellant at a time when she formed
    a relationship with her husband,  there  is  no  express  reference  to
    s.117B(4) which mandates that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
    relationship formed with a qualifying partner that is established by  a
    person at a time when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

30. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did err in law in the
    respects to which I have referred.  Those errors of law are such as  to
    require the decision to be set aside. I indicated to the  parties  that
    if I came to that view, the re-making of the decision was appropriately
    dealt  with  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  to  that  effect  I  heard
    submissions from the parties as reflected above.

31. In re-making  the  decision,  the  first  matter  to  consider  is  the
    application of  the  Article  8  Immigration  Rules.   So  far  as  the
    relationship with her  husband  is  concerned,  under  E-LTRP.2.2.  the
    appellant must not be in the UK on temporary admission or in breach  of
    immigration laws unless paragraph EX.1. applies.

32. For leave to remain as a parent, on  the  facts  of  this  appeal,  the
    appellant would have to satisfy the requirements of  E-LTRPT.2.3  which
    provides as follows:
         "E-LTRPT.2.3. Either-
         (a)  the applicant must have sole parental responsibility  for  the
             child or the child normally lives with the applicant  and  not
             their other parent (who is a British Citizen or settled in the
             UK); or


         (b)  the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives must be-


             (i)  a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;
             (ii)     not the partner of the applicant (which here includes
                  a person who has been in a relationship with the applicant
                  for less than two years prior to the date of application);
                  and
             (iii)    the applicant must not be eligible to apply for leave
                  to remain as a partner under this Appendix.

33. It was accepted on behalf of the appellant that she is not able to meet
    those requirements. To summarise, she does not have sole responsibility
    for her child and the child  does  not  normally  live  with  only  her
    husband.  Under  E-LTRPT.2.4.  the  appellant  would  have  to  provide
    evidence that she has sole responsibility or access rights.  That  does
    not apply in this case.

34. Accordingly, whilst the appellant is not able to rely on paragraph EX.1
    in terms of her relationship with her child, it arguably does come into
    play in terms of her relationship with her partner.   In  that  regard,
    EX.1. applies if:

         "(b)     the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
             with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a  British  citizen,
             settled in  the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
             humanitarian  protection,   and   there   are   insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with that partner continuing  outside
             the UK."

35. Paragraph EX.2. provides that:-


         "For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable  obstacles"
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

36. There is no dispute but that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with a partner who is in the UK and settled.  Her  husband
    has ILR.  The  question  then  is  whether  there  are  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to family life with her husband continuing outside the UK.

37. Although I have found an error of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision, there are certain findings of fact which  are  unaffected  by
    the error of law.  Thus, it was found by Judge Fox that the appellant's
    husband runs a business in Londonderry, which  he  has  done  for  some
    years, and that it is a successful business run with his  brother.   He
    found at [26] that if he were forced  to  accompany  the  appellant  to
    China he would have difficulty in relocating his business to China.

38. He found at [15] that the appellant lives with her  husband  and  child
    "and his family" in the same household.

39. Further findings at [26] are that the appellant, her husband and  their
    child are in good health and that the appellant's husband has  extended
    family in China whom he visits  regularly,  having  uncles,  aunts  and
    cousins there.  It was also concluded that the appellant has family  in
    China.

40. So far as the Immigration Rules are concerned, as already explained the
    appellant is not able to meet those Rules in terms of her  relationship
    with her son.  So far as her husband is concerned, I cannot see how  on
    the evidence before me it could be said that there are  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to  family  life  between  the  appellant  and  her  husband
    continuing outside the UK.  Both the appellant  and  her  husband  have
    family in China. For the appellant's husband China is  plainly  not  an
    alien country.  He visits  and  has  extended  family  there  including
    uncles, aunts and cousins.  Whilst he also has family in the UK and  is
    running a business, his primary family life is with the  appellant  and
    their child.

41. Even if his business in the UK would have to close, about  which  there
    is no evidence, there is no reason to suppose that he would not be able
    to start a new business in china, realising whatever assets  there  are
    in the business in the UK.  Even if he would not be able  to  establish
    himself in business in China, it is not suggested that either he or the
    appellant would be unable to find employment, even assuming  that  lack
    of employment would amount to insurmountable obstacles to their return.

42. I accept that there would be difficulties in their relocating to  China
    but I am not satisfied that the evidence establishes that  there  would
    be very significant difficulties to their continuing their family  life
    together in China, or that if there are, they could not be overcome.  I
    cannot see that within the meaning of insurmountable obstacles in EX.2,
    there are very significant difficulties which would entail very serious
    hardship for the appellant, her partner or incidentally their child.

43. I refer to their child within a consideration of the  applicability  of
    EX.1. because in principle one could see that the  circumstances  of  a
    child of a relationship could  inform the assessment of  whether  there
    are insurmountable  obstacles.   The  fact  of  their  child's  British
    citizenship  does  not  in  my  judgement  reveal  any   insurmountable
    obstacles, even accepting that living in China  their  child  would  be
    deprived of the immediate benefits of  British  citizenship.  The  mere
    fact of a child's citizenship does not, under the Rules or indeed under
    Article 8 proper, rule out relocation to another country.  This can  be
    seen for  example,  within  EX.1.  that  an  appellant  would  have  to
    establish that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave
    the UK, even accepting that the child is a British citizen or has lived
    in  the  UK  continuously  for  at  least  seven  years  preceding  the
    application.

44.  I  have  considered  whether   there   are   circumstances   requiring
    consideration outside the Rules, under Article 8 proper. I  cannot  see
    that there are such circumstances. However, if I am wrong  about  that,
    for example because of the fact of the appellant's husband's  business,
    and the need for a more wide ranging Article 8 consideration,  I  adopt
    the five-stage approach set out in the decision in R  (Razgar)  v  SSHD
    [2004] UKHL 27.

45. It is plain that the appellant has  family  life  in  the  UK.  If  the
    appellant left the UK without her husband  and  child  there  would  of
    course be an interference with her family life with them.  If she  left
    with her child there would nevertheless still be an  interference  with
    her family life with her husband.  In either  case,  that  interference
    will have consequences of such gravity as  potentially  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8.

46. The decision is in accordance with the law  however,  and  pursues  the
    legitimate aim of the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  country  expressed
    through the maintenance of effective immigration control.

47. In assessing proportionality the best interests of the appellant's  son
    is a primary consideration. Those best interests are plainly served  by
    his remaining in a stable and loving relationship  with  both  parents.
    However, their child's best interests whilst  a  primary  consideration
    are not the only consideration.

48. I proceed on the assumption that it would not be in  the  child's  best
    interests to leave the UK with the appellant to live in China,  on  the
    basis that he would be denied the advantages  of  British  citizenship,
    for example in terms of education and access to health  care,  although
    in fact there is no basis for a conclusion that the education he  would
    receive in China or the health care that he would receive  there  would
    be in any way inferior to  that  in  the  UK.   As  I  say  however,  I
    nevertheless proceed on the footing that a child should  ordinarily  be
    entitled to grow up in the country of which they are a citizen.

49. It is important to consider the provisions of ss.117A-B of the 2002 Act
    as follows:
         "117A Application of this Part
         (1)      This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and
             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.
         (2)      In considering the public interest question, the  court or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
             (a)      in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
         117B, and
             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.
         (3)      In subsection (2), "the  public  interest  question" means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's  right
             to respect for private and  family  life  is  justified  under
             Article 8(2).
         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases:
         (1)      The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is in
             the public interest.
         (2)      It is in the public interest,  and  in  particular  in the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-
             (a)      are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b)      are better able to integrate into society.
         (3)      It is in the public interest,  and  in  particular  in the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-
             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and (b) are better able to
                  integrate into society.
         (4)      Little weight should be given to-
             (a)  a private life, or
             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5)        Little  weight  should  be  given  to   a   private life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.
         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable  to deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-
             (a)      the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b)      it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child to
                  leave the United Kingdom"

50. Under s.117B(2) it is in the public interest that the appellant  should
    be able to speak English. There is  no  evidence  before  me  that  the
    appellant can speak English.

51. I am prepared to accept that the appellant is  financially  independent
    on the basis  of  the  evidence  that  her  husband  owns  and  runs  a
    successful business. The  fact  that  the  appellant  and  her  husband
    established their relationship at  a  time  when  she  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully, means that under s.117B(4) little weight should be given to
    her relationship with her husband, or indeed to her private life in the
    UK, such as it is.

52. Under s.117B(6) the issue is whether it would be reasonable  to  expect
    the appellant's child to leave the UK, that provision  indicating  that
    the public interest does not  require  a  person's  removal  where  the
    section applies.  Plainly, the mere fact that a qualifying child  is  a
    British citizen or has lived in the UK for a continuous period of seven
    years or more is  insufficient  to  establish  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  A  "qualifying  child"
    is  a  child  who  in  fact   already   possesses   either   of   those
    characteristics.  Thus, something more is required.

53. What is relied on on behalf of  the  appellant  is,  it  seems  to  me,
    nothing more than the fact of the child's citizenship,  reliance  being
    placed on the decision in ZH (Tanzania).  The child having to leave the
    UK with the appellant would undoubtedly mean that he would not be  able
    to take advantage of the  benefits  that  British  citizenship  has  to
    offer.  On the other hand,  if  he  were  to  leave  the  UK  with  the
    appellant and her husband, he would be  able  to  live  with  both  his
    parents, a matter which is undoubtedly to his advantage.

54. I cannot see on the facts of this case that it could be  said  that  it
    would not be reasonable  to  expect  him  to  leave  the  UK  with  the
    appellant and her husband.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  his
    circumstances  in  China  would  be   particularly   difficult,   cause
    particular hardship to him or mean that  either  or  both  his  parents
    would have difficulty caring for him.  That is not to  say  that  there
    may not need to be some period of adjustment whilst  his  parents  find
    their feet, but as already stated  China  is  not  a  country  that  is
    unknown to them.

55. The question arises as to whether the  appellant  could  reasonably  be
    expected to leave the UK and seek entry  clearance  as  a  spouse  from
    China.  This is not remote from the  provisions of s.117B(6) because of
    the potential for the appellant's child to leave the UK with her whilst
    she sought such entry clearance.  Of course, her son would not  himself
    need entry clearance, being a British citizen.  There would be a period
    of temporary separation between the child and his father, but there  is
    nothing to indicate that that would be for a prolonged period.  In  the
    meantime, the appellant's husband would be able to  continue  with  his
    business.

56. Looking at Article 8 more widely, and in the context of  the  appellant
    making an application for entry  clearance,  leaving  her  husband  and
    child behind, I have considered the decision in Chikwamba. This is  not
    a case however, where the Chikwamba principle applies.   It  is  not  a
    case of simply requiring the appellant to  leave  the  UK  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance purely  for  the  technical  reason  of
    making the application.  In such an application there would need to  be
    an assessment of the extent to which the appellant is able to meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for entry clearance as a partner,
    for  example  the  financial  requirements  and  the  English  language
    requirement.  Furthermore, given that there is nothing to indicate that
    the period of separation would be a lengthy one whilst  an  application
    for entry clearance was sought, I am satisfied that it is proportionate
    to expect the appellant to leave the UK to apply for entry clearance as
    a partner.

57. On any of the scenarios that I have considered,  namely  the  appellant
    and her partner and child leaving the UK as a family, the appellant and
    her child leaving the UK to apply for entry clearance, or the appellant
    leaving the UK on her own to make such an application, I  am  satisfied
    that the respondent's decision  is  a  proportionate  response  to  the
    legitimate aim of the maintenance of effective immigration control.

58. In these circumstances, the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8 of the ECHR is dismissed.

    Decision

59. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  That decision  is  set  aside  and  I  re-make  the
    decision, dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            21/08/15

