
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number AA/05070/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 18 December 2014    On 13 January 2015


                                   Before

                     The Honourable Mrs Justice Carr DBE
               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     GD
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation
    For the Appellant: Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.
    For the Respondent:      Mr.  R.  Reynolds  of  Counsel  instructed  by
    Sutovic & Hartigan.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Siefert promulgated on 3 November  2014,  allowing  the  appeal  of  GD
    against the Respondent's decision dated 3 July 2014 to remove her  from
    the UK.

 2. We continue the anonymity order that has already  been  made  in  these
    proceedings pursuant to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269). Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
    Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings.

 3. Although in the proceedings before us the Secretary  of  State  is  the
    appellant, and GD is the respondent, for the sake of  consistency  with
    the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal we shall hereafter refer
    to GD as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

Background

 4. The Appellant's personal details are a matter of  record  and  are  not
    reproduced here in full in line with the anonymity order. By  the  date
    of the hearing before us the Appellant  was  just  short  of  her  25th
    birthday. She was born in  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  (DRC).
    However,  her  nationality  has  been  a  matter  of  controversy:  the
    Respondent considered her to be a national of Angola, and indeed in due
    course the First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded "that it  has  not  been
    shown on the available evidence that she is a DRC citizen and  that  it
    is most likely that she is an Angolan citizen" (paragraph 45).

 5. The Appellant's immigration history may be taken from  the  summary  at
    paragraphs 2-7 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision:

    "GD left the DRC in July 2004 when she was 14 years of age. On  5  July
    2004 GD arrived in the UK using a DRC passport.


    On 27 August 2004 GD made an application as  an  Angolan  National  for
    indefinite leave to remain as the child of a person present and settled
    in the UK, her father. That application was refused on 15 January 2008.
    Her appeal was dismissed in March 2008.


    On 28 March 2013, GD made an application for leave to remain relying on
    Article 8 of the ECHR. That application was refused on 21 May 2013.  GD
    did not appeal against that decision.


    On 19 June 2013, GD claimed asylum.


    On 3 July 2014 a decision was made to  refuse  to  grant  asylum  under
    paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as  amended)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  to
    refuse to grant Humanitarian Protection and under human  rights.  On  3
    July 2014 a decision was made to remove GD from the United  Kingdom  by
    way of directions under section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999.


    GD appealed against the decision."


 6. Further details of the Appellant's personal  history  are  set  out  at
    paragraph 19:

"- She was born in Kinshasa, DRC [in] December 1989.  Her  father  left  the
    DRC when she was two years of age. Her mother left her when she  was  a
    baby. She used to live with her grandmother in  Kinshasa  and  attended
    school there for 8 or 9 years.
- On 5 July 2004, when she was 14 years of age, she came to the  UK  because
    her grandmother was too old to look after her. She travelled to the  UK
    with her father's friends.
- She was taken to her father's friend's house  in  Lewisham.  Her  father's
    friend, his wife and child lived there. Her father did not stay  there.
    She stayed there for  4  or  5  months.  She  helped  the  family  with
    cleaning, shopping and helped pick up their child from school. She  was
    not forced to do these things, but felt she had to otherwise she  would
    be shouted at. She did not attend school. She was  not  locked  in  the
    house, but felt she could not leave the house as she was too young. Her
    father visited at  the  weekends.  The  woman  in  the  house  was  not
    physically violent to her, but she felt scared. She  shared  a  bedroom
    with her father's friend's daughter and sister. She was  not  paid  for
    helping in the house.
- In December 2004 she moved to her father's house  in  Tottenham.  She  had
    her own bedroom. She attended school from 2004 to 2007. At the weekends
    she stayed at her father's friend's house. This stopped when  she  told
    her father that she had to study more. Her father used to shout at  her
    and on one occasion he threatened her with a knife. She lived with  her
    father for one year or one and a half years.
- In 2005/2006, when she was about 15 years of age, she was taken into  care
    by social services because her father hit her with a chair. She is  now
    estranged from her father. She has not spoken to her grandmother in the
    DRC since she left her father's house in 2005/2006.
- She attended college from 2007 to 2009 where she studied Child  Care.  She
    has been volunteering as an usher at Zion Church in North London."

 7. Paragraphs 40-42 of the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  relate  further
    information concerning the involvement and support of  social  services
    in the Appellant's life.

 8. For completeness we note that, notwithstanding the circumstances of the
    Appellant's arrival in the UK and the domestic duties undertaken at the
    address of her father's friend, there  was  a  separate,  unchallenged,
    decision taken on 18 June 2014 that the Appellant was not a  victim  of
    trafficking for the purpose of domestic servitude: see determination at
    paragraph 21.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found the  Appellant  to  be  a  credible
    witness in respect of her life in the DRC, and also found  her  account
    of events since she came to the UK to be credible  (paragraphs  45  and
    46).

10. The Judge determined that the Appellant was "most  likely"  an  Angolan
    citizen (paragraph 45). It is clear that the Judge did not consider the
    Appellant's claim to be  a  citizen  of  DRC,  or  the  timing  of  her
    application for asylum, to be damaging to her credibility. Implicit  is
    that he accepted the submission made on the Appellant's behalf that she
    genuinely considered herself to be a citizen of the DRC  by  reason  of
    having been born there and having lived there until she came to the UK.
    The finding that the Appellant was most likely an Angolan  citizen  was
    based on her father's nationality. It is to be noted, however, that  an
    enquiry made of the  Angolan  Embassy  in  the  UK  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant by Haringey social services as to how she might establish her
    nationality did not apparently result in any  response.  Moreover,  the
    Appellant has never visited Angola.

11. The Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  asylum  appeal  and  claim  for
    humanitarian protection for reasons set out at paragraphs 49-69.

12. Consideration was then given to the Appellant's private  life  pursuant
    to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The Judge quite  properly
    rejected the Respondent's  case  on  suitability  under  276ADE(i)  and
    Section S-LTR of Appendix FM: see Respondent's  'reasons  for  refusal'
    letter of 3 July 2014 at paragraph 44, and determination  at  paragraph
    75. However, in respect of 276ADE(vi) the Judge found "it has not  been
    shown to the required standard that GD has no ties with Angola or  with
    the DRC. GD has two uncles in Angola with whom she has some contact  as
    referred to in the  evidence.  In  respect  of  the  DRC,  GD  has  her
    grandmother there, although they are  not  currently  in  contact.  She
    speaks Lingala and French".

13. There is no cross-appeal before us in respect of this finding.

14. The Judge then considered the Appellant's case pursuant to Article 8 of
    the ECHR, and concluded that "it has been shown that  the  Respondent's
    decision constituted a breach of  GD's  right  to  private  life  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR": see paragraphs 80-88.

15. Accordingly GD's appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

16. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which
    was granted on 19 November 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish.

Consideration

17. Mr Tarlow on behalf of  the  Respondent  essentially  relies  upon  the
    grounds drafted in support of the application for permission to appeal.

18. The Respondent contends that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
    have proper regard to the public interest  considerations  outlined  in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended by the Immigration Act 2014. In particular,  it  was  submitted
    that the Judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the  issue  of  financial
    independence (section 117B(3)); further,  it  was  submitted  that  the
    Judge erred  in  having  regard  to  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    Appellant had come to be in the UK  unlawfully  and/or  'precariously',
    rather  than  simply  attaching  little  weight  to  her  private  life
    (sections 117B(4) and (5)).

19. The relevant provisions of Part 5A of the 2002 Act are as follows:

"117A  Application of this Part
    (1) This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
    determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
    (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private  and  family  life
    under Article 8, and
    (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998.


    (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or  tribunal
    must (in particular) have regard-
    (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
    (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,  to  the
    considerations listed in section 117C.


    (3) In  subsection  (2),  "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
    question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to  respect
    for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).


    117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
    (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
    interest.


    (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,
    because persons who can speak English-
    (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
    (b) are better able to integrate into society.


    (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  financially  independent,
    because such persons-
    (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
    (b) are better able to integrate into society.


    (4) Little weight should be given to-
    (a) a private life, or
    (b)  a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,   that   is
    established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully.


    (5) Little weight should be given to a private life  established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.


    (6) In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-
    (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
    a qualifying child, and
    (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United
    Kingdom."

20. Mr Reynolds in his submissions  emphasised  the  words  "the  court  or
    tribunal must (in particular)  have  regard...  to  the  considerations
    listed in section 117B" in section 117A(2)(a). He submitted  that  such
    language indicated that the 'considerations' were matters to  be  taken
    into account "in considering the public interest  question",  but  were
    not thereby determinative of it, or determinative of where the  overall
    proportionality balance lay on the facts of  any  particular  case.  We
    accept that submission as being consistent with the plain and  ordinary
    meaning of the statutory words.

21. Moreover, in our  judgement  the  words  "in  particular"  are  clearly
    indicative of the 'considerations' in section 117B not  being  intended
    as an exhaustive list of relevant considerations.

22.  In  the  premises,  the   'considerations'   are   not   determinative
    requirements, and do not constitute  an  exhaustive  list  of  relevant
    factors to which regard is to be had in evaluating the public  interest
    or proportionality under Article 8.

23. The First-tier Tribunal Judge plainly had section  117B  in  mind  when
    determining the appeal. At  paragraph  80  he  made  reference  to  the
    representatives' submissions and paraphrased sections 117B(4) and  (5).
    Submissions relevant to the  substance  of  section  117B(3)  are  also
    recorded at paragraph 81 of the determination. The Judge then expressly
    addresses section 117B at paragraph 87 in these terms:

"I have taken into account section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. Although the Appellant entered the UK  unlawfully,  it
    was noted that she was only 14 years of age at that time.  Her  initial
    application as the child of a person present and settled in the UK  was
    made in 2004, and not determined until 2008. During that period,  as  a
    result of the incidents referred to in the evidence, she was taken into
    the care of Haringey social services, and from that time,  her  private
    life began to be established. She has no relatives in the UK, and  from
    her evidence, it appears that she relies on the  continued  support  of
    Haringey  social  services,  and  in  particular  her  caseworker,  for
    emotional support and direction. The requirement that little weight  be
    attributed to private life established when her immigration status  was
    unlawful areas should be regarded in  that  context.  Although  she  is
    currently  provided  with  accommodation  and  maintenance,   she   has
    expressed the wish, if permitted to remain, to become a  social  worker
    here and will therefore contribute to society."

24. Given the premises we have identified above at paragraph  22,  we  find
    nothing objectionable in the phrase "The requirement that little weight
    be attributed to a private life established when her immigration status
    was unlawful or precarious should be  regarded  in  that  context".  It
    indicates both that the Judge had express regard to the requirements of
    section 117B(4) and (5), but also that he - entirely consistently  with
    the scheme of Part 5A of the 2002 Act  (as  now  amended)  -  set  that
    'consideration' in the overall context of  the  Appellant's  case.  The
    scheme of Part 5A appropriately is broad and flexible enough to  permit
    a full and proper consideration  of  all  relevant  matters,  including
    considerations beyond (and not inconsistent with) the express statutory
    'instructions', and thereby to permit a decision-maker to  accord  such
    weight to other factors and circumstances as is appropriate.

25. This is in keeping with the fundamental underlying  principle  that  an
    Article 8 evaluation by definition involves a personal assessment of an
    individual and is highly fact sensitive. Whilst the nature  of  'public
    interest' may be relatively fixed, there is nothing  in  the  statutory
    scheme that undermines the established imperative to  conduct  a  fact-
    sensitive  case-by-case  analysis  of  the  issue  of  proportionality.
    'Public interest' informs only one side of the proportionality balance.

26. We find that that is what the Judge did.

27. We note that in granting permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Frankish suggested the need for judicial guidance  as  to  whether  the
    protection from penalty of a child for a parent's appalling immigration
    record referenced in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of state  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] UKSC 4 had any application in the context of  section
    117B. We do not consider that this is a matter  that  requires  lengthy
    exposition on the facts of this particular case; we consider that First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Seifert adequately and sustainably  had  regard  to
    all relevant considerations, according  them  such  weight  as  he  was
    required to do, either pursuant to Part 5A of the 2002 Act or otherwise
    as he saw fit when not statutorily confined, and reached a decision  on
    proportionality that was open to him on the evidence.

28. Nonetheless we note the observations in ZH  (Tanzania)  in  respect  of
    recent European jurisprudence showing "a much  clearer  acknowledgement
    of the importance of the best interests of  a  child  caught  up  in  a
    dilemma which is of her parents' and not  of  her  own  making"  -  per
    Baroness Hale of Richmond at paragraph 20. See similarly per Lord  Hope
    of Craighead at paragraph 44: "But considerations of that  kind  cannot
    be held against the children in this assessment. It would be  wrong  in
    principle to devalue what was in their best interests by something  for
    which they could in no way be held to be responsible".

29. Further, the best interests of a child remain a primary  consideration:
    nothing in sections 117A-117D alters that principle. Parliament has not
    otherwise availed itself of the opportunity in passing the  Immigration
    Act  2014  to  amend  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2007.  Accordingly,  'best  interests'  must  inform  a
    consideration  of  proportionality  under  Article  8  as   a   primary
    consideration,   notwithstanding   the   identification   of   specific
    considerations pursuant to Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

30. The jurisprudence in this area has developed through cases which in the
    main concerned a parent or parents - often undeserving  in  immigration
    terms  -  potentially  securing  an  advantage  in  immigration  terms,
    notwithstanding poor immigration histories, through the presence in the
    UK of a blameless child. We do not see  -  without  having  heard  full
    argument on the point - that there is anything in the scheme of Part 5A
    that now denies a place for having regard to the lack of culpability of
    a child. This does not mean that the wider public  interest  could  not
    justify a non-culpable individual  being  the  subject  of  an  adverse
    decision, or being indirectly affected by such a decision in respect of
    a relative: it will entirely depend on the particular circumstances  of
    the case.

31. Be that as it may,  in  commenting  upon  the  particular  position  of
    children we have not lost sight of the fact that the current appeal  is
    concerned with an adult. In our judgement her lack of  culpability  for
    her unfortunate  immigration  history  when  a  child  was  a  relevant
    consideration in the overall proportionality balance, and one to  which
    the Judge was entitled to have due regard. Moreover, that was only part
    of the case. What the Judge has clearly given particular weight  to  is
    the quality of the Appellant's private life established in the  UK  and
    the achievement of stability from very difficult origins and the  abuse
    of her father, (see especially paragraph 86), and necessarily therefore
    the extent of interference with the Appellant's private  life  inherent
    in a removal to a country which the Appellant has never visited.

32. In reaching his conclusion we consider the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    gave  very  careful  consideration  to  all   relevant   circumstances,
    including in particular the public interest, and we do not  accept  the
    basis of the Respondent's challenge  that  the  Judge  failed  to  have
    proper and due regard to section 117B of the 2002 Act.

33. We acknowledge there is substance  to  the  criticism  of  the  Judge's
    comment to the effect that the Appellant's ambition to become a  social
    worker was such that she "will" therefore contribute to society. We  do
    not  consider  that  the  Judge  is  to  be   criticised   for   having
    consideration   to   possible   future   circumstances:   because   the
    'proportionality' assessment is concerned with the impact of the public
    interest if an  applicant  or  appellant  is  permitted  to  remain  it
    necessarily has a prospective element. However, because the Appellant's
    identified  future  contribution  to  society  was  contingent  on  the
    Appellant achieving her ambition, the Judge should more  properly  have
    stated that the Appellant "may" contribute to society. Nonetheless,  in
    the  overall  context  of  the  particular   proportionality   exercise
    conducted by the Judge in this case, we are not persuaded that what has
    every appearance of being a grammatical  slip  amounts  to  a  material
    error of law such as to impugn the Judge's conclusion.

34. In all of the circumstances we reject the Respondent's challenge to the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The  decision  of  Judge  Siefert
    contained no errors of law and therefore stands.

Notice of Decision

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material errors of
    law and stands.  The Secretary of State's challenge is dismissed.

36. GD's appeal remains allowed on human rights grounds.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     11 January 2015
