
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05980/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2015                      |On 22 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     FS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  me  to
    rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 5  January  1987.
    She claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom  on  14  January  2014
    with her three children.  On 24 January  2014,  the  appellant  claimed
    asylum.  She claimed that her husband's family had been involved  in  a
    blood feud in Albania and that she had been trafficked to the UK.

 3. On 29 July 2014, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum, for humanitarian protection and that her removal to Albania
    would breach Arts 2,3 or 8  of  the  ECHR.   On  that  date  also,  the
    Secretary of State made a decision to remove the appellant  by  way  of
    directions.

The Appeal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated  on  12  January  2015,  Judge  Maciel  made   an   adverse
    credibility finding and rejected the appellant's account that she would
    be at risk on return to Albania.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on four
    grounds essentially arguing that  the  judge  had  failed  properly  to
    consider the appellant's claim to be a victim of trafficking.

 6. On 6 February 2015, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Grant-Hutchison)
    granted the appellant permission to appeal on those grounds.

 7. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Appellant's Grounds

 8. Ms Capel, who represented the appellant, relied upon the  four  grounds
    upon which permission to appeal had been granted.   These  grounds  all
    challenge the judge's rejection of the appellant's claim to be at  risk
    on return to Albania as a victim of trafficking.  Ground 1 argues  that
    the judge had made no finding as to whether the appellant was, in fact,
    a victim of trafficking.  Ground 2 argues  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the issue of trafficking within the relevant legal  framework,
    including Directive 2011/36/EU dealing  with  victims  of  trafficking.
    Ground 3 argues that the judge  had  made  a  number  of  "speculative"
    findings in paras 30, 31,  33  and  34  in  rejecting  the  appellant's
    account and evidence  relating  to  her  trafficking  claim.   Finally,
    Ground 4 argues that the judge had wrongly failed to take into  account
    the report of a trafficking expert, Ms Thullesen simply  on  the  basis
    that the expert, unlike the judge, had not had the  benefit  of  seeing
    the appellant cross-examined.

 9. On their face, as I have said, these four grounds  only  challenge  the
    judge's decision in respect of the appellant's claim to be a victim  of
    trafficking.

10. In her oral submissions, Ms Capel sought to also challenge the  judge's
    adverse finding  that  the  appellant  had  not  established  that  her
    husband's family had been involved in a blood feud.   Ms  Capel  sought
    permission to amend the grounds of appeal to include  two  new  grounds
    which, after a short adjournment, she provided in writing.  I will call
    these grounds 5 and 6.

11. Ground 5 argues that the judge's adverse finding  in  relation  to  the
    blood feud involved inappropriate speculation in  taking  into  account
    that it was implausible that only one attempt had been made on the life
    of the appellant's husband in all the  time  they  had  been  together.
    Ground 6 argues that in reaching her  adverse  finding  the  judge  had
    failed properly to take into account  a  second  expert  report  by  Ms
    Landesmann which dealt with blood feuds and which the  judge  had  also
    wrongly rejected on  the  basis  that  that  expert  had  not  had  the
    advantage of seeing the appellant being cross-examined.

12. Ms Capel's application to amend the grounds was opposed by Mr  Richards
    on behalf of the Secretary of State.  He submitted that it was entirely
    inappropriate to raise fresh  grounds  of  appeal  not  linked  to  the
    original grounds some considerable time after the application was made.
     He pointed out that permission to appeal was normally  needed  upon  a
    ground in order for it to be raised and that had not been granted here.



Decision on the Application to Amend

13. The power to permit the amendment  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  as  "a
    document" before the Upper Tribunal is contained in rule 5(3)(c) of the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
    amended).  That power is subject to the overriding objectives  set  out
    in rule 2 of the 2008 Rules to deal with the case "fairly  and  justly"
    including having regard to the factors set out in Rule 2(2).

14. There is much to  commend  Mr  Richards'  submission  that  Ms  Capel's
    application to amend the grounds of appeal should be  rejected.   They,
    in fact, amount a distinct challenge to the judge's adverse finding  in
    relation to the appellant's claim based upon a blood feud.  There is no
    suggestion in the original grounds upon which permission to appeal  was
    granted that that finding, rather than the finding in relation  to  the
    appellant's claim  to  be  a  victim  of  trafficking,  is  challenged.
    Indeed, para 11 of the grounds under "Conclusion" explicitly notes that
    the sole focus of the grounds is on the judge's finding in relation  to
    whether the appellant is "at risk as a victim  of  human  trafficking".
    Those grounds are dated 27 January 2015 and permission was granted on 6
    February 2015.  The new grounds were not raised prior  to  the  hearing
    and both the Secretary of State and the Tribunal were unaware that  the
    appellant's representative wished to broaden out the challenge  to  the
    judge's decision upon which the appellant had been  granted  permission
    to appeal.  The lateness of the application is striking.

15. The Procedure Rules set out  a  specific  procedural  scheme  where  an
    unsuccessful party before the First-tier Tribunal wishes  to  challenge
    the Tribunal's adverse decision.  It is at  the  stage  of  making  the
    application that the person challenging has an obligation to set out in
    as full a form  as  possible  the  grounds  upon  which  they  seek  to
    challenge that decision.  Thereby,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (or,  on
    renewal, the Upper Tribunal) can decide whether there  is  an  arguable
    case and, if there is, the  respondent  to  the  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal has an opportunity to file a rule 24  reply.   Of  course,  in
    some circumstances, additional  points  may  arise  after  the  initial
    application is made or, indeed, after permission has been granted.  For
    example, new case law may cast a different light on the  sustainability
    of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  But, the overriding  obligation
    of the party seeking to challenge the First-tier Tribunal's decision is
    to state the essential grounds upon which it is said that  decision  is
    legally flawed.  The ability to amend the grounds is not to be taken as
    an open invitation to broaden out those grounds  without  good  reason.
    Otherwise, the structural framework for the challenge of  decisions  of
    the First-tier Tribunal set out in the 2008 Procedure Rules may well be
    subverted.

16. Ms Capel was able to offer no explanation why the new grounds were  not
    raised at the time  of  the  application  for  permission  or,  indeed,
    subsequently but prior to the hearing.  The  grounds  are,  as  I  have
    said, late in the extreme and, although their substance  reflects  some
    of the original grounds, they are not directed to the judge's  decision
    in relation to the appellant's claim to be a victim of trafficking  but
    rather to be at risk as a result of the blood feud with  her  husband's
    family.  To that extent, they are discrete. Despite the lateness of the
    grounds, Mr  Richards  was,  nevertheless,  able  to  make  substantive
    submissions in relation to those grounds.

17. Taking all  these  matters  into  account,  and  bearing  in  mind  the
    overriding objective of dealing with the case "fairly and justly", I am
    not persuaded that it is right to permit the amendment of  the  grounds
    first raised at the hearing before me.

18. That said, however, I heard substantive submissions on the grounds and,
    although strictly unnecessary, I will consider them below and, as  will
    become clear, I do not consider that,  even  if  I  had  permitted  the
    amendment of the grounds, those additional grounds are made out.

The Appellant's Claim

19. Before the judge, the appellant's claim was that her  husband's  family
    had been involved in a blood feud since 1990 with a  family  who  lived
    nearby.  She claimed that her maternal grandmother and  maternal  uncle
    had been killed as a result.  In 2007,  the  year  after  she  and  her
    husband began cohabiting, he was stabbed.  She claimed that her husband
    had disappeared in June 2013 and she had not seen him since.

20. That, in essence, was the appellant's claim based upon a blood feud.

21. In addition, the appellant claimed that in September 2013 she, and  her
    three children, were taken by two men who said they were going to  take
    her to see her husband.  In fact, that did not happen and the men  took
    her abroad, travelling through three countries  where  she  was  forced
    into prostitution, before arriving in the UK in January 2014.  She  and
    her children were kept in a house in London where she  stayed  for  ten
    days and was forced to be a prostitute.  The appellant claimed that  on
    23 January 2014 the men received a phone  call  and  left  saying  they
    would be back in five minutes.  The appellant took that opportunity  to
    leave with her children and left through  the  back  door  and  garden.
    They then took a taxi to Bristol  where  a  school  friend,  who  is  a
    distant relative, lived.

22. That, in essence, is the appellant's claim based upon being a victim of
    trafficking.

The Judge's Decision

23. Before Judge Maciel, the appellant gave oral  evidence.   In  addition,
    the appellant relied upon two expert reports of Ms Landesmann  dated  6
    November 2014 and of Ms Thullesen dated 10  November  2014  who  is  an
    expert in trafficking.  Ms Landesmann's  report  dealt  both  with  the
    appellant's blood feud claim and also her  claim  to  be  a  victim  of
    trafficking.  Ms Thullesen's report dealt only with the latter and,  in
    particular, she considered the appellant's account to be plausible  and
    consistent with accounts of other victims of trafficking from Albania.

24. At paras  25-27  the  judge  considered  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    relation to her claim based on a blood feud as follows:

         "25. I consider the other evidence -  the  Appellant's  answers  at
             interviews, the evidence from the two  experts  and  the  oral
             evidence at court together with the  background  evidence.   I
             find that the Appellant was not a witness of  truth.   I  find
             that she had fabricated her claim in order to secure residence
             in the UK.  I find  that  her  assertion  that  her  husband's
             family were in  a  blood  feud  with  another  family  in  the
             vicinity to be undermined by the fact that there had been only
             one claimed attempt on her husband's life in all the time that
             they had been together.  I take into account that her  husband
             worked  in  Italy  and  was  not  in  her  home  continuously.
             However, I find that her own evidence maintains  that  he  had
             returned to the family  home  and  continued  to  live  there.
             There was one claimed attempt on his life in a  pub  when  his
             friend intervened.  However, thereafter  he  was  left  alone.
             This was despite the fact that the opposing family lived  only
             a street away and that her husband went out to work to provide
             for the family.  The situation was never bad enough  for  them
             to leave the area.  The Appellant maintained that leaving  the
             area would not alleviate the problem.  I find that  there  was
             no threat from this  family  as  alleged.   A  blood  feud  in
             circumstances where the opposing family are  actively  looking
             to eliminate the male blood line, would have resulted in  more
             than the one claimed attempt years before her husband is  said
             to have disappeared.

         26.  Further, I find that the Appellant's  inability  to  name  the
             family  in  the  Home  Office  interview  to   undermine   the
             credibility of the claim that there was a blood feud.  I  find
             that given that the Appellant had a son  who  would  become  a
             target and who was in fact threatened by men, one of whom  was
             armed, the Appellant would have their name firmly in her mind.
              I have considered her  claim  that  she  was  distracted  and
             suffering from post traumatic stress disorder at the  time  of
             the interview.  The  Appellant  provided  a  detailed  account
             which  included  specific  dates  and  details  at  the   same
             interview.  She was asked at the beginning of the interview if
             she was happy to be interviewed by a male immigration  officer
             and she stated that it was not important.  I find that a  Home
             Office interview would have been a  stressful  event  for  the
             Appellant.  She would have been aware of  its  importance  and
             keen not to make errors.  I find that it was this stress  that
             resulted in her inability at the interview to make up the name
             of the family with which the blood feud was with.  I find that
             had there been a  threat  from  a  named  family  against  her
             husband and her son, she would have the name of that family at
             the foremost of her mind when being interviewed  by  the  Home
             Office.

         27.  Further, the Appellant's claim that she did not  have  contact
             with her family is contradicted by her claim that she had left
             her ID with her family.  She sought to recant this evidence in
             Court before me when she stated that she had to relinquish her
             ID card before she was issued with a passport.  I reject  this
             explanation".

25. Then at para 28 the judge concluded:

         "Accordingly, I reject her account that her husband's  family  were
         involved in a blood feud.  I further reject her  account  that  she
         had no contact with her own family".

26. Having sought to summarise the two expert reports at paras 7 and  8  of
    her determination, the judge said this about the reports at para 29:

         "I have carefully considered the two expert reports before  me.   I
         am not bound to  accept  their  conclusions  that  the  Appellant's
         claims are credible.  I am entitled to make my own  decision  about
         this issue.  The Appellant's claim was tested  by  detailed  cross-
         examination and I had the benefit of observing this  which  neither
         expert could consider".

27. That, in effect, concluded the judge's reasoning  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claim based upon a blood feud.

28. At para 30 the judge turned to consider  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    respect of her claim to be a victim of trafficking.  At paras 30-37 the
    judge said this:

         "30. I find that her husband did not disappear  and  I  reject  the
             Appellant's account that she was persuaded to leave  with  two
             men to  be  reunited  with  her  husband.   I  find  that  the
             Appellant's account of a journey during which she was sexually
             exploited to be vague.  She stated that she was aware  of  the
             dates as she was counting days and that she was aware of  when
             she was crossing borders because of  the  different  languages
             used.  However, she was unable to state what language the  two
             men were communicating with the 'clients'.   Further,  it  was
             her case that she was kept away  from  other  people  and  she
             would have not had opportunity to assess  the  differences  in
             languages to consider that borders were  crossed  as  alleged.
             Further, I find that it would not have been possible  for  her
             to keep aside 100 Euros as claimed by her which she later used
             to facilitate her journey to Bristol.

         31.  I find that the Appellant's claimed  captors  would  not  have
             allowed the garden door to be left open for  the  children  to
             play in the garden.  This would have brought attention to  the
             children by neighbours.  I find that  the  captors  would  not
             have risked the family being able to escape for  the  children
             to have freedom within the house and garden.

         32.  I reject the Appellant's account that she was able to remember
             her cousin's address in Bristol.  In her evidence, she  stated
             that her cousin was sending gifts for Christmas, New Year  and
             her birthday.  Given that her  birthday  was  in  January,  it
             would have been unlikely that there would have  been  separate
             parcels sent.  Nevertheless, in re-examination, the  Appellant
             sought to exaggerate this evidence and maintained  that  gifts
             were sent for the birthdays of her children also.  I find that
             the Appellant arrived  in  the  UK  armed  with  her  cousin's
             address as she knew that she could  get  assistance  from  her
             whilst she applied for asylum.  There was no evidence from her
             cousin and no acceptable reason for her not to be  before  the
             court.

         33.  I have taken into account that the human traffickers took  the
             Appellant's three children with them on  this  trip.   I  find
             that Ms Thullessen has been candid to  report  that  there  is
             little documentary support of  reports  of  human  traffickers
             taking children of their victims but accept that the immediate
             threat to the life of a child would be a form of  control.   I
             do not accept that this would require the  traffickers  taking
             all three children on this difficult  and  expensive  journey.
             Ms Thullessen speculated that they may  have  been  trafficked
             for their own value.  However, I find that such  a  'valuable'
             family would not have had the luxury of being allowed to  play
             in the garden as claimed by the Appellant.  I  find  that  the
             traffickers would have been keen to contain the family  within
             the house and  to  avoid  the  drawing  of  attention  to  the
             children playing in the garden.

         34.  I do not accept that the Appellant would  have  been  able  to
             retain 100 Euros from a client.  I find that all monies  would
             have been paid to her captors and that any monies paid to  her
             would be taken from her by  her  captors.   I  find  that  the
             Appellant fabricated this aspect to explain how she managed to
             travel to Bristol to D.

         35.  Given the number of issues that I find the Appellant not to be
             credible in, I find that there is insufficient evidence before
             me to decide whether she was of a different  religion  to  her
             husband.  I find that the Appellant does have contact with her
             own family.  I find that her ID card is with her family as she
             stated in her interview.  The Appellant claims that she is not
             in touch with her family because she married  a  person  of  a
             different religion.  I find that she  is  in  touch  with  her
             family which  undermines  her  assertion  to  be  in  a  mixed
             marriage.

         36.  In the light  of  my  findings,  I  do  not  accept  that  the
             Appellant is a single mother and I find that  her  husband  is
             awaiting the outcome of this appeal.  I find that if  required
             to return to Albania, the Appellant will have the  support  of
             her husband and her family.  I find that she and her  children
             will not be at risk of persecution.

         37.  In all the  circumstances  of  this  case,  I  find  that  the
             Appellant is not entitled to  International  Protection  under
             the Refugee  Convention.   I  have  borne  in  mind  that  the
             standard of proof to be applied for the purpose  of  assessing
             the Appellant's fear of persecution is low and that benefit of
             any doubt should be applied liberally in her favour.  I do not
             find the core of the claim to be credible".



Discussion

29. I will deal first with the original grounds of appeal, namely grounds 1-
    4.  Those grounds challenge the judge's decision  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claim to be a victim of trafficking.

30. First, Ms Capel submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  make  any
    findings on whether the appellant was a victim of trafficking.   I  see
    no basis for  that  argument  when  reading  the  judge's  reasons  and
    conclusions at paras 30-37 as a whole.  There, the judge dealt with the
    appellant's  evidence  relating  to  her  claim  to  be  a  victim   of
    trafficking  and  gave  a  number  of  reasons  (which  Ms  Capel  also
    challenged) which led her to consider that the appellant's claim should
    fail.  The judge found, in para 36, that: "she and  her  children  will
    not be at risk of persecution".  Further, at para 37, the judge  stated
    that: "I do not find the core of the claim to be credible".   That  was
    said in the context of the appellant's claim based upon being a  victim
    of trafficking.  The judge had already rejected the appellant's account
    that her husband's family were involved in a blood feud in para  28  of
    her determination.

31. Consequently, I reject ground 1 that the judge erred in law by  failing
    to make any finding in respect of whether the appellant was a victim of
    trafficking.  She did and it was adverse to the appellant.

32. Secondly, Ms Capel submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    reaching her adverse findings on the trafficking claim.  She  submitted
    that the judge had  failed  properly  to  consider  the  report  of  Ms
    Thullesen, a trafficking expert, in rejecting her report simply on  the
    basis that she had not had the  advantage  of  having  the  appellant's
    claim tested by cross-examination as had the judge.  Ms Capel  accepted
    that the judge  had  summarised,  at  least  in  part,  Ms  Thullesen's
    conclusions at para 8 of her determination and also that the judge  was
    not bound to accept her report.  However, relying upon AB v SSHD [2015]
    EWHC 1490 (Admin) at [40]-[41] Ms Capel submitted that  the  judge  was
    required to "grapple" with the expert's opinion which she had not done.
     Further, the judge had failed to take into account that Ms Thullesen's
    report was not uncritical.  She referred me to the report at E8-E56  of
    the appellant's bundle.   Ms  Capel  pointed  out  that,  in  fact,  Ms
    Thullesen had conducted a three and a  half  hour  interview  with  the
    appellant (see para 9).  The "assessment  procedure"  was  set  out  at
    paras 12-16.  At para 14  of  the  report  Ms  Thullesen  set  out  her
    experience and methodology as follows:

         "14. The purpose of the assessment is to identify the  presence  of
             key trafficking indicators  and  the  presence  of  the  three
             constituent elements  defining  trafficking  in  Human  Beings
             within the Palermo Protocol (also  relied  on  within  an  NRM
             assessment) namely: Action, Means and Purpose.  Within this  I
             scrutinise the presence of key trafficking indicators relating
             to recruitment, transportation, harbouring, use of  deception,
             force, abduction or coercion  of  persons  in  a  position  of
             vulnerability and exploitation.   Based  on  my  knowledge  of
             working  in  frontline  services,  with  accepted  victims  of
             trafficking, I analyse  physical  and  psychological  symptoms
             commonly associated with exploitation  and/or  trauma  arising
             from exploitation.  I base my analysis of whether a person has
             been trafficked not only on paper evidence and  narrative  but
             also on how the narrative is relayed  during  our  assessment.
             Drawing on my  expertise  and  experience  working  with  this
             client group, I find that this method allows me to form a more
             systematic and sophisticated opinion of  the  credibility  and
             consistency of a potential VoT.  I am  particularly  aware  of
             applying this method, due to my  experience  that  VoT's  will
             frequently withhold part of their experiences due to  a  false
             sense of loyalty to their exploiters  and/or  shame.   I  have
             furthermore come to understand that persons  having  undergone
             situations of significant  trauma  often  suffer  with  memory
             problems and difficulty presenting a coherent narrative".

33. Ms Capel submitted that the report was a critical analysis  based  upon
    the  appellant's  account,  her  behavioural   presentation   and   the
    interviewer's  experience  of  trafficked  victims.   At  para  94,  Ms
    Thullesen summarised her view as follows:

         "94. In summary, based on the documents provided to me as  well  as
             the assessment  I  conducted  with  [the  appellant],  I  find
             significant evidence  from  her  recruitment,  transportation,
             harbouring and exploitation  to  suggest  she  was  trafficked
             through a number of unknown countries into the United Kingdom.
              This, in combination with her behavioural presentation during
             the interview including guilt, fear  of  the  future  and  the
             psychosocial symptoms, leads me to conclude,  through  careful
             analysis, that I  find  [the  appellant's]  account  of  being
             trafficked  plausible  and  her  presentation   credible.    I
             consider it unlikely that [the appellant] has  fabricated  her
             experiences  or  is  feigning  her   current   emotional   and
             psychological difficulties.  This opinion is  grounded  in  my
             experience working  with  survivors  of  trauma,  particularly
             trafficking, and on  my  academic  training  in  psychological
             assessment".

34. Ms Capel pointed out that Ms  Thullesen  had  specifically  considered,
    only to reject, the possibility that the appellant had  fabricated  her
    experiences.

35. Mr Richards submitted that the judge had set out the conclusions of the
    experts, in particular for this purpose Ms Thullesen.   The  judge  had
    considered  the  appellant's  evidence  which  was  tested  in   cross-
    examination and had made a number of findings which were properly  open
    to her.  He submitted that the judge  had  not  failed  to  follow  the
    approach  in  AB.   At  para  33  he  had  specifically  considered  Ms
    Thullesen's report in respect  of  the  plausibility  that  traffickers
    would bring the appellant's three children with her to the  UK  if  she
    were being trafficked.

36. In substance, I accept Ms Capel's submissions.  Whilst it is true  that
    the judge summarises, at least to some extent, the  conclusions  of  Ms
    Thullesen in para 8 of her determination, I am not satisfied  that  she
    has properly "grappled"  with  that  report  in  reaching  her  adverse
    finding on the appellant's claim to be a  victim  of  trafficking.   Of
    course, the judge was  not  required  to  accept  the  expert  report's
    conclusions (see, for example, JL (medical reports - credibility) China
    [2013]  UKUT  00145  (IAC)).   The  assessment   of   the   appellant's
    credibility was one properly for the judge.  However, Ms  Thullesen  is
    undoubtedly an expert of considerable experience  in  trafficking.   It
    was not open to the judge, in my judgment, to reject her report on  the
    basis that she had not had the advantage of seeing the appellant cross-
    examined.   Ms  Thullesen's  views  were  formed  after  a  substantial
    interview, some three and a half hours with the  appellant,  and  based
    upon her considerable experience of the victims of trafficking.  Whilst
    in AB it would appear that the decision maker, there the  Secretary  of
    State, had wholly failed to consider the expert report on whether  that
    claimant had been trafficked, in this appeal the judge, although making
    reference to the  report  both  in  para  29  (the  absence  of  cross-
    examination issue) and para 33 (the likelihood of children accompanying
    a trafficking victim) failed in  substance,  nevertheless,  to  grapple
    with, and give sustainable reasons for rejecting, the expert's opinion.

37. That expert opinion was a  highly  relevant  piece  of  evidence  which
    supported the appellant's trafficking claim  and  the  judge's  failure
    properly to consider it, in my judgment,  sufficiently  undermines  the
    judge's adverse finding such that it cannot stand.

38. In addition, I have considerable doubts whether the  judge's  reasoning
    in paras 30, 31, 33 and  34  are  capable  of  sustaining  her  adverse
    finding particularly in the absence of a proper  consideration  of  the
    expert's report.  First, at para 33 the judge doubted  the  appellant's
    credibility on the basis that traffickers would not  have  brought  her
    three children with her.  Whilst the judge records  that  Ms  Thullesen
    deals with this at paras 99-101, the expert expresses the view that  it
    was "entirely plausible" that the appellant would  be  trafficked  with
    her  children  even  though  she  accepted  that  this  was  not  "well
    documented" but was nevertheless within her  personal  experience  (see
    para 96).  Secondly, the judge offers no basis for what is  undoubtedly
    speculation on her part that the appellant would not be able to  retain
    100 euros from her client, as she claimed,  and  that  the  traffickers
    would not allow her children to play in the garden.  It does not strike
    me as inherently implausible that either of  these  "facts"  should  be
    true.  More significant might have been the appellant's claim that  the
    men left her alone in the house with easy means of  escape  which,  she
    claims, she took advantage of.  That, however, was not referred  to  by
    the judge.

39. Ms Capel relied upon the court's recognition of  the  danger  of  fact-
    finders regarding aspects of an individual's account to be  implausible
    when based  upon  cultural  or  social  assumptions  not  supported  by
    background evidence (see, for example HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1037).
    Whilst this case law  is,  perhaps,  more  concerned  with  social  and
    cultural assumptions about life outside the UK,  I  remain  unpersuaded
    that the judge's "implausibility" findings provide a  solid  basis  for
    her adverse credibility findings.

40. Consequently, for these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge erred in
    law in reaching her adverse finding that the appellant had not  been  a
    victim of trafficking.

41. None of the  original  grounds,  as  I  have  already  noted,  directly
    challenged the adverse finding in relation to  the  blood  feud  claim.
    Even if I had granted permission to amend the grounds  to  include  the
    new grounds raised by Ms  Capel  at  the  hearing,  having  heard  full
    argument on those grounds, they are, in my judgment, without merit.

42. First, it was not, in my view, inappropriate speculation for the  judge
    to conclude that if there had been a blood feud between the  family  of
    the appellant's husband and a  neighbouring  family  since  1999,  that
    evidence was undermined by the  fact  that  there  had  only  been  one
    attempt on her husband's life in 2007 and nothing further prior to  his
    disappearance in June 2013.  In any event, the judge gave a  number  of
    reasons in paras 25-27, which are  not  challenged,  why  she  did  not
    accept the appellant's evidence in relation to the blood feud including
    the appellant's inability to name in her interview the family  involved
    despite the fact that the feud was long standing.

43. Further, in relation to the other expert  report,  namely  that  of  Ms
    Landesmann, Ms Capel also submitted that the judge had given inadequate
    reasons for rejecting her report and, in fact, made no reference to  it
    in relation to the expert's view on the appellant's blood  feud  claim.
    When I enquired of Ms Capel as to what parts of the expert report  were
    specifically relied upon as relevant to the  judge's  decision  on  the
    blood feud claim, Ms Capel drew my attention to only one passage of the
    report at A14 of the appellant's bundle.  There,  in  relation  to  the
    judge's reasoning concerning the single incident involving attack  upon
    the appellant's husband, Ms Capel pointed out that Ms Landesmann stated
    that there were "no time limit on  feuds".   However,  as  Mr  Richards
    pointed out the very next sentence of the report states that: "that  is
    to say that the avenging family will continue to pursue the person they
    consider to have insulted them until they have killed them".  That,  Mr
    Richards submitted, suggested contrary to the appellant's  claim,  that
    there was a certain relentlessness in pursuing a blood feud  which  was
    inconsistent with the appellant's claim that her husband had only  been
    attacked on one occasion.  He submitted that the report,  if  anything,
    supported the judge's finding rather than undermined her conclusions in
    relation to the blood feud.

44. I accept Mr Richards' submissions on this point.  To  the  extent  that
    the report is relied upon by Ms Capel in her proposed amendments to the
    grounds, I do not consider that the judge's failure  to  take  it  into
    account amounted to a material error of law  so  as  to  undermine  her
    adverse finding in relation to the blood feud claim.

Disposal

45. In her reply, Ms Capel invited me to remit the appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  rehearing  even  if  I  only  accepted  her
    submissions based upon the original grounds in relation to the  judge's
    adverse finding on the trafficking claim.  She submitted that the judge
    had reached an overall adverse credibility finding such that no part of
    her decision could stand.

46. The factual findings in respect of the blood feud are unaffected by the
    error of law I have identified.  In those circumstances,  the  findings
    should, in principle, stand (see DK (Serbia) v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1747).   It will be for the Judge on remittal to  consider,  if  it  is
    raised, whether  there  is  any  exceptional  basis  to  revisit  those
    findings which, subject to that, must stand (see  DM  (Zambia)  v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 474).  It will be for the  appellant  at  the  remitted
    hearing to seek to establish she was the victim of trafficking  despite
    the adverse finding on the initial part of her claim.

Decision

47. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

48. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  rehearing
    before a judge other than Judge Maciel on the basis set out in para  46
    above.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
