
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/05702/2015
                                                               AA/06266/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Field House               |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 7th December 2015                |On: 18th December 2015               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     AM
                                     MM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mannan, Goodfellow Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellants are both nationals of Sri Lanka. They  are  brothers
         aged 25 and 38 respectively. They  appeal  with  permission[1]  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge SD Lloyd)[2] to  dismiss
         their appeals against decisions to  remove  them  from  the  United
         Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999[3].
         Those decisions followed the rejection of  the  Appellants'  asylum
         claims.

      2. The central question raised in this appeal is  whether  the  First-
         tier Tribunal erred in law by joining the appeals so as to hear and
         determine the matters together.

         Chronology

      3. AM arrived in the United Kingdom in 2011 with a valid student visa.
         He thereafter made an application for a residence  card  under  the
         EEA Regulations and when this  was  refused  he  was  arrested  and
         placed in immigration detention. He  claimed  asylum  on  the  16th
         September 2014. Detailed reasons  for  rejecting  that  claim  were
         given by way of letter dated 11th March 2015 and a s10  notice  was
         served on the 12th March 2015. An appeal was lodged with the First-
         tier Tribunal on the 31st March 2015.

      4. MM arrived in the United Kingdom in 2008, also  as  a  student.  He
         claimed asylum on the 10th March 2013. His claim  was  rejected  by
         way of letter dated 19th March 2015 and a removal decision made the
         same day. He lodged an appeal with the First-tier Tribunal  on  the
         8th April 2015.

      5. As can be seen, each Appellant  had,  until  that  point,  entirely
         separate immigration histories,  claims,  refusals,  decisions  and
         appeals.

      6. On the 26th June 2015 Judge Obhi of the First-tier Tribunal took  a
         decision, at a Case Management Review, that the two matters  should
         be listed on the same date, before the same judge.  It  would  seem
         from the record of proceedings that this was at the  suggestion  of
         the Presenting Officer.  There is no direction that the matters  be
         linked.

      7. Both matters were listed before Judge Lloyd on the same  date.  The
         record  of  proceedings,  and  determination,  show  that  at   the
         beginning of the day Judge Lloyd invited submissions as to  whether
         the  appeals  should  be  linked.  The  Appellants'  representative
         objected.  The determination records that his reasons were concerns
         about "cross contamination" of the evidence, and that the solicitor
         had maintained a 'Chinese Wall' in  dealing  with  the  two  cases.
         Judge Lloyd decided to hear the cases together  for  the  following
         reasons:
          i) "hearing the appeals together increases  the  objectivity  and
             openness of the process, allowing submissions to  be  made  on
             any  contention  or  joint  evidence  that  might  affect  the
             deliberation"
         ii) both cases raised matters under section 8 of  the  Asylum  and
             Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004
        iii) there were common issues of fact  in  both  appeals,  relating
             inter alia to the brothers' past history of involvement in the
             LTTE.

      8. The First-tier Tribunal proceeded to hear the appeals together. The
         determination addresses each claim separately and both accounts are
         found wanting. The Tribunal finds each Appellant to have failed  to
         discharge the burden of proof and having regard to the risk factors
         set out in GJ and Ors (Sri Lanka) CG  [2013]  UKUT  319  (IAC)  the
         appeals are dismissed.

         Error of Law

      9. Although permission to appeal was granted in respect of all of  the
         grounds raised, before me Mr Mannan pursued only  one:  that  there
         was a procedural unfairness in having linked  the  matters  without
         the consent of the two different Appellants.

     10. His primary submission in this regard was that there had been  some
         prejudice to  the  Appellants  in  that  the  negative  credibility
         assessment made in respect of one brother was simply rolled over to
         infect the assessment of the second. There is no justification  for
         that assertion. The fact that the Judge was already aware  that  he
         had formed a negative view about MM when he came to assess AM  does
         not disclose an arguable unfairness. If MM's appeal had been heard,
         and dismissed, long  before  AM's  appeal  was  listed,  the  Judge
         hearing that appeal would still have had to take into  account  the
         findings already  made  about  his  brother,  were  those  findings
         relevant.   The  fact  that  the  hearings  were  linked  made   no
         difference.  It is apparent from the decision that there  was  very
         little if any overlap between the two  accounts.    The  Judge  has
         not, for instance, used what is said by one  brother  to  discredit
         what is said by the other.

     11. The second submission is found in the  written  grounds  of  appeal
         (drafted by Ms Jegarajah of Counsel). Each of these Appellants made
         a claim to have been sexually tortured whilst in detention  in  Sri
         Lanka. That formed the centrepiece of each case. Both  claims  were
         supported, to some extent, by medical evidence. That being so,  the
         Appellants' individual instructions to  their  representative  when
         faced, on the morning of the 10th July 2015, with  having  to  talk
         about such experiences in front of each other, was that they  would
         feel embarrassed and  inhibited  in  doing  so.  Neither  Appellant
         wished his brother to  hear  him  talk  about  what  had  happened.
         Although this is not reflected in the determination, the record  of
         proceedings shows that this is precisely what  the  solicitor  told
         the Tribunal when invited to make  submissions  about  whether  the
         matters should be linked.  In my view that was  a  clear  and  good
         reason why the appeals should not be linked. Even if the danger  of
         'cross contamination' could be obviated by one appellant being made
         to  wait  outside  whilst  his  brother  gave  evidence  (itself  a
         questionable practice if the evidence being given was  in  any  way
         pertinent to his appeal) this would be of  no  assistance  to  that
         second witness, who would face the prospect of  having  to  discuss
         painful, distressing and  'shameful'  experiences  in  front  of  a
         member of his close family.  I accept that this had  at  least  the
         potential to impede the ability of  such  a  witness  to  give  his
         evidence in a comprehensive, detailed  and  natural  way.  Such  an
         impediment would have obvious  ramifications  for  the  credibility
         assessment.

     12. In contrast there appears to be have been no good  reason  to  link
         the two matters at all. Rule  4(3)(b)  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure
         (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules  2014
         ('the Procedure Rules') provides  that  the  Tribunal  may  give  a
         direction in relation to the conduct  of  proceedings  including  a
         direction to "consolidate or hear together  two  or  more  sets  of
         proceedings or parts of proceedings  raising  common  issues".   In
         fact, as this determination makes clear, there was precious  little
         commonality between the two accounts. The common issues  were  that
         both men claimed to have been  released  from  detention  with  the
         assistance of their father (on different occasions), and that  they
         had both taken part in pro-Tamil protests in the  UK.   Neither  of
         these matters required the appeals to be linked.  It  is  difficult
         to see how the fact that both appeals raised section 8  issues  was
         relevant.

     13. It cannot be said that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  have  the
         power to link the appeals, since the  Procedure  Rule  cited  above
         plainly provides for this to be done. That power  must  however  be
         exercised fairly. The determination fails to  address  at  all  the
         primary objection raised by  the  Appellants  against  the  appeals
         being linked and in doing  so  fails  to  recognise  the  potential
         interference with the interests of justice that resulted.

     14. For that reason I find that the determination must be set aside and
         each appeal remade in the First-tier Tribunal, by  separate  judges
         if at all possible, and at the very least in separate proceedings.

         Decisions

     15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  of
         law and it is set aside.

     16. Each matter is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal. The appeals
         should not be linked.

     17. I maintain the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.



                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                                          7th December 2015.
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 15th October 2015 by Upper Tribunal Judge
Kebede
[2] Determination promulgated 17th August 2015
[3] Decision dated 22nd January 2014

