
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05146/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke on Trent              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2016                    |On 11 January 2017                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     p m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paramjorthy, instructed by KQ Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By an order dated 1 September 2016, the  conduct  of  this  appeal  was
    transferred from Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey who, by  a  decision
    dated 26 July 2016, had set aside the previous decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  His reasons for doing so were as follows:

             "The Appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, appealed against  the
             Respondent's decisions, dated about the end of July  2014,  to
             refuse to vary leave to remain and to make removal  directions
             under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality
             Act 2006.

         2.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Veloso  (the
             judge) who, on 11 August 2015, dismissed the appeal based upon
             Refugee Convention, Humanitarian Protection and Articles 2 and
             3 of the ECHR grounds.

         3.   In a nutshell, the Appellant claimed to have been detained  by
             the Sri Lankan authorities, seriously  ill-treated,  signed  a
             confession and released on payment of a bribe. She came to the
             United Kingdom.  Her fears on return were that her history and
             past conduct would draw her to further adverse attention  from
             the Sri Lankan authorities and lead to further  ill-treatment.
             Her claim was rejected by the  judge  who,  in  the  decision,
             raised three particular points which have been the subject  of
             argument and show the judge made errors of law.

         4.   First, it was said that the judge wrongly had picked  up  upon
             differences in account that the Appellant had given as to whom
             she had disclosed her LTTE interests and those of  her  father
             which, it was said, was not credible; a view  with  which  the
             judge agreed.   Secondly, it was said  that  the  opinions  on
             scarring formed by Professor Lingham, in his report,  dated  1
             November 2012, did not confirm the nature  of  injuries  being
             particular burns as opposed to other physical  injuries  of  a
             non-scarring kind which the Appellant had been  said  to  have
             sustained when detained in  Colombo.   The  ill-treatment  was
             said to have  included  being  beaten  with  batons,  slapped,
             kicked with booted feet and  beaten  with  heated  iron  rods.
             Those injuries were said to have been  inflicted  towards  the
             end of August or the beginning of September 2012.

         5.   The report of Professor Lingham identified (page 26) his  view
             and opinion that the scarring, particularly  with  regards  to
             scars 2 and 4, were inflicted between  about  three  to  eight
             weeks prior to the examination and in respect of scars  1  and
             3, some eight weeks before his examination which he  said  was
             consistent with the history given by the Appellant.  Professor
             Lingham in his opinion ruled  out  the  possibility  that  the
             burns scarring  was  caused  by  self-inflicted  means  simply
             because in his judgment the scars are located in an area which
             were not reachable by her.

         6.   Professor Lingham also concluded that these scars had not been
             inflicted deliberately in order to  mislead.   Thirdly,  there
             was no other medical condition likely to cause such scarring.

         7.   Finally, he considered if the accidents or wounds or childhood
             injuries could have otherwise caused scarring, although  these
             were denied by the Appellant.  At page  36  Professor  Lingham
             said that he could not  say  for  certain  when  the  scarring
             occurred  but  found  no  reason  from  what  he,  presumably,
             examined and the history given to conclude that  the  scarring
             did not occur when it was claimed.  He, as  has  been  pointed
             out, described those scarrings as "typical"  i.e.  of  a  kind
             usually found for the type of trauma claimed albeit there were
             other possible causes; although  as  the  report  noted,  self
             infliction was not in his view a likely cause.

         8.   The judge rejected the opinion although the reasoning given is
             pretty sparse and based upon  the  judge's  assumption  as  to
             whether it  was  possible  for  those  injuries  to  be  self-
             inflicted.

         9.   The further ground of challenge was the extent  to  which  the
             Appellant fell within GJ risk categories.

         10.  Having heard the submissions I am  reminded  that  the  appeal
             which has been undertaken on one previous occasion and led  to
             it being remade.  It is a matter of regret therefore that such
             time and uncertainties have arisen.  The difficulty  comes  in
             the assessment of the differences in the Appellant's  accounts
             and their materiality which did not necessarily  detract  from
             the claim to have been arrested and detained and  ill-treated.
             The wider assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the  claim  is
             coloured by the judge's conclusion that the Appellant was  not
             detained at all.  Equally, since the Appellant was claiming to
             have signed a confession, it is unfortunate that the judge has
             made no reference to that basis  of  fear  on  return.  It  is
             perhaps less than anxious scrutiny of the credibility  of  the
             claim to have been  injured  and  detained  or  because  of  a
             difference in  account  concerning  the  relationship  of  the
             Appellant with a person called Malathy.

         11.  I am left ultimately with an unsatisfactory decision where  it
             is possible to say that  the  decision  is  just  sustainable.
             Given the nature of the risk  that  is  relied  upon  and  the
             claimed continuing adverse interest taken by  the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities, it seemed to me that it would be a bold course to
             simply conclude that  if remade the same decision  would  have
             been arrived at.

         12.  It is correct to say that the  judge  did  look  at  the  risk
             categories identified in the case  of  GJ  [2013]  UKUT  00319
             (IAC) but it seemed to  me  that  that  contemplation  of  the
             significance   of   the   GJ   categories   was    essentially
             consequential upon what facts are actually found,  adverse  or
             otherwise, and reasoned by a judge.

         13.  In the circumstances although it may be that the same  outcome
             is reached, that is for another day  and  I  express  no  view
             whatsoever upon that decision.  Accordingly I am satisfied the
             Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.   The  matter  will
             have to be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

         Directions

         (1)  List before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

         (2)  First available date

         (3)  Time estimate: 3 hours.

         (4)  No findings of fact to stand.

         (5)  The issues are all those that  formed  the  substance  of  the
             claim previously.

         (6)  Any further documents relied upon in support of the appeal  to
             be lodged not less than 10 days before the date of any further
             hearing and to be served  on  the  IAC  and  the  Home  Office
             Presenting Unit Specialist Appeal teams.

         (7)  Relist in Nottingham if possible."

 2. The resumed hearing took place at Stoke on Trent  on  5  October  2016.
    The burden of proof in the appeal is on the appellant and the  standard
    of proof is whether there is a real risk that the appellant will suffer
    ill-treatment or persecution upon her return to Sri Lanka.

 3. I heard evidence from the  appellant  and  also  from  the  appellant's
    husband.  Each  witness  adopted  their  written  statements  as  their
    evidence-in-chief.  The witnesses were cross-examined briefly Mr Bates.

 4. The core of the appellant's claim was that she returned to India, where
    she had been living, to Sri Lanka in August 2012 and was then  arrested
    by the Sri Lankan authorities  and  tortured.   A  bribe  was  paid  by
    relatives for her release which occurred  on  2  September  2012.   The
    appellant then left to travel to the United Kingdom without difficulty.
     In cross-examination, the appellant told the  Tribunal  that  she  had
    informed  7-8  individuals  in  Sri  Lanka  about  her  previous   LTTE
    involvement.  She had been arrested by two police officers on 8  August
    2012.

 5. The appellant's oral evidence was consistent with the evidence she  had
    given in her statement and, in his submissions to me, Mr Bates, for the
    respondent, did not seek to persuade me that she had failed to tell the
    truth.  I also find that the evidence given by the appellant's  husband
    was truthful.

 6. In his submissions, Mr  Bates  stressed  that  the  appellant  had  not
    suffered any problems in Sri Lanka prior to her arrest.  The  appellant
    had left Sri Lanka for travel to India in 1998 although  she  had  been
    back to Sri Lanka in 2006 and again in 2011.  In 2008, she claimed that
    her  family  and  her  sister  had  helped  the   LTTE   by   providing
    accommodation for LTTE activists. Mr Bates queried  why  the  appellant
    would have been tortured during her arrest had  her  interrogators  not
    sought the names of other LTTE members; it was the appellant's evidence
    that they had been solely concerned  with  activities.   There  was  no
    reason to believe that her name would appear on a stop list  or  indeed
    that she was to be monitored upon return to her home area in Sri Lanka.

 7. For the appellant, Mr Paramjorthy referred me to a  medical  report  of
    Professor Lingam.  Mr Paramjorthy submitted  that  there  had  been  no
    challenge by Mr Bates in his submissions to  the  medical  evidence  of
    Professor Lingam and further that Professor Lingam had found  that  the
    scars on the appellant's body were diagnostic of the  sort  of  torture
    (burns) to which she claimed to have been subjected.  Professor  Lingam
    was unable  to  date  the  scarring  given  that  the  scars  were  not
    particularly recent at the date when he examined them.  Mr  Paramjorthy
    submitted that the main  submission  of  Mr  Bates  (that  it  was  not
    credible that, if she had been tortured, the appellant would  not  have
    been asked for the names of other LTTE  activists)  fell  away  if  the
    evidence and, in particular, the medical evidence was strong enough  to
    discharge the burden of proving that torture  had  occurred.   I  agree
    that the findings of Professor Lingam appear categorical as to the fact
    that the application had been tortured although he, of course, can  say
    no more than that the form of scarring is diagnostic  of  the  sort  of
    torture which the appellant claims to have been inflicted upon her;  he
    was unable to confirm that the torture occurred on the dates claimed by
    the appellant or while she was under detention in Sri Lanka.   However,
    I am particularly struck in this appeal by the strength of the  medical
    evidence which, as I have acknowledged above, was not challenged at the
    hearing.  Rather, Mr Bates' submission was, in essence, to  the  effect
    that the arrest and  torture  had  not  occurred  because  it  was  not
    credible that the appellant would not have  been  quizzed  about  other
    LTTE activists.  With  respect,  that  is  to  consider  the  items  of
    evidence in the wrong order; if the Tribunal  finds  that  the  medical
    evidence shows that the torture is reasonably likely to  have  occurred
    in the circumstances described by the appellant, then the fact that she
    claimed not to have been asked about other LTTE activists  is  unlikely
    to dislodge the evidence which indicates that she had been arrested and
    tortured.  I find that  to  be  the  case  in  this  instance.   It  is
    important to consider all the evidence as a totality, that is, in  this
    appeal, the evidence of the appellant  in  her  written  statement  and
    under cross-examination and also the medical evidence.  That  evidence,
    for the reasons I  have  stated  above,  leads  me  to  find  that  the
    appellant was arrested and tortured on the  occasions  upon  which  she
    claims that this occurred, whilst the fact that she was not  questioned
    about other LTTE operatives  is  insufficient,  in  the  light  of  the
    medical evidence, to render her claim incredible or implausible.  It is
    possible that those individual who detained the appellant may have  had
    other reasons for wishing to torture her than to discover the names  of
    other LTTE members; to put it  another  way,  there  is  no  reason  to
    suppose that such torture  is  only  inflicted  in  order  to  force  a
    detainee to disclose the names of others.

 8. Having found as a fact that the appellant was arrested and tortured  in
    2012 as she claims I also  find  it  reasonably  likely  that  she  was
    released by payment of a bribe  in  the  circumstances  she  described.
    There is a great deal of background material relating to the payment of
    bribes in such circumstances.  This brings me to Mr Paramjorthy's  main
    submission, namely that the significance of the appellant's arrest  and
    torture in 2012 is that this followed the conclusion  of  the  conflict
    between the Sri Lankan Government and the  LTTE.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant was stopped and arrested at all would indicate that her  name
    appears on some stop or similar list and that, if she returned again to
    Sri Lanka, her name would  again  show  up;  thereafter,  it  would  be
    reasonably likely that  she  would  again  be  arrested  and  face  the
    prospect of torture or other ill-treatment.

 9. Examining Counsel's submission in the context of the  country  guidance
    (GJ (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)  I
    am persuaded that there is much force  in  it.   It  is  reasonable  to
    suppose that the appellant was stopped in the first  instance  in  2012
    because her previous activities were known to the authorities  and  her
    name appeared on a list.  Such an assumption is wholly in line with the
    background material and GJ.  It could be argued that,  given  that  she
    had been released on the payment of a bribe, the appellant is no longer
    of any interest to the authorities who had not bothered to  arrest  and
    torture her  again  having  found  nothing  of  interest  on  the  last
    occasion.  I find that would be a  dangerous  assumption  to  make.  To
    accept it, one would have to assume, that following  her  release,  the
    appellant's name has been taken off the stop list or that the list  has
    been marked in some way as to show that she is not to be detained again
    as she is not of interest.  It is equally possible that the appellant's
    name remains on the list and that government officers other than  those
    who detained her in 2012 would be likely to detain and interrogate  her
    should she return to Sri Lanka now.  She is known to have been  a  LTTE
    activist in the past, and, significantly, her interrogators are  likely
    to know that she has been living abroad in  the  United  Kingdom  where
    Tamils activists remain active in  promoting  anti-government  opinions
    amongst the diaspora.  The fact the appellant has not been involved  in
    such activities will  not,  in  my  opinion,  prevent  her  from  being
    identified from the stop list and  again  detained  and  probably  ill-
    treated upon return to Sri Lanka.

10. In all the circumstances, I find that  the  appellant's  asylum  appeal
    should be allowed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Articles 2/3).

This appellant is not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 10 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 10 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

