
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: AA/05224/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 July 2016                              |On 20 July 2016               |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                           GUNALASINGAM MUKUNTHAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel, instructed by Theva Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Broe who, in a  decision  promulgated  on  17  July  2015,
         dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision
         of 09 March 2015 to refuse his asylum application and to remove him
         from the UK.


   Background


      2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, date of birth 25 June
         1987. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 25 January 2010 pursuant
         to a student entry clearance. He was granted a further period of
         leave to remain valid until 28 November 2014. He went back to Sri
         Lanka on 14 July 2013 and returned to the UK on 4 August 2013. He
         made an asylum claim on 31 August 2013.


      3. The appellant, who is of Tamil ethnicity, claimed to have
         volunteered for the LTTE in October 2002 and officially joined in
         January 2006. He claims that he was recruited into an intelligence
         unit. He received brief training. As a result of attacks by the
         LTTE on an army base the appellant moved to Colombo. He moved to
         Colombo in January 2007. Whilst in Colombo he was involved in
         financing and organising accommodation for LTTE members. At the
         same time he continued his studies. Following the defeat of the
         LTTE, the appellant feared that he would be identified as a result
         of his involvement and came to the UK to continue his studies.


      4. The appellant maintains that his mother became seriously ill and,
         as a result, he returned to Sri Lanka on 14 July 2013. His passport
         was allegedly seized at the airport and he was told that he would
         be subject to further investigations within 14 days. Instead of
         attending a CID office the following day, as requested, he went to
         Jaffna to see his mother. Following the visit to his parents he was
         taken by the military and CID at a checkpoint on his way back to
         Colombo. He maintains that he was tortured by the authorities this
         included being burnt and beaten with metal bars sticks and cables
         on his back arms and legs. His uncle secured his release by paying
         a large bribe. The appellant stayed with his uncle in Colombo after
         his release. The appellant's uncle arranged for his travel out of
         the country and for the recovery of his passport. Because he was
         accompanied by the agent the appellant did not encounter any
         difficulties at the airport.


      5. The respondent did not find the appellant's claim to be credible.
         The respondent refused to grant the appellant asylum and decided to
         remove him from the United Kingdom. The appellant gave evidence at
         his appeal hearing. The appellant produced two bundles of documents
         in support of his appeal. The first bundle contained a medical
         report from Dr Andres Izquierdo-Martin. Dr Martin had considered a
         number of scars on the appellant's body. In his summary the medical
         expert stated that most of the scars on the appellant's body were
         typical of intentionally caused injuries and were likely to have
         been caused by a third party.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      6. The first-tier Tribunal judge did not find the appellant a credible
         witness. From paragraphs 25 to 29 of the decision the judge gave a
         number of reasons why he did not find the appellant credible. These
         include, inter-alia, the appellant's failure to cake claim asylum
         in the UK, the implausibility of the appellant returning to Sri
         Lanka in 2013 in circumstances where he held a fear of the security
         forces, the absence of any reference in a document given to the
         appellant when he first arrived at the airport in Sri Lanka telling
         him to report to the CID officers the following day, the
         unlikelihood of the appellant's previous activities being in
         possession of the army at the checkpoint rather then on his arrival
         at the airport, the absence of any explanation as to how he
         regained possession of his passport, and implausibility is relating
         to the dates contained in E ticket receipts for the appellant's
         departure from Sri Lanka.


      7. At paragraph 30 the judge said this:


         for these reasons, and taking into account the low standard of
         proof applicable, I do not accept his account of the events on his
         return to Sri Lanka in 2013.


      8. Having rejected the appellant's version of events following his
         return to Sri Lanka the judge, at paragraph 33, then considered the
         medical report from Dr Martin. In assessing the medical report the
         judge was guided by the findings in KV (scarring - medical
         evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 230 (IAC). At paragraph 34 the
         judge stated:


         I note that Mr Martin found that it was likely that the appellant's
         injuries were caused by a third party. He found that self-
         infliction by proxy could not be discarded as a possible cause
         there was no presenting fact making it more than a remote
         possibility. In the light of my conclusions above I cannot be
         satisfied that the appellant's injuries were caused in the way he
         claims.

      9. Having made these credibility findings, and on the basis of the
         facts as he found them to be, the judge applied the guidance issued
         in MP (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 829. The judge concluded that the
         appellant did not come within any of the risk categories. The
         appeal was consequently dismissed.

    The Grounds of Appeal


     10. The grounds of appeal focused on a discrete point. It was contended
         on behalf of the appellant that the judge failed to consider the
         medical report when assessing the appellant's credibility. The
         judge considered various matters that caused him to doubt the
         reliability of the appellant's evidence in paragraphs 25 to 29. It
         was not however until paragraph 33, after having found the
         appellant's account of his return to Sri Lanka incredible, that the
         judge considered the scarring report. It was submitted that the
         judge reached his conclusion that the appellant's evidence was not
         credible without first of all considering whether the medical
         evidence provided support for the appellant's account, to be
         weighed against the matters identified in paragraphs 25 to 29 as
         counting against him. It was submitted that such an approach was
         contrary to the case Mibanga v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2015] EWCA Civ 367, KV and MT (Credibility assessment
         flawed Virjon B applied) Syria [2004] UKIAT 00307.

Submissions at the Upper Tribunal hearing


     11. At the hearing Mr Lewis relied on the grounds of appeal and
         reiterated that the judge had effectively put the cart before the
         horse. The failure to include the medical report as an integral
         part of the judge's credibility findings amounted to a material
         error of law. Ms Isherwood, on behalf of the respondent, fairly
         accepted that she was in some difficulty. She invited me to
         consider the determination, particularly at paragraphs 19 and 21
         and 22, which did make reference to medical evidence before the
         tribunal. She also invited me to consider paragraph 34 where the
         judge specifically assessed the expert report. Having pointed out
         to Miss Isherwood that the judge's conclusions in paragraph 34 were
         premised upon his earlier adverse credibility findings Miss
         Isherwood once again accepted that she was in a difficult position
         in defending the decision.


     12. I indicated at the hearing that I was satisfied the decision was
         vitiated by a material error of law. The judge had reached his
         conclusions in respect of the appellant's credibility without
         taking into account the medical evidence.

Discussion

     13. In paragraphs 25 to 29 the judge  gave  a  number  of  reasons  for
         rejecting the appellant's account of what happened to him following
         his return to Sri Lanka in 2013. In so doing it  is  apparent  that
         the judge did not take into account the expert scarring report that
         was before him.


     14. At paragraph 24 of Mibanga the Court of Appeal stated,


          It seems to me axiomatic that a fact finder must not reach his or
          her conclusion before surveying all the evidence relevant thereto
          ... What [expert reports] can offer is a factual context in which
          it may be necessary for the factfinder to survey the allegations
          placed before him; and such context may prove a crucial aid to the
          decision whether or not to accept the truth of them. What a
          factfinder does at his peril is to reach a conclusion by reference
          only to the appellant's evidence and then, if it be negative, to
          ask whether the conclusion should be shifted by the expert
          evidence.

     15.  The  scarring  report  was  clearly  a  relevant  factor  to   the
         appellant's credibility. The first-tier Tribunal judge should  have
         dealt with it as an integral part of his  findings  on  credibility
         rather than just  as  an  add-on,  which  does  not  undermine  the
         conclusions to which he would otherwise come. Given  the  need  for
         anxious scrutiny in determining an asylum claim it cannot  be  said
         that the judge would inevitably have reached an adverse credibility
         conclusion had the medical report been  an  integral  part  of  his
         assessment.


     16. In circumstances where the judge has failed to  adopt  a  holistic,
         integral approach to the totality of the evidence, a fresh  hearing
         will be required. Any  new  judge  must  ensure  that  the  medical
         evidence is considered in a holistic manner.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision contains a material error of law.
The matter is remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  all  issues  at
large.


Signed

[pic]
Upper Tribunal  Judge  Blum                                            Date:
    19 July 2016


