
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05412/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25 November 2014                             |On 12 December 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSTICE LAING
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            hanan sahil al-fadli
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shalliday, Annan Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  from  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Osborne on 14  October  2014.   Granting  permission  to
    appeal  Judge  Osborne  recounted  that  the  respondent  was   seeking
    permission  to  appeal  a  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 4 September 2014 in which  the  appellant's  appeal  had
    been allowed against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse the
    appellant's asylum claim as an undocumented Bidoon.

 2. As  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  recounted,  the  respondent's
    submission was that the judge had made an  arguable  error  of  law  by
    failing to consider the appellant's case by reference to the  Secretary
    of State's view that she was removable to Iraq even  if  it  was  found
    that she was not removable to Kuwait.  Judge Osborne  recounted that at
    paragraph 60 of the determination the judge  had  stated  "I  find  the
    appellant has established she is an undocumented stateless Bidoon  from
    Kuwait.  Given this finding in the  context  of  the  country  guidance
    cases I do not  consider  it  necessary  to  assess  the  rest  of  the
    appellant's claims."

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne went on to say that it  was  arguable
    that the judge should have given full  consideration  to  the  evidence
    that the appellant was in fact a citizen of Iraq and that  his  failure
    to do so was an arguable error of law.

 4. The Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal  were  essential  that  the
    judge had rejected the evidence of a document examiner who  had  stated
    that the Iraqi  passport   bore  the  appellant's  photograph  and  was
    genuine, and had preferred the evidence of witnesses he  had  heard  to
    the effect that the appellant was an undocumented Bidoon  from  Kuwait.
    The judge should have considered, the  Secretary  of  State  contended,
    whether the Iraqi passport was genuine and whether the appellant  would
    suffer persecution on return to Iraq.

 5. The Secretary of State also submitted  that as the judge had considered
    that he would have been assisted in determining the appeal  by  seeking
    the passport he should have asked the Home Office Presenting Officer if
    it was available, and it was submitted that  on the whole the judge had
    erred in law.

 6. Dealing if I may with the latter  point,  the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  asked  for  copies  of  both
    passports on which the Secretary of State had relied  to  be  disclosed
    for the purposes of  the  appeal  and  Mr  Shalliday  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer this morning  accepted  that  neither  the  original
    passport  nor copies had been provided to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
    the hearing.

 7. We can set out the facts very shortly by reference  to  the  first  few
    paragraphs  of  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    background was that the appellant claimed to be a stateless Bidoon from
    Kuwait born on 2 July 1989 and she was appealing against  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse her asylum and to remove  her  from
    the United Kingdom.  She had arrived in the United Kingdom at  Stansted
    Airport on 8 May 2013  and  claimed  asylum  immediately.   She  had  a
    screening interview with the respondent on the same day and completed a
    full and detailed asylum interview with the Home Office case  owner  on
    30 June 2014.  The respondent had refused that application on  16  July
    2014 and the appellant exercised her  right  of  appeal  under  Section
    82(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal summarised the appellant's  claim  as  follows.
    She claimed to be a stateless Bidoon born  and  living  the  Sulabiaiya
    district of Kuwait. She asserted that she lived with her parents, three
    sisters and two brothers but had never been  to school.  She  said  she
    could not read or write in any language  and  had  never  received  any
    identity documents or official papers in Kuwait. She claimed  that  she
    and her family had been accommodated and supported by a  Kuwaiti  named
    Falah Al-Mutairy all their lives but that her father and  other  family
    members sold vegetables and fruit in the market whenever they could  do
    so in order to earn money. The assertion was that the family was a poor
    one and depended to a large extent on the generosity of Mr Al  Mutairy.



 9. As a result of this generosity Mr Al-Mutairy's request  to  the  family
    that he marry the appellant was looked on favourably by the appellant's
    parents. The appellant herself was informed of this  request  in  early
    2013 but did not want to marry him.  She was told she  had  no  choice.
    She then spoke to her uncle, Mr Ayad Al-Fadly who tried to persuade her
    father to avoid the marriage but was unsuccessful.

10. He then advised her  to  present  she  was  willing  to  undertake  the
    marriage while he made arrangements through friends for  her  to  leave
    Kuwait. With the assistance of the uncle the appellant then left Kuwait
    to travel to an unknown country and then arrived in the United  Kingdom
    using a false passport.

11. Her case was that she  could  not  return  to  Kuwait  because  of  her
    situation both as an undocumented Bidoon and also because  she  was  at
    risk of honour killing or so-called honour killing at the hands of  her
    family having fled the marriage.

12. The Secretary of State Reasons for Refusal Letter was  then  summarised
    by an Immigration Judge and what he said at paragraphs  13  to  19  and
    following was as follows:

13. Although the appellant had shown knowledge of Kuwait and  was  able  to
    provide a coherent account of her life in Kuwait as a Bidoon which  was
    generally  consistent  with  the  background  information   about   the
    situation there, she nevertheless rejected the appellant's claim to  be
    a Bidoon from Kuwait.

14. The Secretary of State noted that when the  appellant  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom at Stansted Airport an Iraqi passport bearing her  name,
    date of birth and photograph  was  found  in  the  smuggler's  luggage.
    After examining the passport  it was found to be genuine and issued  by
    the Iraqi authorities on 9 April 2013.  The Secretary of State rejected
    the appellant's claim that she knew nothing  about  the  passport   and
    took the view she was an Iraqi national.

15. The Secretary of State also regarded some aspects  of  the  appellant's
    account of her life in Kuwait as inconsistent since, given such persons
    have no right to work  in  the  country,  it  was  not  clear  how  the
    appellant was able to pay the agent to take her out of the country.

16. Also the appellant had been unable to give very much detail  about  the
    individual she was supposed to marry and this  led  the  respondent  to
    doubt her credibility.

17. The respondent also did not consider the willingness of  the  appellant
    to resist forced marriage to be consistent with  her  claim  to  be  an
    uneducated woman who rarely left her parents' home.

18. Since  the  Secretary  of  State  considered  that  the  appellant  had
    concealed her genuine nationality, she also  regarded  the  appellant's
    credibility as damaged by reference to Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004.  The respondent then
    went on to assess the risk of harm to the appellant were she to  return
    to Iraq rather than to Kuwait and  she  concluded  that  the  appellant
    could  return safely to Kuwait.

19. The First-tier Tribunal Judge then summarised the evidence which he had
    heard.  He heard evidence from the appellant and  also  from  two  live
    witnesses who were called in her support.  He set out his findings  and
    reasons at paragraphs 41 and following of the determination.  He  noted
    that the appellant's evidence about Kuwait was detailed  and  coherent.
    She was cross-examined and that cross-examination gave him  no  reasons
    to be suspicious of her  account.    Two  further  witnesses  had  been
    called and given evidence and had been cross-examined and they too  had
    supported her account. Nothing that they had said had  been  undermined
    by their cross-examination.

20. At paragraph 50 of the determination he concluded that "I  consider  it
    is more likely than not that all of these  witness  have  told  me  the
    truth"

21. As against that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  took  into  account  the
    fact that an appellant  had been   found  in  possession  of  an  Iraqi
    passport.  He  went  on  to  say  at  paragraph  52:  "There  are  some
    difficulties with this evidence I must say".

22. First, her referred to the fact that no copy of the passport  had  been
    made available to the Tribunal and thus he had been unable  to  examine
    it.  Furthermore, the document examiner whose witness statement was  in
    the bundle and who  had  examined  the  passport  did  not  attend  the
    hearing, did not give evidence and his assertions could not  be  tested
    in cross-examination.

23. Most significantly, however the judge said it was not entirely clear to
    him what the respondent was asserting since there  was  some  confusion
    between the statement and the refusal letter.  In  the  refusal  letter
    the respondent said that an Iraqi passport  bearing the name,  date  of
    birth and picture of the appellant had been found. At the  top  of  the
    refusal letter  the  respondent  had  stated  that  the  appellant  was
    believed to be Hana Sohail Edan Al Balaawi, born in Iraq on  1  January
    1989 although we interpose to say that the  name  at  the  top  of  the
    letter is Al Balaawi.  But she claims to be Hana Sahil Al-Fadli born in
    Kuwait on 2 July 1989 and she also has an alias as a result of using  a
    British passport to enter of Muna Hama Dahal Eidan, born on 1  February
    1997.

24. According to the witness statement the Immigration Officer  examined  a
    passport  in the name of Sohail Edan Al Balaawi and found that it to be
    genuine.  Of courses, this is not the name the appellant stated is hers
    and given I had no passport  to examine I cannot see what photograph is
    contained.  Furthermore, the date of  birth  set  out  in  the  refusal
    letter next to the respondent's preferred Iraqi  identity  is  not  the
    date of birth which the appellant stated was hers.

25. The judge went on to say "It is therefore not correct to say  that  the
    date of birth in the Iraqi passport  was the same as the date of  birth
    the appellant presented, unless an assumption is merely made  that  the
    Iraqi identity is the true identity."

26. The judge went on to say that it was unfortunate he had not  been  able
    to examine the passport  himself or hear  from  the  document  examiner
    "But looking at the matter in the round", he said, "I do  not  consider
    it is safe to conclude that this appellant has completely invented  her
    identity."

         "The detail and coherence of her evidence, not only with the  other
         witnesses but, as accepted by the  respondent,  with  most  of  the
         background information, as well as the very detailed  and  coherent
         account as between the three witnesses,  leads  me  to  prefer  the
         evidence of the appellant on this point."

27. He went on to say that there could be no certainty in such matters  and
    that he was alive to the possibility that the appellant  was  inventing
    her  identity.   "Nevertheless",  he  said,  "It  seems   to   me   the
    preponderance of the evidence set out above establishes on balance  she
    is more likely to be who she said she is."

28. He concluded for all those reasons that he found that the appellant had
    established she was  an  undocumented  stateless  Bidoon  from  Kuwait.
    "Given this finding in the context of the country guidance cases, I  do
    not consider it  necessary  to  assess  the  rest  of  the  appellant's
    claims".

29. We have no hesitation in concluding that that view of the evidence  was
    one which was open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge who  gave  adequate
    reasons for his conclusions that he preferred the evidence of the  live
    witnesses to the Secretary of State's reliance on the passport  and  he
    gave reasons why he was not satisfied that the passport  was an  answer
    to the appellant's claims.

30. For all those reasons we conclude that he was entitled to  decide  that
    the  asylum  claim  succeeded.   We  also  conclude  that  it   is   an
    irresistible  inference  from  his  conclusion  that  he  accepted  the
    evidence of the appellant and her witnesses that she could  not  be  an
    Iraqi as the Secretary of State argued.

31. For those reasons it seems to us there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  It was  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to weigh up the evidence and it reached a conclusion which  it
    was entitled to reach on the evidence which it heard  and  saw.   There
    are no possible grounds for us to interfere with that  and  we  dismiss
    the appeal.

Signed        Date 11 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Mrs Justice Laing
