

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05906/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                              |Decision Promulgated         |
|                                              |On 25 July 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                  M.T.M.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms C. Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr M. Schwenk of counsel, instructed by Broudie
                    Jackson &   Cantor, solicitors


                                  DECISION

   1. Following a hearing at Stoke on 18 May 2016, by a decision bearing the
      same date I found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made an error
      of law and set aside his decision  other  than  that  to  dismiss  the
      appeal on asylum grounds. A copy of that decision is appended to  this
      decision.


   2. On 16 June 2016 the following directions were sent to the parties:


                          MEMORANDUM AND DIRECTIONS


       1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal against a  decision
          of First-tier Tribunal Judge Malik who, by a decision  promulgated
          on 22 July 2015, dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
          decision of the respondent, made on 17 March 2015, to  refuse  his
          claims advanced  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
          rights grounds. Following a hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  on
          18 May 2016 the appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  allowed  to  the
          extent that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the
          appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights   grounds
          (article 3 of the ECHR) was set aside to be determined  afresh  on
          those grounds only.


       2. It is the appellant's case  that  there  had  been  a  sufficient
          change in country conditions,  as  demonstrated  by  the  country
          evidence now relied upon, such as to warrant, possibly to demand,
          a departure from  the  current  country  guidance  in  AT  &  ors
          (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya CG [2014]  UKUT  318  (IAC).
          The  appellant's  representatives  put   before   the   judge   a
          considerable body of country evidence that post-dated  AT  &  ors
          and make clear in the skeleton argument that  this  material  was
          relied upon to justify a departure from it.


       3. The Upper Tribunal has found that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
          made a material error of law in failing to engage adequately with
          the country evidence  before  him  that  post-dated  the  current
          country guidance.


       4. My provisional view is that the authority of AT  &  ors  (Article
          15c; risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC)  as  country
          guidance should be removed.  It  appears  to  be  evidenced  that
          country conditions in Libya at present are sufficiently fluid  to
          establish that it is no longer safe or appropriate to  rely  upon
          it as authoritative country guidance. That does not,  of  course,
          prevent any party from relying  upon  material  drawn  from  that
          judgment. For the purposes of this appeal, there must be  a  full
          reconsideration in the light of any country evidence the  parties
          wish to rely upon. No doubt the  Tribunal  will  provide  further
          country guidance on Libya in due course.


       5. Subject to any written representations to the  contrary  received
          by the Upper Tribunal no later than 4 pm on  27  June  2016,  the
          Upper Tribunal proposes to remit this appeal  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal to be determined afresh by a  different  judge  of  that
          Tribunal. The scope of that hearing is to be as provided  for  in
          the Upper Tribunal's decision of 18 May 2016, by which the  error
          of law discussed above was identified.


       6. The parties are on notice that, if the Upper Tribunal proceeds in
          this manner, its judgment may be considered  for  reporting,  but
          only in respect of what is said at paragraph 4 above.




   3. No such written submissions have  been  received  from  either  party.
      Therefore, I now proceed in accordance with those directions to  remit
      this appeal to be determined afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.




   Summary of decision:

   4. In dismissing the appeal on asylum grounds the judge made no error  of
      law.


   5. In dismissing the appeal on humanitarian protection and  human  rights
      grounds the judge made an error of law and to  that  extent  only  her
      decision is set aside.


   6. The findings of fact made in respect of the appellant's  evidence  are
      to stand


   7. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  afresh
      (to the extent directed) by a different judge of that Tribunal.



      Signed                 [pic]
                               Date:    21 July 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

































                                    ANNEX


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05906/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke (Bennett House)                |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 18 May 2016                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                  M.T.M.A.

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms C. Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr M. Schwenk of counsel, instructed by Broudie
                    Jackson &   Cantor, solicitors


                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION

   1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal against a decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Malik who, by a decision  promulgated  on
      22 July 2015, dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of
      the respondent, made on 17 March 2015, to refuse his  claims  advanced
      on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.


   2. The appellant is a citizen of Libya who claimed asylum on  arrival  in
      the United Kingdom on 6 December 2013.  Essentially,  there  were  two
      main aspects of his claim. First, he said that he was at risk in Libya
      because he was of the Warfalla tribe loyal  to  Colonel  Gadhafi,  his
      father being a member of the Comrades of the Leader and he had  served
      that group himself. Because of that association he was targeted by the
      Misrata militia, detained and tortured, being able to leave the prison
      when it  was  stormed  during  an  uprising.  Having  secured  medical
      treatment for his injuries he travelled to the United Kingdom in order
      to claim asylum. The second strand of his claim was founded  upon  the
      risk arising generally for civilians because, he  claimed.  There  was
      and is in Libya a high level  of  indiscriminate  violence  such  that
      there were substantial grounds for believing that he would, simply  by
      being present face a real risk to his life or person.

   3. The judge dismissed the appeal because, for the reasons set out in her
      determination, she  did  not  accept  to  be  true  any  part  of  the
      appellant's account of his experiences in  Libya.  That  was  because,
      although she recognised that the appellant suffered from mental health
      problems that he said made it difficult for him to concentrate, he had
      given such a starkly inconsistent and contradictory account of  events
      at the very core of his claim that it was lacking in  all  credibility
      that he was giving an account of events that had actually occurred.

   4. There is a challenge  to  that  adverse  credibility  finding  in  the
      grounds, developed by Mr Schwenk in his oral  submissions.  There  are
      two strands to the challenge to the approach taken by the judge to the
      appellant's credibility and to her approach to the evidence offered of
      the appellant's health problems. First, it is said that she  may  have
      misunderstood the argument being advanced.  That  is  because  in  her
      determination she focussed upon the question of whether  there  was  a
      real risk of infringement of rights protected by article 3 of the ECHR
      on account of health problems in respect of which  the  appellant  may
      not be able to access the same level of medical treatment in Libya  as
      was available to him there. But, as Mr Schwenk explained, that was not
      the submission being advanced. What was  being  argued  was  that  the
      health difficulties were relevant for two reasons. First an  inability
      properly to concentrate was relevant  to  the  credibility  assessment
      itself and, second, to the assessment of the 15(c) risk, which was  to
      be informed by the particular  characteristics  of  the  appellant  if
      those were such as to mean that his vulnerability itself enhanced  the
      risk involved.   However, although the judge had not been  invited  to
      examine the question of whether there was a  viable  article  3  claim
      open on health grounds, her conclusion in that respect was not legally
      incorrect.  The  judge  engaged  properly  with  the  nature  of   the
      appellant's health difficulties, was plainly fully  sighted  upon  the
      evidence relied upon and, in concluding that those health difficulties
      were not such as to explain away the stark nature of the  inconsistent
      and contradictory account that had been given, it is  plain  that  the
      credibility finding made by the judge was one that was open to her and
      that this was a reasoned conclusion plainly open to her that discloses
      no error of law.

   5. That leaves the main  thrust  of  the  challenge  being  pursued.  The
      submission advanced before  the  judge  was  that  there  had  been  a
      sufficient change  in  country  conditions,  as  demonstrated  by  the
      country evidence now relied upon, such  as  to  warrant,  possibly  to
      demand, a departure from the current country  guidance  in  AT  &  ors
      (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya CG [2014]  UKUT  318  (IAC).  The
      appellant's representatives put before the judge a  considerable  body
      of country evidence that post dated AT & ors and  make  clear  in  the
      skeleton argument that this material was  relied  upon  to  justify  a
      departure from it. The material included:

        a. FCO Travel Advice 29/5/2015;
        b. Amnesty International Report 2015;
        c. UNHCR Position paper on Returns to Libya;
        d. UNHCR - New Displacement in east, south and west of Libya;
        e. Voice of  America  report:  "Islamic  State  Grows  Stronger  in
           Libya";
        f. UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office - Joint Communique 10/6/15;
        g. Foreign and Commonwealth Office: "Country of Concern Libya";
        h. UNHCR - "Upsurge in Fighting" 16/1/2015
        i. UN News Centre report.

   The only reference made by the judge to this body of evidence is found at
   paragraph 18 of her decision where she said simply this  in  response  to
   the submission that there was reason to depart from the existing  country
   guidance:


           "I have considered the objective  evidence  in  the  appellant's
           bundle to this effect and whilst the situation in Libya  appears
           to be declining, I am not satisfied to the lower  standard  that
           this decline is sufficient to depart from the  country  guidance
           case..."


   6. That can only be regarded as a wholly inadequate basis upon  which  to
      reject the appellant's case as it was argued before the judge. On  the
      face of the new country evidence relied upon and put before the judge,
      there had been, if that evidence were accepted, significant changes in
      country conditions. Routes of return identified in AT & ors were  said
      no longer to be open. Tripoli airport had been closed, as had Benghazi
      airport. There were reports of widespread  fighting  throughout  Libya
      and a deteriorating situation throughout the country. There  had  been
      indiscriminate shelling of civilian occupied  areas  in  a  number  of
      locations. There was said to be  a  displacement  crisis  and  a  high
      incidence of violation of human rights in a deteriorating humanitarian
      situation. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office had spoken of "...  the
      high number of deaths and injuries of civilians as  a  result  of  the
      conflict between armed groups in civilian areas...".

   7. Of course, as the judge carried out no assessment of this evidence  in
      her decision we do not know why she rejected it. We do not know if she
      had correctly engaged with and understood the evidence  because  there
      is no discussion of the evidence.

   8. For that reason, although the decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum
      grounds discloses no legal error, the decision to dismiss  the  appeal
      on humanitarian protection and human rights grounds cannot  stand  and
      will be set aside. To  that  extent  only  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal succeeds.

   Summary of decision:

   9. In dismissing the appeal on asylum grounds the judge made no error  of
      law.


  10. In dismissing the appeal on humanitarian protection and  human  rights
      grounds the judge made an error of law and to  that  extent  only  her
      decision is set aside.


  11. The findings of fact made in respect of the appellant's  evidence  are
      to stand


  12. The appeal will be listed for the appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
      and human rights grounds to be determined afresh.


      Signed                                       Date:       18 May 2016

           [pic]

           Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

