
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05783/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5 September 2016                        |On 28 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE H H STOREY



                                   Between

                                     U K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Brindock, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a national of  Malawi.   She  obtained  permission  to
    appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S Taylor dated
    27 May 2016 dismissing her  appeal  against  a  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 23 March 2015 refusing to grant  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection.

2.   The appellant advanced five grounds.   It  is  unnecessary  to  address
    them all because I am  quite  satisfied  that  ground  3  identifies  a
    material error of law in the form of a failure by  the  judge  to  take
    into account or make any reasoned  findings  about  the  report  by  Dr
    Kilgore (formerly Aguilar) dated 12 May 2016.

3.   This report does appear to my mind to have shortcomings  as  an  expert
    report, including failure to engage with the findings of fact  made  by
    the previous Tribunal who dealt with  the  appeal  of  the  appellant's
    husband and a failure to  engage  with  the  respondent's  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.  However, as Mr Tufan conceded, it is not  possible  to
    say that this report has no potential bearing on the material facts  of
    the appellant's case and it should have been addressed  by  the  judge.
    The judge's failure to do  so  constituted  a  material  error  of  law
    necessitating that I set aside his decision. The nature of the  judge's
    error is such that  none  of  the  judge's  findings  of  fact  can  be
    preserved  and  there  will  need  to  be  a  de  novo  hearing,   most
    appropriately achieved by way of  remittal  to  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge other than S Taylor.

4.   Whilst the evidence will be entirely a matter for the  next  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to assess, it may assist, in view of the fact  that  the
    appellant and her husband have been concerned in  a  previous  Tribunal
    hearing and the case is yet again going before the First-tier Tribunal,
    if I clarify the following matters:

    1)   Applying Devaseelan principles, the  judge  will  be  entitled  to
         treat the previous findings of fact in the husband's  appeal  as  a
         start point.


    2)   It will not be an error of law for  the  judge  to  weigh  in  the
         balance the findings of fact made by the Tribunal  who  dealt  with
         the husband's appeal when assessing the value and  significance  of
         the medical evidence and of the witness evidence from the sister-in-
         law.


    3)   To the extent that the appellant seeks to rely in this appeal on a
         claim  to  past  persecution  (rape  whilst  a  minor  involved  in
         initiation rights), she will need to explain why she did  not  make
         this claim earlier than she did.


    4)   Although no findings of fact made by Judge S Taylor are preserved,
         the parties agreed before me that it was not in dispute that:


         (i)  The appellant's home area of Soche was either in or  close  to
             Blantyre which is the second largest city in Malawi which is a
             large urbanised city with nearly 2 million people;


         (ii)     She and her husband met in Soche, when the  appellant  was
             living with her uncle.


         It is also uncontroversial that:


         (iii)    The appellant came to the UK on a student visa and claimed
             to have pursued studies in business management.


         (iv)     The appellant's husband previously had a student  visa  to
             study computer science and went to boarding school in Soche.


                 These facts may be of relevance when  assessing  the  claim
    made by the appellant that she and her husband could not be expected to
    return to Malawi and live in Soche.

5.   For the above reasons:

     The judge materially erred in law and is decision is set aside.

     The case is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  before  a  judge  (or
    judges) other than S Taylor and Judge Talbot.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 8 September 2016

                [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

