
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA052822015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 May 2016                            |On 27 May 2016                    |
|Prepared 10 May 2016                      |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                       mr samisaeed abdullah al-ariki
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Johnrose, Agent for Immigration Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of the  Yemen,  date  of  birth  15  December
    1972, appealed against the  Respondent's  decision,  dated  16  January
    2015, to make removal directions on Form IS151A having been served on 1
    May 2013 and an asylum/human rights based claim  having  been  refused.
    The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicol (the judge)  who
    promulgated a decision [D] on 31 July 2015 in  which  he  dismissed  an
    appeal based on asylum grounds, human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal that decision was  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Page on 19 August 2015.  The Secretary of State made  a  Rule  24
    response dated 8 September 2015.

3.   The Appellant's immigration history is not directly relevant but it  is
    plain that the judge applied Section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 and made a  number  of  adverse
    findings against the Appellant's claim.

4.   The criticisms of the judge's decision are in short these.   First,  it
    was argued that the Appellant's circumstances on a return to Yemen were
    such that Article 15(c) of  the  Qualification  Directive  was  engaged
    because there was such a serious risk of harm through the  destabilised
    status of the Yemen and he would face indiscriminately a real threat to
    his life.

5.   Secondly, it was said that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for the findings on material matters particularly his rejection
    that  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  involved  in  journalism  as  an
    occupation in the Yemen.  Rather the judge had found the Appellant  was
    a translator/interpreter.  The judge dealt with that issue at [D 23  to
    26] and in general terms rejected credibility at [D 29 and 30].  It  is
    extremely unfortunate when the judge was taken to evidence which showed
    at least prime facie evidence and better evidence than that,  that  the
    Appellant was recorded in the Register of Yemeni Journalists  Syndicate
    as well as had a commercial licence to operate and other  documentation
    that spokes to the Appellant's work  as  a  journalist  and  editor  in
    publishing in the Yemen.

6.    There were no sufficient or adequate reasons  to  reject  the  general
    claim and to fail to make any reference to or have any regard  for  the
    evidence that had been specifically provided;  upon  which  submissions
    were made, in part he noted  [D 21] and yet make no findings  upon  the
    matter. These failures are material errors of law.  The  judge  [D  21]
    referred  to  the  Appellant's  representative  providing  a   skeleton
    argument but this appears that was a mistake by the judge. Ms  Johnrose
    who appeared then, as before me, confirmed that she  had  not  provided
    any skeleton argument.  In the circumstances I can only assume that  is
    a mistake and could not have been considered by  the  judge  as  he  in
    general terms said he had done.  The position therefore was that [D 27]
    the judge simply concluded that Yemen was currently in a  'not  settled
    state'.  The judge may have intended to address Article 15(c) but if so
    failed to do so.

7.   In addition the judge was also taken to material that  highlighted  the
    extent to which the Appellant, as a journalist, was at risk on  return.
    In the circumstances not only did the judge not deal with those  issues
    to which I have referred but also much  of  his  reasoning  lacked  any
    substance.

8.   I was satisfied that the Original Tribunal's decision cannot  stand.  A
    decision will have to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions
    (1)  Please list for hearing in Manchester not before Judge  Nicol  nor
         Judge A K Simpson.
     (2) List for hearing two hours.
    (3)  Issues to be dealt with Refugee Convention Articles 2 and 3  ECHR,
         Article 15(c), Article 8 ECHR is not to be an issue pursued.  There
         is no need for consideration of any claim arising based on personal
         life under the Rules.
     (4)      Yemeni interpreter required

No anonymity order is necessary nor requested.

Signed                          Date 24 May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
