

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  AA/05182/2013
                                                               AA/05180/2013
                                                               AA/05184/2013
                                                               AA/05186/2013
                                                               AA/05188/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination sent           |
|On 20 March 2014                              |On 6 May 2014                |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     HRG
                                     SS
                                     MHG
                                     WHG
                                     BHG

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M McGarvey of Garvey Immigration Practitioners
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      us to rescind the order and we continue it pursuant to rule 14 of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Background

   2. The first appellant is a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who  was  born  on  1
      February 1965.  The second appellant is his wife and the third, fourth
      and fifth appellants are their daughter and  sons  respectively.   The
      second appellant arrived in the UK on 27 January 2010 with leave as  a
      student valid until 31 May  2011.   Thereafter,  she  applied  for  an
      extension of her leave which was granted until 12 November 2014.   She
      returned to Pakistan on 9 November 2012 and  returned  on  6  December
      2012 to the UK.  The first appellant and their children came to the UK
      on 1 February 2013 as her dependents and were granted  leave  in  line
      with that of the second appellant.  On 18 March 2013,  the  first  and
      second  appellants  applied  for  asylum  and  the  third  and  fourth
      appellants were their dependents to that claim.  On 15 May  2013,  the
      Secretary of State refused the claims for asylum.  On 20 May 2013, the
      Secretary of state curtailed each of  the  leave  to  remain  of  each
      appellants either as a student or a student dependent  and  also  made
      against each appellant a  removal  decision  to  Pakistan  by  way  of
      directions under s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
      2006.

The First-tier Tribunal Decision

   3.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
      determination dated 15 July 2012 Judge Archer dismissed their  appeals
      on all grounds.   The  Judge  found  the  appellants  to  be  "broadly
      credible" and their accounts to be supported by  documentary  evidence
      (see para 34).  The Judge accepted the evidence of the first appellant
      that he had worked for the forest department in Pakistan and  had  had
      problems since 1999 with the timber mafia.  He accepted that the first
      appellant had  been  attacked  with  dogs  in  1999  and  then  by  an
      individual with an axe in 2005.  He further  accepted  that  in  April
      2008 four masked men had come into the family home with a gun but  had
      fled when they were disturbed.  Further, he accepted that in July 2008
      the second appellant and two of the  children  were  attacked  in  the
      street.  Finally, he accepted that  on  4  December  2012  the  second
      appellant was attacked by two individuals on a motorbike when she  was
      shot at and one bullet went through her arm. Nevertheless,  the  Judge
      went on to  find  that  the  appellant's  would  be  able  to  find  a
      "sufficiency of state protection" from the  Pakistan  authorities,  in
      particular the police if they returned to Pakistan (para 39).  He  did
      not accept that the police would be unwilling or unable to protect the
      appellant and there was no objective evidence that  the  timber  mafia
      are a serious threat for the police in Pakistan.

   4. The Judge's reasons are set out at paras 35-39 of his determination as
      follows:

           "35.  However, the next hurdle for the appellants is sufficiency
                 of state protection.  I accept Ms  Goodfellow's  submission
                 that on the appellants' own accounts there is a sufficiency
                 of state protection in  this  case.   The  first  appellant
                 states that he was a Forester and filed many  FIRs  against
                 the timber mafia.  He was attacked by his own colleagues in
                 2005 but the primary assailant was convicted and  sentenced
                 to 21 months imprisonment.  The first  appellant  chose  to
                 return to his job in 2007, albeit in  an  office  capacity.
                 His previous officer who was involved  in  the  attack  was
                 suspended and sent to Lahore.  His  new  officer  was  very
                 sympathetic and helpful.

             36. The attacks in 2008 and 2012 were clearly very  frightening
                 but there were police investigations and sympathetic  media
                 coverage in 2012.  A prosecution in relation to  the  April
                 2008 attack failed because the first  appellant  could  not
                 identify the men whom the police  charged.   Many  criminal
                 prosecutions fail because of problems with identity  issues
                 and the attackers did wear masks.  That  does  not  suggest
                 that the police were unable or  unwilling  to  protect  the
                 family.

             37. The most serious attack was the shooting on 4 December 2012
                 but again, there is no evidence that police  are  unwilling
                 to investigate and prosecute if possible.  The incident was
                 reported in the media as a robbery and there is very little
                 evidence that it was an assassination attempt by the timber
                 mafia.   The evidence is that the  timber  mafia  run  away
                 when they fear confrontation with the police and  there  is
                 no evidence of police collusion with the timber mafia.  The
                 main mafia person was killed as long ago as 2001.  There is
                 no objective evidence that the timber mafia are  a  serious
                 threat for the police in Pakistan.

             38. The second appellant confirmed in oral  evidence  that  she
                 was pursuing the court case against  the  timber  mafia  up
                 until 3 years ago.  Her brother in law is also involved and
                 the case is on-going.  The children have  attended  the  Al
                 Fazal public school since 2010 although the third appellant
                 chose to study at home and to  pass  her  exams  privately.
                 The first appellant did not even tell the school about  the
                 2008 incident.  There is  no  evidence  that  the  children
                 cannot return to school if they return  to  Pakistan.   The
                 first appellant still has his job in Pakistan.

             39. Overall, I find  that  there  is  a  sufficiency  of  state
                 protection in Pakistan and therefore the asylum claims  and
                 claims under Articles 2/3 of the  Human  Rights  Convention
                 must fail."

   5. In addition, Judge Archer  dismissed  the  appellants'  appeals  under
      Article 8 concluding that their removal  would  be  proportionate  and
      that it was in the best interests of the children, who are citizens of
      Pakistan, to be with their parents and to continue to be brought up in
      their own culture in Pakistan (see para 43).

   6. Finally, Judge Archer accepted a submission  made  on  behalf  of  the
      appellants that the Secretary of State had not offered any explanation
      why  the  appellants'  leave  had  been  curtailed  since  the  second
      appellant was still a student and the remaining  appellants  were  her
      dependents.   He concluded as follows (at para 44):

           "44.  ....There is no clear reason why  the  second  appellant's
                 period as a student in the UK cannot continue.  That  (sic)
                 respondent may choose to further consider that issue."

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   7. The appellants sought permission to appeal on three  grounds.   First,
      the Judge had erred in finding that a sufficiency  of  protection  was
      available to the appellant's in Pakistan.   Secondly,  the  Judge  had
      erred in assessing  the  best  interests  of  the  children  including
      consideration of their right  to  receive  education  which  would  be
      disrupted in Pakistan by the hostility faced from  the  timber  mafia.
      Thirdly, the Judge had  arguably  erred  in  failing  to  resolve  the
      lawfulness of the curtailment of the leave of each appellant.

   8. On 6 August 2013, the  First-tier  (Judge  RC  Campbell)  granted  the
      appellants permission to  appeal.   Whilst  he  was  unimpressed  with
      grounds one and two, he concluded  that  ground  three  was  arguable.
      Thus, the appeal came before us.

Discussion

   9. In his submissions before us, Mr McGarvey accepted that the  Secretary
      of State was entitled to curtail the leave of the appellants following
      the refusal to grant them asylum. He no  longer  pursued  that  ground
      before us.  Further, he did not address us on the issue of the Judge's
      consideration of the children's best interest.  Suffice it for  us  to
      say, therefore, that we are entirely  satisfied  that  the  Judge  was
      entitled to take the view that the children's best interests  were  to
      be with their parents in Pakistan in the absence of any evidence  that
      their interests would be harmed on return to Pakistan.

  10. Mr McGarvey relied exclusively upon the  "sufficiency  of  protection"
      ground.  He submitted that given the Judge's positive findings on  the
      facts,  it  was  not  open  to  him  to  conclude  that  the  Pakistan
      authorities, in particular the police, would be  able  or  willing  to
      provide a sufficiency of protection to the appellants.   He  submitted
      that, even though the police had prosecuted the primary assailant  who
      attacked the first appellant in 2005, did  not  demonstrate  that  the
      police would  be  wiling  to  provide  protection  now.   Mr  McGarvey
      submitted that the second appellant had been attacked twice and,  most
      recently on 4 December 2012 and she reasonably believed that it was by
      the timber mafia.  Mr McGarvey, however, accepted that  the  appellant
      had left Pakistan after that attack without seeking the protection  of
      the police.  Mr McGarvey drew our attention to the Country  of  Origin
      Information Report (COI) (7 December 2012) referred to at para  29  of
      his skeleton argument  which,  he  submitted,  demonstrated  that  the
      police in  Pakistan  are  corrupt  and  largely  responsible  for  the
      breakdown of law and order in the country and the  steady  erosion  of
      the criminal justice system.   (see  para  9.03,  COI).   Further,  he
      relied upon para 9.04 of the COI report which, quoting a US Department
      of State Report 2011, states that:

           "Frequent failure to punish abuses contributed to a  climate  of
           impunity."

  11. Mr McGarvey submitted that the Judge should have  concluded  that  the
      Pakistan authorities knew or ought  to  have  known  of  circumstances
      particular to the appellants' situation  and  had  failed  to  provide
      additional required protection (see  Osman  v  UK  [1999]  1  FLR  193
      (ECtHR)).

  12. The general approach to the issue of "sufficiency of protection" to be
      provided by a state  against  non-state  actors  is  set  out  in  the
      Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC) at Article  7.2
      which states as follows:

           "Protection is  generally  provided  when  the  [state]  take[s]
           reasonable steps to prevent  the  persecution  or  suffering  or
           serious harm, inter alia, by operating an effective legal system
           for  the  detection,  prosecution   and   punishment   of   acts
           constituting persecution or serious harm and the  applicant  has
           access to such protection."

  13. We accept, in the light of the Strasbourg Court's decision  in  Osman,
      that a reasonable level of protection  is  required  where  the  state
      knows or ought to know of a particular risk to an individual.

  14. Paragraph 9.03 of the  COI  report,  quoting  from  the  Asia  Society
      "Report by the Independent Commission on Pakistan Police Reform" (July
      2012), states:

           "The police in Pakistan are perceived to be corrupt as a  matter
           of course, and  are  thought  to  be  largely,  if  not  solely,
           responsible for the breakdown of law and order  in  the  country
           and for the steady  erosion  of  the  criminal  justice  system.
           Apart from its effect on law and  order,  police  corruption  is
           also responsible for the  weak  prosecution  of  criminals,  the
           failure of trial prisoners to  appear  in  court,  flawed  court
           proceedings, and an alarming high rate of acquittals.  Some have
           argued that police corruption merely reflects the corruption  of
           Pakistani society at large.  They  contend  that  in  a  sea  of
           corruption it is impossible to create  islands  of  honesty  and
           integrity..."

  15. As we understand it, that extract together with the single sentence in
      para 9.04 of the COI report that "frequent failure to punish abuse has
      contributed to a climate of impunity", is (and was before  the  Judge)
      the only background material relied upon.  Whilst that  does  paint  a
      somewhat bleak picture of the integrity of the  Pakistan  police,  the
      fact remains that these appellants have not been treated in that  way.
      The evidence before the Judge, which he accepted in para 35, was  that
      the police had in fact prosecuted the first appellant's  assailant  in
      2005 and that had resulted in a conviction.  Further, in  relation  to
      an  attack  in  April  2008,  the  police  again  investigated  and  a
      prosecution only failed because the first appellant could not identify
      the  men  whom  the  police  charged.   Far  from   demonstrating   an
      unwillingness to  protect  the  appellant,  this  (like  the  previous
      prosecution) demonstrates a willingness to  do  so.   The  prosecution
      only failed because the first appellant was unable to give identifying
      information.  Further, in relation to the incident in July  2008  that
      was reported to the police but, in her witness statement,  the  second
      appellant described the attack as  being  by  "unknown  men".   It  is
      difficult to see what more could reasonably  have  been  done  by  the
      police to pursue the complaint.  Finally in relation to the attack  on
      4 December 2012, this was reported  to  the  police  and  a  newspaper
      report described the incident as involving a robbery  rather  than  an
      attack by (as the appellants claim) the timber mafia.  In  any  event,
      two days later the second appellant came to the UK.  It is  not  clear
      what further action was taken by the  Pakistan  police  but  the  fact
      remains that the second appellant was no longer in Pakistan to  assist
      the police in any investigation into the attack upon her.

  16. The Judge accepted, at para 37 of his determination, that  the  timber
      mafia feared confrontation with the police and there was  no  evidence
      of police collusion with the timber mafia.  That, in our judgment,  is
      wholly borne out by the actions of  the  police  in  relation  to  the
      appellants' reports of attacks by  the  timber  mafia.   Even  if  the
      evidence established that corruption existed in  the  Pakistan  police
      that had no impact upon the police response to the appellants' reports
      of attacks by the timber mafia.    The Judge  was  entitled  to  find,
      given the appellants past circumstances, that the appellants  had  not
      established that the Pakistan police would be unwilling or  unable  to
      provide a reasonable level of protection.

  17. In our judgment, on the  evidence  before  the  Judge,  he  was  fully
      entitled to find that the appellants had failed to establish that  the
      Pakistan police were unable or unwilling to offer a  reasonable  level
      of protection to the appellants from the timber mafia.

Decision

  18. Consequently, for these reasons the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to
      dismiss the appellants' appeals on all grounds  did  not  involve  the
      making of an error of law.

  19. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss each of the  appellants'
      appeals on all grounds stands.

  20. The appellants'  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are,  accordingly,
      dismissed.



                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
