
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/05374/2015
                                                               AA/05386/2015
                                                               AA/05361/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 27th May 2016                           |On 4th July 2016           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between


                             SHARLUJAR RAJENDRAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                             First Appellant
                          DHARRISNA NAIDO RAJENDRAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                            Second Appellant
                          RAMZAN BABA BIN ABDULLAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRSECTION NOT MADE)
                                                             Third Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr T Ruddy, solicitor, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



DECISION AND REASONS

1. We have considered whether any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of these Appellants when their appeals were decided before  the  First-tier.
Having considered all the circumstances and evidence we do not  consider  it
necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by all three Appellants against the decision of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge McGavin promulgated on 6 November 2016, which  dismissed
the Appellants' appeals on all grounds.

Background


3. The First Appellant was born on 6 September 1986.  The  second  Appellant
was born on 15 July 1988. The third Appellant was born  on  20  March  1954.
The third appellant is the father of the first and  second  appellants.  All
three appellants are nationals of Malaysia.


4. On 10  March  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  each  Appellants'
application for asylum.

The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge McGavin ("the Judge") dismissed the appeals against  the  Respondent's
decisions.


6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and, on 2 December 2015, Judge Davies  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia


      "2. I have serious concerns that a Judge, who heard an appeal  on  5th
      June  2015  and  prepared  his  decision  on  the  4th  November  2015
      (promulgated on the 6th November 2015) could be in a position to  give
      full and proper consideration to the evidence that was put before him.
      It could not have been fresh in his mind.


      "3. The Judge has given no explanation for the delay in preparing  his
      decision.


      "4. The grounds and decision do disclose an arguable error of  law  on
      the basis of my concerns expressed above. "

The Hearing

7. (a) Mr Ruddy, solicitor for all three appellants, moved  the  grounds  of
appeal. He conceded that, although there is an emphasis on the  question  of
delay, the appeals could not succeed on the  question  of  delay  alone.  He
told us that the issue of delay is not an independent ground of  appeal.  He
told us that the real thrust of this appeal  is  (it  is  argued)  that  the
Judge has not taken account of material  passages  of  evidence  and,  as  a
result, her assessment of risk to the appellants in Malaysia is flawed.

(b) He took us to [21] of the decision and told us the language  used  there
indicates that the  Judge  proceeded  on  assumptions  rather  than  on  the
evidence placed before her. He reminded us that at [17]  the  Judge  records
that the account given by all three appellants of distressing  incidents  in
2003, 2010 and 2014 is accepted by the respondent. Against that  background,
Mr Ruddy said that the Judge's finding that she could not place reliance  on
the evidence of the appellants was unsafe, and her finding  that  the  agent
of persecution, Imam Khalid, was a man who does not have far-reaching  power
connections to the immigration authorities was without foundation.  He  told
us that "Jakim" (of whom, it is said,  Imam  Khalid  is  a  director)  is  a
powerful, unscrupulous branch of  the  Malaysian  state  which  targets  all
three of the appellants and has ambitions to oppress Christians.

(c) Mr Ruddy argued that the Judge's findings between [17] and [45]  of  the
decision are unsafe and should not stand because of the  approach  that  the
Judge took to each appellant's evidence; he told  us  that  the  Judge  took
inadequate account of the respondent's acceptance  of  the  overall  history
given by the appellants, and  he  argued  because  the  background  material
supports the appellants' account. He urged us to set the decision aside.

8. Mr Matthews, for the respondent, accepted that the  appellants  have  all
suffered in incidents in 2003, 2010 and 2014. He  told  us  that  the  Judge
considered  each  strand  of  evidence  before  coming  to  the  sustainable
conclusion that the was no reliable evidence of a  connection  between  Imam
Khalid and "Jakim". He reminded us  that  none  of  the  appellants  made  a
serious attempt to find protection within Malaysia.  He  told  us  that  the
Judge's decision does not contain any  errors,  material  or  otherwise.  Mr
Matthews argued that the Judge's decision is  a  carefully  worded  decision
which accurately reflects the content and quality  of  the  evidence  before
the Judge. He argued that the appeal is, in reality, simply  a  disagreement
with sustainable conclusions which were open  to  the  Judge  to  reach.  He
urged us to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

9.   We are grateful to Mr Ruddy for  clarifying  at  the  outset  that  the
delay in writing the decision is not a freestanding  ground  of  appeal  and
that the focus in this case is the manner in which the Judge dealt with  the
evidence placed before her. It is common ground  that  the  appellants  were
victims of assaults and harassment in 2003, 2010, & 2014. The focus  in  all
three cases is almost entirely on the third appellant. All three  appellants
claim that they have a well-founded fear of persecution in Malaysia  because
of their religious belief, and that the agents  of  persecution  are  a  man
known as Imam Khalid and an organisation called Jakim. The appellants  claim
that Imam Khalid has significant  power  because  he  is  a  director  of  a
government backed organisation known as Jakim, and that Jakim has a  mandate
to persecute Christians, particularly the appellants.

10. Before dealing specifically with the decision, it is helpful to look  at
the evidence which was before the Judge. The  three  incidents  about  which
the appellants complain occurred. We consider what  evidence  there  was  of
Imam Khalid's role, and Jakim's role, in those incidents.  At  paragraph  15
of the grounds of appeal it is said that there are 86  pages  of  background
materials which provide crucial evidence ignored by the Judge. We  asked  Mr
Ruddy to take us to the specific passages which identify the claimed  agents
of persecution. He was unable to do so.
11. The background materials tell us that Malaysia  has  a  majority  Muslim
population in most  of  its  states  and  an  economically-powerful  Chinese
community. Consisting of two regions separated by 640  miles  of  the  South
China Sea,  Malaysia  is  a  federation  of  13  states  and  three  federal
territories.  Ethnic Malays comprise about 60% of  the  population.  Chinese
constitute around 26%; Indians and indigenous  peoples  make  up  the  rest.
Since 1971 Malays have benefited from positive discrimination  in  business,
education and the  civil  service,  but  ethnic  Chinese  continue  to  hold
economic power and are the  wealthiest  community.  The  Malays  remain  the
dominant group in politics while the Indians are among the poorest.
12.  There has been a proposal to provide Jakim, a  Muslim  organisation  in
Malaysia, with seconded police officers to  assist  in  the  prosecution  of
Shari'ah criminal cases. Jakim and the Shari'ah justice system  in  Malaysia
only have jurisdiction over adherents to Islam. Jakim  is  a  non-government
Sunni Muslim organisation active in Malaysia.
13. There was a five-month delay in preparing  the  determination.  That  is
disappointing, but a careful reading of  the  determination  indicates  that
the passage of time did nothing to diminish the Judge's  ability  to  assess
the evidence in this case. At [24] the Judge records verbatim a  passage  of
the third appellant's evidence in  chief.  No  challenge  is  taken  to  the
Judge's recollection of the evidence. No overt argument  is  made  in  these
appeals that the passage of  time  contaminated  the  quality  of  decision-
making.
14. The determinative question in these appeals is  the  approach  that  the
Judge took to the evidence relating to the claimed  agents  of  persecution.
At [6] and [7] the Judge accurately records the  evidence  that  was  placed
before her.  Between  [9]  and  [11]  the  Judge  accurately  sets  out  the
fundamentals of the law that she is to apply.  At  [17]  the  Judge  records
that the unpleasant incidents in 2003, 2010 & 2014 occurred. The fulcrum  of
the decision is contained in the Judge's succinct finding at [19].
15. At [19] the Judge says
      "Having considered all of the evidence in the round, I find that there
      is no credible evidence that the person who  the  appellants,  and  in
      particular, the third appellant, claim to fear, Imam Khalid,  is  part
      of the Malaysian authorities, or that he preaches in a mosque which is
      "related to the government" (R3.D4), creating a  risk  for  all  three
      appellants which is, effectively, from the Malaysian authorities....."
16. To succeed, the appellants would have to establish that Imam  Khalid  is
linked to the Malaysian authorities or preaches in  a  mosque  sponsored  by
the Malaysian authorities.  A fair reading of the Judge's detailed  decision
(which quotes passages of oral evidence verbatim) makes it clear that  after
considering each strand of evidence  the  Judge  could  not  find  that  the
appellants' evidence properly engaged with those two crucial matters.
17. In the hearing before us, we asked the appellants' solicitor to take  us
to the documentary evidence which identified  Imam  Khalid,  linked  him  to
Jakim, and then linked Jakim to the Malaysian authorities. He  was  entirely
unable to do so. We asked the  appellants'  solicitor  to  take  us  to  the
evidence that Christians are  targeted  by  the  Malaysian  authorities.  He
response was only to  tell  us  that  Islam  is  the  official  religion  of
Malaysia. A constitution which enshrines one recognised  religion  does  not
equate to state-sponsored persecution of members of other religions.

18. The appellants argue  that  the  Judge  should  have  made  two  crucial
findings of fact

      (i) the appellants are persecuted by Imam Khalid, and

      (ii) the Malaysian authorities condone that persecution.

The Judge did not, and could not, make those two findings of  fact,  because
there was no reliable evidence placed before her to lay the foundations  for
such findings.
19. At paragraph 49 of MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, it was said that  "Where
a tribunal has referred to considering all the evidence,  a  reviewing  body
should be very slow to conclude that that tribunal overlooked  some  factor,
simply  because  the  factor  is  not  explicitly   referred   to   in   the
determination concerned". In  the  same  paragraph  "Where  a  tribunal  has
referred to considering all the evidence, a reviewing body  should  be  very
slow to conclude that that tribunal overlooked some factor,  simply  because
the factor is not explicitly referred to in the determination concerned".

20. The findings at [17] to [45] are findings which  were  well  within  the
range of findings which could competently  be  made  by  the  Judge  on  the
evidence placed before her. It is not an arguable error of law for  a  Judge
to give less weight or greater weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
alleged. Nor is it an error of law for the Judge to fail to deal with  every
factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  the  Judge's   factual
conclusions, her appraisal of the evidence or assessment of credibility,  or
her evaluation of risk does not give rise to an error of law.  Irrationality
has a very high threshold and a conclusion is not  irrational  just  because
some alternative explanation  has  been  rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
possible.

21. The Judge carefully considered each strand  of  evidence  placed  before
her. She carefully records the submissions that were made  and  then,  after
correctly directing herself in law, makes reasoned findings of  fact  before
reaching conclusions which were manifestly open to her to reach.

22.   We find that the Judge's decision, when read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

23. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

24. The appeals are dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                                                              Date 31
May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
