
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05141/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 2 November 2015                    |                   On 12 November 2015|
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                                   mr v d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero, Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of Albania, appealed against  the  refusal  of
    the Respondent of her application for political asylum  and  protection
    on human rights grounds.

2.   The Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Macdonald sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 9 July 2015.  The Appellant was represented, by  Counsel;  the
    Respondent was not.  The Appellant gave evidence.  In  a  determination
    of 13 July, promulgated on 24 July 2015, the judge dismissed the appeal
    on political asylum whilst allowing it on human rights grounds.

3.   The Appellant has  not  appealed  on  political  asylum  grounds.   The
    Respondent has appealed on human rights grounds.  Permission to  appeal
    was granted on 14 August 2015 by Judge Parkes in the following terms

         "1.  The respondent seeks permission to appeal against  a  decision
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald promulgated on 24  July
             2015 whereby the Appellant's application against the Secretary
             of State's decision was dismissed.  The application is in time
             and is admitted.


         2.   The Appellant's asylum application was  refused.   The  appeal
             was allowed on human rights  grounds  on  the   basis  of  the
             Appellant's  relationship  and  twin  sons  who  are   British
             nationals.


         3.   The grounds argue that the judge erred in failing to  identify
             the compelling circumstances that  justified  considering  the
             Appellant's case outside the Immigration  Rules,  the  finding
             that the family could not relocate was  inadequately  reasoned
             and did not properly consider the public interest which had to
             be set against the findings made  in  respect  of  the  asylum
             claim.


         4.   The judge does not appear to have considered the applicable or
             relevant aspects of the Immigration Rules  before  considering
             the position under  article  8,  the  case  of  Chen  is  also
             relevant.  Given the need to assess article 8  with  reference
             to the Immigration Rules it is arguable that the judge erred.


         5.   The grounds are arguable and permission to appeal is granted."

4.   The Appellant and her partner attended the error of law hearing,  which
    took the form  of  submissions.   These  I  have  taken  into  account,
    together with the permission application and the skeleton  argument  of
    the Appellant.

Determination

5.   The essence of a challenge to the decision is that the  judge  did  not
    identify compelling circumstances  requiring  Article  8  consideration
    outside the scope of the Immigration Rules, and ought not therefore  to
    have embarked upon the Article 8 proportionality  assessment  which  he
    did.

6.   At the error of law hearing there were  competing  submissions  on  the
    law on this matter.  Singh v SSHD [2015[  EWCA  Civ  74,  heard  on  12
    February 2015, considered and upheld, especially at paragraphs  61,  62
    and 67, the judicial approach in Izuazu (Article 8 - new Rules)  [2013]
    UKUT 45 (IAC) and R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 7200 (Admin).   It  held
    that only if, after addressing the Immigration Rules, there remains  an
    arguable case that there may be good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules by reference to Article 8 will it be necessary
    for Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
    compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently   recognised   under   the
    Immigration Rules to require the grant of leave.  If it is  clear  that
    consideration under the  Immigration  Rules  has  fully  addressed  any
    private of family life issues arising  under  Article  8  it  would  be
    sufficient simply to say that, without any need to go  on  to  consider
    the case separately from the Immigration Rules.  SSHD v SS (Congo)  and
    Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387, heard on 23 April 2015, held, especially at
    paragraphs 47, 48 and 51, that while the basic two stage analysis  will
    apply,  whether  or  not  the  Immigration  Rules  are  considered   to
    constitute a complete code, compelling circumstances have to  apply  to
    justify a grant of leave to enter or remain where  the  Rules  are  not
    complied with.   In  short,  therefore,  compelling  circumstances  are
    required, and must therefore be identified, to empower the Tribunal  to
    undertake a freestanding Article 8 proportionality assessment.

7.   In the present appeal, the  judge  considered  the  Appellant's  asylum
    claim and in conclusion rejected it [78].  "There is, however her claim
    under Article 8.  I assess this as at the date of  hearing  on  9  July
    2015."  [80].  He considered the applicable law, including Section 117B
    of the 2002 Act, and applied the five stage Razgar tests [82 -112].  He
    found that the Appellant did not meet  the  financial  requirements  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules [100] "I have  considered  whether
    the appellant meets the requirements for leave to  remain  outside  the
    rules and I have taken into account the matters to be considered  under
    Section 117B [101].  I have come to the conclusion that  the  appellant
    should be granted leave to remain outside the rules" [102].   Accepting
    that the maintenance of effective immigration control was in the public
    interest [103], the judge considered factors relevant to the  Appellant
    and her partner: "On the evidence before me  I  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal on  human rights grounds" [112].

8.   What is missing from this analysis,  the  Respondent  submits,  is  any
    recognition   of   the   need   for   exceptional   circumstances,   or
    identification  of  them,  in   order   to   ground   the   Article   8
    proportionality assessment.  I accept this submission.  If any  of  the
    factors identified in paragraphs 102 to 110 was considered to meet  the
    criterion  of  exceptionality,  it   should  have   been    identified,
    individually  or  cumulatively.   The  judge  should  not  simply  have
    embarked upon a freestanding Article 8  proportionality  analysis.   To
    have done so was an error of law, material because it  was  capable  of
    affecting, as it did, the decision upon the appeal.

9.   Mr Bonavero submitted that, even if established, this error of law  was
    immaterial, because it would not have affected the  outcome:  R  (Iran)
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at paragraph 10.   He  argued  that  the  Appellant
    satisfied  the  relevant  requirements  of   Appendix   FM,   including
    paragraph EX.1, relating to the Appellant's relationship with  children
    who are British citizens and whom it  would  not  therefore  have  been
    reasonable to expect to  leave  the  UK:  Sanade  and  Others  (British
    children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 at paragraph 95.  Since
    paragraph EX.1 was satisfied, the financial requirements in paragraph E-
    LTRP3.1 of Appendix FM  would not have been  required to be satisfied.

10.  The difficulty with the submission is that  it  requires  consideration
    of  these  numerous  requirements,  and  thus  establishing  that   the
    financial requirements were not in point. This might prove  to  be  the
    case, but it cannot be assumed without an assessment of  those  factors
    which, since Mr Bonavero handed in his skeleton argument shortly before
    the start of the hearing, the Respondent cannot have come  prepared  to
    address.  I might have reached a different conclusion had this argument
    been adduced in a Rule 24 response, but it was not.

11.  The decision contains an error of law and, in relation to human  rights
    grounds, cannot stand.  I accordingly set aside paragraphs 79  to  112.
    I preserve the remainder of  the  determination,  which  dismisses  the
    appeal on political asylum grounds.

12.  The appeal must accordingly be reheard on human rights  grounds.   This
    will afford the Appellant the opportunity to submit that Appendix FM of
    the Immigration Rules is complied with.

Decision

13.   The  original  decision  contains  an  error  of  law.   I  set  aside
    paragraphs 79 to 112, in which it allowed the appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.  I preserve the remainder of the determination,  in  which  it
    dismissed the appeal on political asylum grounds.

14.  The appeal is to be reheard on human  rights  grounds.     This  should
    take place in the First-tier Tribunal, to enable the Appellant to  make
    arguments not previously heard about compliance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules.

Signed                                                                Dated:
    11 November 2015



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis




