

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05927/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 25 February 2015                  |On 25 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                  MS RENUKA SAJEEWANI DAWUNDA MUDIYANSELAGE
                        (no ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Lashley-Bobb, Solicitor (Migrant Legal Action)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction


    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Nicholson on 31 December 2014 against  the  decision
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge JDL Edwards made  in  a  decision  and
         reasons promulgated on 26 November 2014 dismissing the  Appellant's
         asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.


    2.     The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 12 July 19869.
          She had appealed against her removal from the  United  Kingdom,  a
         decision taken by the Respondent on 30 July  2014.   The  Appellant
         had entered the United Kingdom as an overseas domestic worker  from
         Saudi Arabia in 2012.  She had escaped from  her  employers  on  22
         August 2013 and sought help from a charity.  She claimed asylum  on
         23 April 2014.  She stated that she feared to return to  Sri  Lanka
         because of her husband who had been violent towards her, denied her
         contact with her daughter and from whom she was estranged.


    3.     When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Nicholson considered that it was arguable that  Judge  Edwards  had
         erred in his assessment of the risk on return.  The Respondent  had
         accepted that the Appellant was a victim of  trafficking  and  that
         she had suffered domestic abuse in Sri  Lanka.   Those  concessions
         had not been withdrawn.  It was arguable that the  judge  had  thus
         erred when reaching his adverse credibility findings.


    4.     The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  indicating  that  the
         appeal was opposed.  Standard directions were made by the  tribunal
         and the appeal was listed for adjudication of whether or not  there
         was a material error of law.


    Submissions


    5.     Ms Lashley-Bobb for the  Appellant  relied  on  the  grounds  of
         onwards appeal  earlier  submitted,  together  with  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal.  Counsel submitted that the judge  had  erred
         by ignoring the important concessions which the Respondent had made
         in the reasons for refusal letter: see sections  2.2.a,  b  and  c.
         His credibility assessment had thus started from the  wrong  point.
         There was no doubt that trafficked women  were  to  be  treated  as
         members of particular social group: see Fornah [2006] UKHL  46  and
         related authorities.  The decision and reasons should be set  aside
         and the appeal reheard taking  the  Respondent's  concessions  into
         account.


    6.     Mr Wilding for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's rule 24
         notice.  He submitted that the decision and  reasons  disclosed  no
         error of law.  The issue of trafficking was not touched on  in  the
         judge's findings because it was not a live issue for the  tribunal.
         There was nothing in the skeleton argument which  had  been  before
         the judge to suggest that it had been argued that the Appellant was
         at risk of being retrafficked from Sri Lanka.  The judge's findings
         set out at [29] of his decision had nothing to do with trafficking.
          They had addressed the risks on return identified in the  skeleton
         argument.  The judge had found that the Appellant had not  shown  a
         well founded fear of return in objective terms.   The  finding  was
         that the Appellant was a lone female returning to Sri Lanka who was
         of no interest to the authorities.


    7.     In reply, Ms Lashley-Bobb reiterated  her  client's  case.   The
         adverse credibility findings were in effect unsound.


    No material error of law


    8.     The tribunal accepts Mr Wilding's submissions.  As  always,  the
         decision and reasons needs to be read as whole.  The judge set  out
         the Appellant's case and her evidence, including that of her expert
         witness, in succinct and  accurate  summary.   At  [19]  the  judge
         summarised the trafficking  history.   It  was  accepted  that  the
         Appellant's mother remained in Saudi Arabia where she was  working.
         At no stage later in the decision did the judge doubt the essential
         facts which the Respondent had accepted or conceded.  At section  3
         of the reasons for refusal letter, the Respondent had  stated  that
         it was not accepted that the Appellant was at risk from her husband
         on return  to  Sri  Lanka  and  that  in  any  event  there  was  a
         sufficiency of protection  available  to  her  and  the  reasonable
         option of internal relocation.


    9.     The judge gave detailed and sustainable reasons for finding that
         the Appellant had not given a credible account of her claimed fears
         of return to Sri Lanka.   There was no claim before  him  that  the
         Appellant was at risk on return  of  being  retrafficked  from  Sri
         Lanka. There was no evidence that  such  an  event  was  reasonably
         likely.  The judge found that  the  Appellant  had  taken  O  level
         equivalents at school, had worked in Sri Lanka and would be able to
         find employment again.


    10.    The decision was a comprehensive reflection on the issues raised
         in the appeal, demonstrating abundant anxious scrutiny.  There  was
         no error of law.  There  is  no  basis  for  interfering  with  the
         judge's decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal, which dismissal
         must stand.


    DECISION


    The tribunal finds that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    original decision, which stands unchanged






    Signed Dated 25 February 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
