
                                                                [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/05350/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          | Determination issued             |
|on 7th March 2016                         | on 30th March 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             rashid yusuf bakari

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M D Templeton, of Quinn, Martin & Langan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies himself as a citizen of Somalia, born  on  3rd
    March 1983.  It is accepted that he speaks Kibajuni, and is of a Bajuni
    background.  The question has always been whether he is from the  small
    population of the Bajuni islands in southern Somalia, or from elsewhere
    in East Africa, where many other Bajuni live, passing  himself  off  as
    Somalian to gain asylum.

 2. The appellant's original claim resulted in  a  determination  by  Judge
    Forbes, promulgated on 4th February 2009, dismissing his appeal.

 3. A  renewed  claim  arising  from  further  submissions  resulted  in  a
    determination by Judge Debra Clapham, promulgated 23rd  December  2015,
    again dismissing his appeal.

 4. The first ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal is that Judge  Clapham
    erred by failing to  accept  the  submission  for  the  appellant  that
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702, [2003] Imm AR 1, did  not  apply.   That
    ground is misconceived, as was  the  corresponding  submission  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The submission there appears  to  have  been  made
    without any direct reference to  what  Devaseelan  actually  says.   As
    stated at paragraph 39(1) thereof, the previous determination is always
    the starting point.  That does not mean that  subsequent  evidence  may
    not lead  to  another  outcome,  but  that  requires  to  be  reasoned.
    Devaseelan accepts at paragraph 42(7)  that  there  may  be  occasional
    cases where it would be right for the judge to look at the matter as if
    the first determination had never been  made.   If  that  is  what  the
    appellant's  representatives  meant  by  their  submission,  it  is   a
    principle  to  be  found  within  Devaseelan,  not  an  argument   that
    Devaseelan was inapplicable.

 5. In any event, this case did not go so far  as  to  require  the  second
    judge to look at the matter as if the  first  determination  had  never
    been made.  The proper case for the appellant  was  that  some  of  the
    findings of Judge Forbes fell to be disregarded,  based  on  later  and
    better information which was had not been before Judge Forbes, and that
    a  fresh  decision  required  to  take  account  of  all  evidence  now
    available.

 6.  The  appellant's  second  ground  of  appeal  is  that  Judge  Clapham
    inadequately considered the fresh evidence which was available  to  her
    but had not been available to Judge Forbes.

 7. The most significant aspect of  this  ground  is  that  the  respondent
    founded upon a Sprakab report dated 23rd October 2008.  That report  is
    partly based not on linguistic analysis but on the appellant's lack  of
    knowledge of "country and culture", including inability to describe the
    currency of Somalia.  At paragraph 50 of his determination Judge Forbes
    founded strongly upon this point, on the view that the  appellant  said
    that he had accurately described the bank notes used  in  Somalia,  and
    there was no reason for the analyst to lie.  Before Judge  Clapham  the
    appellant relied upon new evidence including certified translations  of
    the Sprakab interview by which he sought to show that  the  information
    he gave about Somalian currency was accurate.  This would  then  become
    evidence not going against the appellant but positively in his favour.

 8. The respondent's submission to Judge Clapham, recorded at paragraph  13
    of her determination, is that Sprakab's comments about currency  should
    be disregarded.  That was an appropriate concession,  although  perhaps
    it should have gone even further.  It was not the function  of  Sprakab
    to comment on matters of local knowledge,  but  is  the  appellant  was
    right about the currency, that was not neutral, but in his favour.  The
    submission for the appellant was of course that the appellant's correct
    answers to those questions were to his credit.

 9. Under the heading of Findings  and  Reasons,  Judge  Clapham  does  not
    return to this particular issue.  She takes the determination of  Judge
    Forbes  as  her  starting  point,  and  finds  (correctly)   that   his
    conclusions were not based solely on the  Sprakab  report.   She  notes
    that Judge Forbes was highly critical of a report by Dr Faulkner,  upon
    which the appellant relied at the earlier stage, and  she  goes  on  to
    deal with a second report by Dr Faulkner, dated  22nd  June  2015.   At
    paragraphs 39 to  44  she  gives  her  reasons  for  not  accepting  Dr
    Faulkner's conclusions.  Those reasons have not been subjected  to  any
    specific criticism.

10.   At paragraph 45 the judge notes "for the sake of  completeness"  that
    she also had before her a Medical Foundation report and a GP's  report,
    but she sees nothing therein to allow her to depart from  the  original
    findings "in relation to them", which appears to  overlook  that  there
    was a later GP's report, mentioned below.

11. At paragraph 46 the judge describes a statement  by  the  appellant  as
    "self-serving" and notes that he made no  attempt  to  explain  queries
    about his birth certificate.

12. Ground 2 also criticises Judge Clapham for failing to make findings  on
    whether the appellant's credibility is  advanced  by  production  of  a
    letter from  Glasgow  Central  Mosque  confirming  his  attendance  for
    worship there since January 2009, and on fresh evidence in a GP  report
    regarding scars on the appellant's body.

13. Mr Matthews conceded that it could not be said  that  within  the  four
    corners of the determination Judge Clapham showed that  she  took  into
    account that the appellant had previously been  thought  to  have  been
    unable accurately to describe the currency of Somalia, whereas in  fact
    he had got that right.  He acknowledged  that  it  was  a  point  which
    weighed heavily with Judge Forbes, and which Judge Clapham had not  met
    head on.  However, he submitted  that  her  decision  as  a  whole  was
    nevertheless an adequate explanation  of  why  the  appellant  did  not
    succeed,  even  taking  proper  account  of  the  further  evidence  he
    presented.  There was no error in the judge's analysis and rejection of
    the further report by Dr Faulkner.  She did  not  specifically  mention
    the letter from the mosque, but the appellant's attendance  there  from
    2009 to 2015 was all subsequent to his original claim, and even to  its
    rejection by the Tribunal.

14. I agree with the submission for the respondent that  it  is  of  little
    significance that the judge did not deal specifically with  the  letter
    from the mosque.  The appellant's  attendance  from  2009  onwards  has
    little if any bearing on whether his evidence in 2008  and  in  January
    2009 was consistent with his claim to be  a  Muslim.   (The  underlying
    importance is that all  Somali  Bajuni  are  of  a  Muslim  background,
    whereas speakers of Kibajuni or Kiswahili from elsewhere in East Africa
    might be of either Muslim or Christian background; so if not a  Muslim,
    as he claimed to be, the appellant was unlikely to be from Somalia.)

15. Mr Matthews also submitted that there was no material error in the lack
    of further analysis of the medical evidence, as the new point on  which
    the appellant sought to rely was evidence of some scarring, whereas  he
    was recorded at paragraph 12 of the determination by  Judge  Forbes  as
    saying in evidence that he "carried no marks on his body", and  in  the
    end his representative at that stage did not appear to have pursued  an
    application for an adjournment to produce  a  further  medical  report.
    This historic matter does not  appear  to  be  capable  of  having  any
    significant affect on the outcome.  Mr Matthews further submitted  that
    any evidence of memory problems would not explain away  findings  about
    deliberate prevarication.

16. Having heard the submissions for both sides, I indicated that  while  I
    was not persuaded by ground 1, or by all the elements in  ground  2,  I
    was satisfied that the unfortunate  omission  to  tackle  head  on  the
    matter of the evidence about Somalian currency was so material that the
    decision by Judge Clapham could not safely stand.   It  was  plainly  a
    point of great significance to Judge Forbes.  It was one  to  which  he
    was entitled to give a good deal of  adverse  weight  on  the  evidence
    before him (although Mr  Matthews  accepted  that  the  view  that  the
    analyst would have to have been guilty of lying, and the  whole  report
    thereby tainted, went too far).  Although the submission  before  Judge
    Clapham for the respondent was  that  the  comments  by  Sprakab  about
    currency should be disregarded, which was fair as far as it  went,  the
    matter went rather further.  The  point  had  been  converted  from  an
    adverse one to a favourable one, and  a  central  point  of  the  first
    adverse determination had  been  eliminated.   Although  even  a  brief
    reason might have been enough, I think the appellant  had  to  have  an
    explicit explanation from the second judge of how this particular point
    was resolved.

17. Although the case requires a fresh decision in the First-tier Tribunal,
    the second Judge's reasoning of those matters on which  she  did  opine
    does not have to be either formally excised or formally preserved.   It
    is there for parties to make such further  submissions  as  they  think
    appropriate, and for the next judge to make up his or her mind as he or
    she sees fit.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law,  as  explained
    above, and as to some extent was conceded. The error is so material  as
    to require the decision to be set aside and remade.  No findings of the
    First-tier Tribunal are formally preserved.  Under section  12(2)(b)(i)
    of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and  extent  of
    judicial fact-finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such
    that it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the  case
    are not to include Judge Clapham.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

                           [pic]
                           11 March 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
