
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05668/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 January 2016                   |On 25 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Pristimah Vintaremdoo
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Ms J Rothwell, instructed by North Kensington Law Centre
For the appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant, Pristimah Vinktaremdoo, date  of  birth  24.12.75,  is  a
    citizen of Mauritius.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Petherbridge  promulgated  29.9.14,  allowing  on  human
    rights grounds only the claimant's appeal against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse her asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights claims. The Judge heard the appeal on 11.9.14.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    15.10.14. However, when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge C Lane granted permission to  appeal  on
    2.2.15.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 23.7.15 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  As set out in my error of law decision, I found  such  error
    of law in the making of  the  decision  of  Judge  Petherbridge  as  to
    require it to be set aside and remade. In summary,  I  found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge gave too much weight to the single fact  that
    the claimant's eldest child has entered secondary school  education  in
    concluding that it was not reasonable to expect the  claimant  and  her
    family to leave the UK. The judge failed to have regard to all relevant
    circumstances including the public interest in controlling  immigration
    and the cost to the public purse of educating the child in the UK, when
    there was no entitlement to such education.

 5. However, as there had been no appeal or cross-appeal in relation to the
    findings and conclusion of Judge Petherbridge dismissing the claimant's
    asylum and humanitarian protection claims, I considered that that  part
    of the decision must stand and the appeal remained dismissed  on  those
    grounds. The only  matter  in  issue  adjourned  for  the  continuation
    hearing was that of private and family life under article 8 ECHR.

 6. The matter came back before me for a Case Management Review hearing  on
    8.9.15, following the granting of an application for adjournment of the
    continuation hearing in order to adduce expert evidence on  the  impact
    on the appellant's children of being removed from the UK.  At  the  CMR
    the expert report was not ready but believed to be able to be served by
    the end of October 2015.

 7. The report was lodged with the tribunal by fax on 12.11.15, but sent to
    an out of date address for the Secretary of State, with the effect that
    Mr Staunton had not seen the report and was  entirely  unaware  of  its
    existence prior  to  the  continuation  hearing  listed  before  me  on
    22.1.16. He stated that he was consequently not in a position  to  deal
    with the issues raised in the report.

 8. However there are further concerns raised by the report, which suggests
    that there is a risk on return for  the  appellant's  children  and  an
    issue as to viability of internal flight. In consequence,  Ms  Rothwell
    drafted by hand on the morning of the listed hearing an application for
    permission to  appeal  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to asylum and humanitarian protection. As  stated  above,  the
    appellant had not previously  sought  to  challenge  the  findings  and
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of these issues.

 9. On reflection, it appears to me that the fairest course is  to  revisit
    my error of law finding setting aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by setting aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    its entirety and remitting the decision to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    be remade  afresh  with  no  findings  preserved,  thereby  giving  the
    opportunity for all relevant issues to be considered anew.  Neither  Mr
    Staunton nor Ms Rothwell demurred from this proposal.

10. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the facts are  unclear  on  a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as they now are in this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of those issues.

11. In all the circumstances, and at the  invitation  of  both  parties  to
    relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I do
    so on the basis that this is a case which  falls  squarely  within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error of law has been to deprive the appellant of  a  fair  hearing
    and that the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is  such  that,
    having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with  cases
    fairly and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I  find  that
    it is appropriate to remit this appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusion & Decision

12. For the reasons set out herein and in my error of law decision, I  find
    that he making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the decision to  be  remade  in  the  First-tier
                    Tribunal.




                    [pic]
                    Signed
                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated



Consequential Directions

13. The decision in the appeal is remitted to be heard at Taylor  House  at
    the first convenient date after 6 weeks;

14. The estimated length of hearing is 3 hours, the only witness is  likely
    to be the appellant;

15. No interpreter is required.

16. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  except
    Judge Petherbridge.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did  not  make  an  order.  Given  the  circumstances,  I  make  no
anonymity order.

Fee Award     Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee  award.
I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.




                    [pic]
                    Signed
                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated
