
[pic]
IAC-CH-AP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05602/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th August 2015                  |On 01st September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     h h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Smith, Counsel instructed on behalf of Parker
                    Rhodes Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Peterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iran, seeks permission  to  appeal  against
    the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Upson)  who,  in  a
    determination promulgated  on  10th  June  2015  dismissed  her  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent taken on 10th May 2012.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269 as amended) I make an anonymity order  as  result  of
    the medical evidence provided.  Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, no report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify the applicant. For the avoidance  of  doubts,  this
    order also applies to both the applicant and  to  the  Respondent.  The
    failure to comply with this order  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 3. The Appellant's history is as follows.  The Appellant first entered the
    United Kingdom on 25th February 2011 in possession of a  valid  student
    visa.  On 17th April 2012  she  claimed  asylum,  having  undertaken  a
    screening  interview  on  17th  April  of  that  year  and  substantive
    interview on 26th April.  Her application for asylum was considered  by
    the Secretary of State but was refused in a letter dated 10th May 2012.
     The Appellant appealed that decision and as a result of that  it  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Upson).

 4. In his determination promulgated on 10th June 2015, he  considered  the
    basis of her claim for asylum, firstly, by  rejecting  her  account  of
    having been the subject of abuse at the  hands  of  a  family  relative
    which had led to anti-regime material being discovered with  an  arrest
    warrant being issued.  As to a second issue relating to her  conversion
    to Christianity, he reached the conclusion on the evidence having heard
    from two witnesses in addition to the Appellant, that she had converted
    to Christianity and  could  be  "properly  described  as  a  Christian"
    however in the determination at [56-57] the judge found  that  she  was
    not a proselytising Christian and also that she would not be at risk on
    return to Iran by reason of her conversion to Christianity.

 5. The Appellant applied to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal and permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 7th
    July 2015.  The reasons for that were as follows:-

         "It is arguable as asserted in the grounds that the judge erred  in
         finding that the Appellant's claims are not credible with regard to
         sexual abuse on the basis of one  discrepancy  which  the  evidence
         indicates was not a discrepancy.

         It is also arguable that  the  judge  erred  in  having  found  the
         Appellant to have converted to Christianity, failing to  take  into
         account HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31."

 6. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 notice  on  22nd  July  2015.   In  that
    response it was argued that the credibility finding at paragraph 49 was
    open to the judge and that whilst the judge accepted  that  she  was  a
    Christian he did not accept that she had been  proselytising.   It  was
    further found that the judge considered the degree of  risk  associated
    with the Appellant and it was open for her to return to Iran.

 7. The matter came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Ms Smith of Counsel and the Secretary  of  State  by  Ms
    Peterson, Senior Presenting Officer.  Ms Smith relied upon the  written
    Grounds before the Tribunal.  In respect of the judge's findings as  to
    risk on return relating to her religion and conversion to Christianity,
    she submitted that the judge failed to have regard to material evidence
    and in that respect made reference to the evidence of the Reverend  and
    also the Appellant.  In  particular  she  made  reference  to  page  15
    (evidence of the Reverend  )  who  referred  to  her  "having  recently
    brought a friend along to the group as she shares her  Christian  faith
    with others".  She also  made  reference  to  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement at paragraphs 29, 31 and 32, all  of  which  related  to  her
    conduct and in particular at paragraph [29] she  stated  that  she  had
    brought an Iranian friend, Daniel to church.  She made reference to the
    fact that as a result of that he was now attending a church and  wanted
    to become a Christian.  At [31] she  made  reference  to  conversations
    with her sister who was a devout Muslim but she was "trying to convince
    her to become a Christian", but that she was very much against it.  She
    also said at [31] "I will continue  to  talk  to  both  of  them  about
    Christianity".  At [32] the Appellant  gave  evidence  about  what  she
    would do upon return to  Iran  having  converted  to  Christianity  and
    speaking to others about her faith.  In this context, she referred  the
    Tribunal to the country guidance decision of FS at [161] as set out  at
    paragraph 5 of the  Grounds  and  therefore  she  submitted  that   the
    judge's finding at [57] that she was in effect  an  "ordinary  convert"
    was flawed.

 8. In the alternative  she  also  submitted  the  situation  in  Iran  had
    worsened since 2004 when the decision of FS had been decided.  She made
    reference to the evidence in the Appellant's bundle highlighted in  the
    key passage index relating to the decision  of  Christian  converts  in
    Iran as at today including the arrests of members of house churches and
    the abuse of those who  had  converted  from  Islam.   There  was  also
    reference made to the Country Information Report provided on behalf  of
    the Respondent  at  page  56  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  which  made
    reference to members of evangelical and  house  churches  who  actively
    seek to evangelise others and engage in proselytising activities are at
    real risk of persecution in Iran.  Thus it was submitted that the judge
    erred in failing to make  findings  on  the  country  evidence  and  by
    failing to take into account the worsening country situation in Iran.

 9. Ms Peterson on behalf of the Secretary of State conceded that the judge
    had made an error of law and in  particular  that  his  assessment  and
    analysis of risk on return to Iran was not complete in that  it  failed
    to take into account the principles set out in  HJ  (Iran)  as  to  the
    Appellant's conduct if she were to return to Iran.   Thus  she  was  in
    agreement with Ms Smith that the determination did disclose an error of
    law in the judge's determination and as a result the decision  relating
    to the asylum claim could not stand.

10. I am satisfied that the judge's determination does disclose an error of
    law.  It is plain from reading the determination that he  accepted  the
    Appellant was a convert to Christianity notwithstanding the late  stage
    that it had been  made  in  her  claim  at  [55]  and  he  reached  the
    conclusion on the evidence and in  particular  following  the  evidence
    from two witnesses that she was  properly  described  as  a  Christian.
    Whilst at [56] he made reference to "all of the  evidence"  before  him
    pointing to the Appellant being "no more than  a  good  member  of  the
    congregation of the  church",  that  did  not  take  into  account  the
    evidence highlighted by Ms Smith set out not only  in  the  Appellant's
    evidence but also that of the Reverend and that it went  beyond  having
    brought a friend referred to in the  determination  as  David,  but  is
    referred to as Daniel in the documents.  In any event, as  Ms  Peterson
    accepts, there was no consideration of the  principle  set  out  in  HJ
    (Iran) and her conduct upon return to Iran which  is  relevant  to  any
    risk.  The evidence before the judge in the  Appellant's  statement  at
    [32] made it plain that  if  she  were  returned  she  would  carry  on
    speaking to others about her faith.  I also consider that Ms  Smith  is
    correct in her submission that at [57] the judge did not  consider  the
    most up-to-date information  relating  to  the  position  of  Christian
    converts in Iran.  Consequently for those reasons the  decision  cannot
    stand.

11.  I would observe that there was a second ground relied upon by Ms Smith
    in which it was submitted that the judge's rejection of  her  claim  to
    have been a victim of sexual abuse because of  an  alleged  discrepancy
    referred to by the judge at [49] was in fact not a discrepancy.  Whilst
    it is not necessary for me to consider that matter any  further,  given
    that I have found an error of law in relation to Ground 1, for sake  of
    completeness, it is plain to me that there was no discrepancy as  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Martin stated when granting permission.   The  judge  at
    paragraph [49] made reference to the Appellant's witness statement  and
    also to her evidence in cross-examination.  He recorded that in  cross-
    examination the Appellant had said that "she and her sisters  had  been
    sexually  abused.   The  abuse  of  her   sisters   did   not   involve
    intercourse".  The judge made reference to this by stating that, "at no
    point did she say that the abuse of her  sisters  had  involved  rape",
    however the notes attached to the Grounds when read with  paragraph  24
    make it plain that it was the Appellant's  case  that  her  sister  was
    raped later in February 2012 and that the answer that she had given was
    in response to a question about what had happened when she  first  came
    from the UK and therefore there was no discrepancy in that regard.

12. Both advocates agree that this appeal and the basis upon which  it  was
    set aside falls within the Practice Statement (as amended) at paragraph
    7.2 in the light of the factual nature of the  evidence  to  be  given.
    Thus it was agreed by consent between the parties that the  appropriate
    course was for the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set  aside
    and for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  there
    to be an assessment of all the evidence which will include the evidence
    of the Appellant and also the country materials.  Whilst it is not  the
    ordinary practice of the Tribunal to  remit  cases  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, there are reasons why in this case such a  course  should  be
    adopted, having given particular regard to the overriding objective and
    that there are issues of fact that are  central  to  this  appeal  that
    require determination which have not been taken into account.

13. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and  the
    case is to be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Bradford  or
    Manchester for a hearing in accordance with  Section  12(2)(b)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act and paragraph 7.2 of the Practice
    Statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).

14.  None of the findings of fact shall remain  save  for  the  finding  at
    paragraph 52 of the determination in which the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant was a Christian convert.





Decision

The decision of the Immigration Judge is to be set  aside  and  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for hearing in accordance with Section  12(2)(b)  of
the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act and  Practice  Statement  of  10th
February 2010 (as amended).

An anonymity direction is made.

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269 as amended) I make an  anonymity  order  as  a  result  of  the
medical evidence provided.  Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the applicant. For the avoidance of doubt, this order also  applies
to both the applicant and to the Respondent.  The  failure  to  comply  with
this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

