
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05294/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 June 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     As
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Knorr, instructed by Wilsons, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing an appeal by the appellant following a hearing  on  7  March
    2013 against the respondent's decision made on 9 May 2012  refusing  to
    vary his leave to remain following the refusal of his claim  on  asylum
    and human rights grounds.  Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in a decision issued on 25 April 2013.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born in 1994.  He arrived  in
    the UK on  17  January  2010  and  subsequently  claimed  asylum.   His
    application was refused on 20 May 2010.  The respondent did not  accept
    that the appellant was born in 1994 but assessed his year of  birth  as
    1992.

3.   The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before IJ Gordon on 7 July 2010.  Although she found that he  was  born
    in 1994, she did not accept that he would be at real  risk  of  serious
    harm on return to Afghanistan and his appeal was dismissed.  Permission
    to appeal was refused by both the First-tier and  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    However, in the light of the findings about his  age,  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave until 18 February 2012.  On  16  February  2012  he
    made an application for further leave to remain, in substance repeating
    the basis of his previous claim.  His appeal was dismissed by the First-
    tier Tribunal but this decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal and
    remitted for rehearing.  It was  reheard  on  7  March  2013  by  Judge
    Buckwell and dismissed on all grounds.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The judge summarised the basis of the appellant's  claim  in  [5].   He
    said that he had a well-founded fear of persecution if he  returned  to
    Afghanistan as his father had been  a  commander  with  Jamiat-e-Islami
    when the Taliban governed the country.  His father was  a  wealthy  man
    and had had contracts with the previous government, but lost them  when
    the Taliban came to power.  Nevertheless, he was still perceived to  be
    wealthy  and  attracted  the  attention  of  criminal  gangs  including
    kidnappers.  The appellant claimed that he was kidnapped  and  released
    only when his father made a payment of US$93,000.  He also claimed that
    his father and family  members  had  encountered  problems  with  rival
    commanders and in particular one identified as Commander Hamidullah who
    belonged to Hezb-e-Islami.  The  animosity  between  them  led  to  the
    appellant's father deciding to send him to Europe to save his life.  In
    submissions made in support of his application, it was  said  that  the
    whereabouts of his father were not known but other family members  were
    in Pakistan and a paternal uncle had been captured by Hezb-e-Islami.

5.   A witness statement dated 16 February 2012 from the appellant was  also
    submitted in support of the application.  He said that his family  were
    of Tajik ethnicity and where they lived it was common for  people  from
    their ethnic group to be involved with the Jamiat-e-Islami.  Those  who
    were Pashtuns were more likely to be affiliated to Hezb-e-Islami or the
    Taliban.  His father had been a commander with the Mujahidin, which had
    taken over the capital city Kabul  when  the  government  supported  by
    Russia had collapsed.  His father had secured valuable  contracts  from
    the new government and although the appellant was young at the time, he
    was aware that his father  had  engaged  armed  protection  for  family
    members.  Following the fall of the Taliban and President Karzai coming
    to power and international forces being in the country, his father  had
    set up new businesses.  Although his father's wealth had  been  reduced
    during the Taliban regime, the family were still perceived  as  wealthy
    and the rivalry with Commander Hamidullah remained.  His son  had  been
    killed and it was perceived that the appellant's father was involved in
    the death.

6.   In July 2008 the appellant and  family  members  set  out  to  visit  a
    shrine in Herat but their vehicle was stopped by a  group  of  men  who
    were masked and armed.  The appellant was kidnapped  and  driven  away.
    He was kept in a dark basement.  He was punched  and  detained  for  43
    days.  He gave the captors his father's  telephone  number  which  they
    said they already held.  Every day he was  threatened  with  death  and
    asked about the activities of his father and about his land and wealth.
     He was released when US$93,000 was paid.  He said that even after  his
    release, those  who  kidnapped  him  continued  to  pursue  the  family
    demanding more  funds.   For  this  reason  they  left  Kabul  and  the
    appellant was put in the hands of an agent so that his travel to Europe
    could be arranged.   The  family  first  moved  to  Iran  and  then  to
    Pakistan.  His father had lost contact with his mother on  the  journey
    to Iran and he had heard his father had been  killed  but  he  was  not
    sure.  His mother and siblings resided in Pakistan.  He  believed  that
    his life would be in  danger  if  he  was  returned  to  Kabul  due  to
    perceptions about his father's wealth.

7.   His application was supported with a number  of  enclosures  identified
    by the judge in [14].  These  included  not  only  background  evidence
    about  the  situation  in  Afghanistan  but  letters  relating  to  the
    appellant including a document addressed to him  seeking  an  execution
    due to the killing of Commander Hamidullah's son and stating  that  the
    appellant's uncle was in their captivity.  The letter was  said  to  be
    from Hezb-e-Islami and issued in Parwan province on 24 September  2011.
    There was also a letter said to be from the  police  command  in  Kabul
    stating that in response to a request for security for  the  appellant,
    there would not be sufficient resources to respond and a letter in  the
    name of  the  Taliban  addressed  to  his  father  demanding  that  the
    appellant be  sent  to  join  them  and  threatening  the  family  with
    punishment including a threat to blow up their house.  A correction was
    also made to his previous statement to the effect that the  money  paid
    for his release was $90,000 not $93,000.

8.   The judge set out in [16] - [20]  the  substance  of  the  respondent's
    decision in the decision letter of 9 May 2012.  It was the respondent's
    view  that  the  credibility  assessment  of  Judge   Gordon   remained
    authoritative and that the account given by the appellant  was  neither
    plausible  nor  credible.   She  noted  that  documents  sent  by   the
    appellant's uncle residing in Pakistan had come  from  Afghanistan  but
    without any explanation as to how they had come into his custody.   The
    relevant envelopes had not been  provided.   The  letter  from  Hezb-e-
    Islami purported to be from their legal department  but  there  was  no
    evidence that this armed organisation had such a  department.   It  was
    noted that Commander Hamidullah's son was said to have been  killed  on
    10 September  2008  but  in  his  most  recent  witness  statement  the
    appellant had said that he had been killed earlier than that  which  is
    why he had stopped attending school and was subsequently  kidnapped  in
    July 2008.  The respondent also commented that a  membership  card  for
    the  appellant's  father  in  relation  to  Jamiat-e-Islami  giving   a
    registration date of 26 July 1992 was in remarkable condition given its
    claimed age and described the appellant's father  as  a  worker  rather
    than as a commander.

9.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and his  brother.   He
    also had a psychiatric report prepared by Dr Katona, a bundle  of  case
    law and a small number of further documents identified  in  [25].   The
    appellant gave oral evidence in substance confirming his account.   His
    brother gave evidence confirming and adopting  his  witness  statement.
    It was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the  issue  of
    credibility needed to be looked at afresh  as  at  the  hearing  before
    Judge Gordon the appellant had been a minor and no medical evidence was
    available.  There was also an expert report by Mr Peter Marsden whereas
    Judge Gordon had had no more than minimal  evidence  before  her  about
    circumstances in Afghanistan.   It  was  argued  that  the  appellant's
    family  had  had  bodyguards  and  there  were  many  armed  groups  in
    Afghanistan.  The report from Mr  Marsden  confirmed  that  there  were
    animosities  and  hostilities  between  individuals.   The  appellant's
    mental health difficulties as set out in Dr Katona's report  should  be
    taken into account.  It was argued that the appellant  and  his  family
    had  received  threats  and  that  the  family  had  left  Pakistan  in
    consequence.  On behalf of  the  respondent  it  was  argued  that  the
    appellant's evidence was unreliable and evasive and it was  simply  not
    credible that he would not have had any adverse  experiences  prior  to
    the claimed kidnapping.

The Judge's Findings and Reasons

10.  The judge set out his findings and conclusions  in  [49]  -  [69].   He
    said that he was not at all impressed by the quality  of  the  evidence
    given by the appellant [60].   He  did  not  rely  on  the  appellant's
    demeanour but said that it was clear from his summary of  the  evidence
    that the appellant had been able in response to  certain  questions  to
    give relatively clear answers but when questioned in  cross-examination
    in particular, he was often vague.  On other questions he was  able  to
    give much clearer answers.  The judge  cited  by  way  of  example  the
    appellant being able to  explain,  when  previously  he  had  said  his
    captors may have been the Taliban or otherwise he did not know who they
    were, that he stated this in his reply because he had meant that he did
    not know the individuals concerned and was therefore not sure who  they
    were.  He was also able to say the family had experienced problems from
    the Taliban.  However, having claimed that he was held for  many  days,
    when he was asked about speaking to those  who  held  him  captive,  he
    accepted that he had done so but when asked for more detail, his  reply
    was that he had not been in  a  good  situation.   He  had  been  asked
    whether he had ever asked his father who his captors had been  but  had
    said he was unable to recall asking his father that.  The  judge  found
    that to be extraordinary.
11.  The judge commented that the content of the appellant's  oral  evidence
    was  in  stark  contrast  with  the  apparent  detail  of  his  witness
    statements which had been adopted at  hearings  both  before  this  and
    previous Tribunals [61].  He gave little weight to the  record  of  the
    screening  interview.   He  commented  that  the  appellant  was  asked
    questions about Commander Hamidullah but he was unable to say  how  far
    away he  lived  from  the  appellant's  family  home.   Generally,  the
    appellant had been unable to  recall  any  detail  of  significance  in
    response to  the  questions  posed  to  him.   He  noted  that  in  re-
    examination the appellant did appear to be able to give longer and more
    detailed replies to questions put to him and was  able  to  talk  about
    documents held by his father, his last  contact  with  family  members,
    telephone warnings to his father,  warning  letters,  the  restrictions
    which the family had placed on his  own  travel  and  the  more  recent
    information that his father had been killed [63].

12.  The judge found that the evidence given by the appellant's brother  did
    not  advance  his  cause  to  any  significant  degree  in   terms   of
    establishing his credibility.  Having been  given  the  opportunity  to
    explain what difficulties his father and the family had experienced  in
    Afghanistan, his brief answer was to say that his  father  had  been  a
    contractor for the former Northern Alliance government [65].

13.  The judge summarised his findings as follows:

         "68. The Tribunal finds here that the appellant has not set  out  a
             truthful account.  It is believed that he wished  to  come  to
             this country in order to find a  better  life.   The  Tribunal
             does not believe the account of  the  appellant.   It  is  not
             accepted  that  he  was  previously  targeted,  that  he   was
             abducted, that his father paid any sum  to  release  him  from
             kidnap or that any other threats had been  made  against  him.
             The  Tribunal  does  not  give  weight  to  the  documentation
             provided in view of the general adverse  credibility  findings
             and does not accept on the basis of his claimed  account  that
             the appellant is at risk on return to Afghanistan."

14.  The judge  then  went  on  to  find  that  the  appellant  was  not  an
    individual who had a current and well-founded fear of persecution for a
    Geneva Convention reason in any part of Afghanistan or  that  he  would
    face any real risk of treatment contrary to article 3 of the  ECHR  and
    that in addition he would not face circumstances which would engage the
    2006 Regulations.  The appeal was accordingly dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

15.  In the grounds it is alleged that the  judge  committed  three  errors:
    firstly, he erred in law in his  assessment  of  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence; secondly, he failed to take into  account  relevant  evidence
    and to assess the evidence in the round and thirdly, he failed to  give
    reasons for dismissing the humanitarian  protection  appeal,  to  apply
    country guidance, to consider all relevant considerations  or  to  make
    findings on the whereabouts of the appellant's family.

16.   Ms  Knorr  dealt  initially  with  the  second  and   third   grounds,
    crystallising them into two points.  The judge had failed to deal  with
    the article 15c argument on humanitarian protection and had also failed
    to make any findings on where the appellant's family were.   The  judge
    had accepted that the appellant was vulnerable and suffered from  post-
    traumatic stress disorder but there  had  been  no  assessment  of  his
    individual circumstances in the context of a return  to  Kabul.   There
    had been evidence in two statements from his uncle but  the  judge  had
    not dealt with them.  He had made no findings on the whereabouts of the
    appellant's family and it followed, so she submitted,  that  there  had
    been no proper basis  on  which  to  simply  dismiss  the  humanitarian
    protection appeal.

17.  The first ground was dealt with in  more  detail  and  the  grounds  of
    appeal at [2] - [18] set  out  a  detailed  challenge  to  the  judge's
    findings on credibility.   It  is  argued  that  the  judge  ultimately
    rejected the appeal on the basis the appellant was unable to give  full
    answers to all questions when giving oral evidence and that  the  judge
    relied on the following factors to find  that  the  appellant  was  not
    credible: having been held captive for many days and accepting that  he
    had been spoken to his captors, when he  was  asked  for  more  details
    about what had been said, he had simply replied that he had not been in
    a good situation [60].  The judge had regarded it as extraordinary that
    the appellant was unable to recall whether  he  had  asked  his  father
    about who his kidnappers had been and had been unable to  say  how  far
    away Hamidullah had lived from the appellant's family home.

18.  The grounds then argue that it was irrational to  conclude  from  these
    factors and the other  criticisms  made  of  the  appellant's  evidence
    identified in [4] of the grounds that his evidence  was  not  credible.
    Although the judge had taken into account Dr Katona's  report,  he  had
    failed expressly to acknowledge that the appellant had  been  diagnosed
    with a significant learning disability or to  take  this  into  account
    when assessing the oral evidence.  The grounds raise issues about  what
    inferences should be drawn from the appellant's evidence and argue that
    some of the judge's conclusions were unreasonable and to this extent he
    took irrelevant considerations into account.  The appellant  had  given
    extensive evidence about matters  which  had  not  been  challenged  or
    tested orally and the judge had failed to take into  account  the  fact
    that Mr Marsden had confirmed the plausibility of a number  of  aspects
    of the appellant's evidence.

19.  It was submitted in particular that the uncle's  evidence  should  have
    been taken into account  because  of  its  importance  and  dealt  with
    specifically.  The judge also erred, so it is argued,  in  the  way  he
    dealt with the  documentary  evidence  by  not  giving  weight  to  the
    documents in the light of his general adverse credibility findings  and
    by not looking at the evidence in the round.  The judge had  said  that
    he gave little weight to the asylum interview but it is argued that  he
    had failed to take into account the question of whether the appellant's
    evidence had been consistent and had also failed to factor  in  to  his
    assessment of  the  appellant's  evidence  the  fact  that  he  was  an
    exceptionally vulnerable young man.

20.  Ms Tanner submitted that the judge's assessment  of  the  evidence  was
    exemplary and that the grounds amounted to no  more  than  a  sustained
    disagreement with his findings of fact which were properly open to him.
     The judge had been right to take as his starting  point  the  previous
    determination by Judge Gordon.  He had then considered  the  additional
    evidence from Mr Marsden and Dr Katona.  He reviewed  the  evidence  in
    the round and was entitled to comment in  the  light  of  the  detailed
    evidence given in the witness statement that the  appellant's  evidence
    in cross-examination had been vague.  It had been open to the judge  to
    comment in [62] that generally the appellant was unable to  recall  any
    detail of significance in response to the questions posed to him.   She
    accepted that the judge had not dealt in terms  with  the  humanitarian
    protection appeal but in the light of his findings of fact there was no
    basis on which that appeal could succeed.  It was clear that  the  core
    of the appellant's account was rejected and  that  the  judge  did  not
    believe his evidence about his family.

Assessment of the Issues

21.  The issue for me at this stage of the appeal is whether the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law such that its decision should be  set  aside.   I
    shall deal firstly with the challenge to the judge's findings of  fact.
    Such a challenge can only succeed if his  findings  were  not  properly
    open to him on the evidence or can be categorised  as  unreasonable  or
    irrational.  They may also be erroneous in law if relevant matters were
    left out of account when his evidence was assessed.

22.  The initial challenge in the grounds is  that  there  was  no  adequate
    basis for rejecting the appellant's evidence in that the judge was  not
    entitled to find that he lacked credibility on the basis of the replies
    that he gave about what had been said to those who  held  him  captive,
    the fact he did not recall whether he had  asked  his  father  who  his
    kidnappers were and had been unable to say how far away from  Commander
    Hamidullah the family had lived.  It is also argued in the grounds that
    the appellant's evidence in cross-examination that he was not sure  how
    much ransom had been paid for his release and his comment that he could
    not explain why he could not recall matters as they had happened a long
    time ago, the fact that he was unable to be more clear  about  who  his
    kidnappers were and in particular whether they were from  the  Taliban,
    whether he had ever seen the person who had threatened to kill him  and
    whether people at his school had told him someone was looking  for  him
    did not provide an adequate basis from which to draw an adverse finding
    on credibility.  It was also argued that the judge had failed  to  take
    proper account of Dr Katona's report and failed to look at  matters  in
    the round.

23.  These grounds do not satisfy me that the appellant is able to meet  the
    high threshold of showing that the judge's findings of  fact  were  not
    properly open to him.  The judge made it clear that when assessing  the
    evidence he took into account all  the  documentation  whether  or  not
    specifically referred to and that  when  considering  the  veracity  of
    documentation he was guided by the Tribunal decision in Tanveer   Ahmed
    [49].  He referred again to considering the evidence in the round  when
    commenting in [50] that it  was  for  him  to  conclude  whether  Judge
    Gordon's findings should stand or whether consideration of evidence  in
    the round should lead to a different view on credibility.  He  referred
    to the reports submitted in evidence.  The  report  of  Mr  Marsden  is
    covered in [51] - [53].  He was clearly aware from this report that  Mr
    Marsden had expressed the view that the appellant would be particularly
    vulnerable [51] and that if his father had died then he  would  not  be
    able to benefit from his previous protection or  influence  his  father
    might otherwise have [53].  The psychiatric report from Dr  Katona  was
    considered in [54].

24.  The judge was entitled to comment in  [57]  that  the  assessments  and
    professional opinions expressed including assessments  of  plausibility
    on the appellant's account did not of themselves  provide  an  absolute
    assurance that the account  he  gave  of  his  claimed  experiences  in
    Afghanistan and his fear of future  risk  on  return  were  necessarily
    truthful.  The use of the word "absolute" must be read in  context  and
    when the determination is read as  a  whole,  there  is  no  reason  to
    believe the judge  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  evidence  simply
    because  the  reports  did  not  provide  an  absolute   assurance   of
    credibility, an  impossible  standard  if  read  literally,  not  least
    because the judge balanced what he said about  the  expert  reports  by
    acknowledging that the standard of proof was still relatively  low  but
    the burden was on the appellant.

25.  The judge also commented in [58] that, when considering Judge  Gordon's
    decision, it was  also  appropriate  to  take  into  account  that  the
    appellant at that hearing had  been  unrepresented  and  that  for  any
    individual, let  alone  a  vulnerable  individual,  facing  a  Tribunal
    hearing  with  or  without  the  support  of  a  social  worker  was  a
    significant and very challenging scenario.  He also  repeated  that  he
    took into account the views and the conclusions in  the  report  of  Mr
    Marsden.

26.  There is nothing to support a contention that the judge  did  not  take
    the reports into account and give proper weight to them in the  context
    of the evidence as a whole.   He  went  on  to  make  findings  on  the
    appellant's credibility.  This was an issue of fact for him to  assess.
    He did not find the appellant to be an  impressive  witness  and  I  am
    satisfied that he  gave  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for  this
    conclusion.  He was  entitled  to  comment  on  the  vagueness  of  the
    appellant's answers in cross-examination in contrast to the  detail  in
    his witness statement.  It was argued by Ms Knorr that it was wrong  to
    contrast cross-examination with examination-in-chief when  very  little
    further evidence had been given and in  any  event  the  appellant  had
    given clearer evidence in re-examination.

27.  However, the point the judge was entitled to make  was  that  generally
    the appellant  was  unable  to  recall  details  of  significance  when
    questioned: [62].  The grounds identify details in the evidence and set
    out arguments about the inferences which could or  should  properly  be
    drawn from the evidence but in substance,  these  are  arguments  about
    issues of fact and the inferences to be drawn from primary fact.   They
    do not satisfy me that the judge erred in law in the view  he  took  of
    the credibility of the appellant's evidence.

28.  The judge dealt with the evidence of the appellant's brother  in  [65].
    He explained why he took the view that it did not  to  any  significant
    degree help establish the appellant's credibility.  It is  argued  that
    the judge should have made specific findings on the evidence  from  the
    appellant's uncle but the judge was  clearly  aware  of  that  evidence
    [23].  The appellant had been asked about his family in  re-examination
    and these answers are recorded in [33].  There is no reason to  believe
    that the uncle's evidence  was  left  out  of  account  and  I  am  not
    satisfied that the judge erred in law by not dealing specifically  with
    that evidence.

29.  The judge is also criticised for the way he dealt with the  documentary
    evidence where in [68] he says that he did not give  weight  to  it  in
    view of his general adverse credibility findings.   If  the  judge  had
    left  the  documentary  evidence  out  of  account  when   making   his
    credibility findings, he would have fallen into  error  but  I  am  not
    satisfied that this was the case.  As I  have  already  indicated,  the
    judge said on a number of occasions that he took all the evidence  into
    account and there is no reason to believe that he did not do so.  I  am
    not satisfied that he fell into the  error  of  compartmentalising  the
    evidence when making his findings of fact.  In summary, the  challenges
    in the grounds to the judge's findings of fact do not satisfy  me  that
    he erred in law in this respect.

30.  It is  argued  that  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to  give  specific
    consideration to  the  humanitarian  protection  appeal  under  article
    15(c).  It is correct that he did not deal specifically with this issue
    and made no reference to it in [70]-[71] even  though  this  appeal  is
    referred to as being dismissed in [73].  However, I  am  not  satisfied
    that the humanitarian protection appeal had any prospect of success  in
    the light of the judge's findings of fact.  It is clear that he did not
    find the appellant's evidence to be credible and he did not believe his
    evidence about events in Afghanistan including his evidence about where
    his family members were.  When the determination is read as a whole, it
    is clear that the judge did not believe the appellant's evidence  about
    his family circumstances and was not  satisfied  that  he  was  without
    family members in Afghanistan to whom he could look for support.

31.  The appellant failed  to  show  that  he  would  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution on return to Afghanistan and applying the country  guidance
    at [243] of AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163  he
    would be unable to bring himself within the provisions of article 15(c)
    in relation to a return to Kabul.  The evidence about his vulnerability
    arising from the report of  Dr  Katona  would  only  give  rise  to  an
    arguable claim if he was able to show that he would be  without  family
    support.  The appellant was therefore unable to  show  either  that  he
    would be at risk from generalised violence under article 15(c) or  that
    there were particular features  relating  to  his  circumstances  which
    would bring him within article  3  or  article  15(b).   Any  error  in
    failing to deal specifically with humanitarian  protection  is  not  in
    these circumstances an error capable of affecting the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

Decision

32.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and its decision stands.

33.  No application has been made to vary or discharge the  anonymity  order
    made by the First-tier Tribunal and accordingly that direction  remains
    in force.






Signed                                  Date: 9 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

