
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05783/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 10 July 2014                               |                             |
|Extempore judgment                            |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                          Mr Krishnabalan Kandasamy

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C G Talacchi
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an application for permission to appeal the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Taylor, who dismissed the appeal of  the  appellant
    against a decision to remove him from the UK.   The  judge  found  that
    such removal would not result in a breach of the Refugee Convention.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on a number of grounds,  first  of  all
    failing to properly  consider  and  apply  country  guidance,  secondly
    taking issue with the head note of the country guidance in that it  was
    said that the head note did not provide for the exclusive categories of
    those at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

3.   The Court of Appeal in the meantime had granted  permission  to  appeal
    in the country guidance case of GJ [2013]  UKUT  319  and  in  granting
    permission indicated that it may not be  wise  to  remove  those  whose
    appeals have been determined on the  exclusive  basis  that  they  fell
    outwith the risk categories set out in GJ.

4.   The judge in the First-tier Tribunal in this case  found  in  paragraph
    20 that: "Applying the country guidance as set out in the case of GJ  I
    find no evidence that the appellant would be at risk on return  to  Sri
    Lanka."  He considered the country guidance risk  categories  as  those
    specifically delineated in paragraph 7 of the head note.

5.   Permission was granted on that basis, and when this appeal came  before
    me in March 2014 I adjourned it to be heard after the Court  of  Appeal
    had produced their judgment.  The Court of  Appeal  have  now  produced
    their judgment as MP and NT [2014] EWCA Civ 829.

6.   In that judgment in paragraph 16 the Court of Appeal says:

         "I think that the UT in KK (application of  GJ)  Sri  Lanka  [2013]
         UKUT 00512 (IAC) was right to conclude that the UT in  the  present
         case was endeavouring to provide  'definitive'  guidance  on  risk.
         That is why in paragraph 356 it stated  that  the  risk  categories
         then set out 'are' rather 'include' those listed.  It was therefore
         rejecting the notion that those currently at risk might embrace for
         example former LTTE combatants or cadres who lack current  potency,
         real or perceived, to threaten the unitary Sri Lankan state."

7.   Lord Justice Maurice Kay went on to say in paragraph 19:

         "All this  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  rational  and
         permissible to narrow the  risk  categories.   The  UT  could  have
         explained its difference in approach from that of  the  UNHCR  more
         fully and more directly but, in my judgment, it  is  plain  from  a
         careful consideration of the determination as a whole that  it  had
         identified an important change as to the 'present objective ...  to
         identify Tamil activists in the Diaspora who are working for  Tamil
         separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state'.  I  am
         bound to say that, in the light of much of the undisputed evidence,
         this  chimes  with  common   sense   and   it   is   not   at   all
         counterintuitive.  Three years after the end of the civil  war  and
         after the completion of the large-scale  rehabilitation  programme,
         it is entirely understandable  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,
         seeing that the LTTE within the country was 'a spent force' and  in
         the absence of significant acts of terrorism, decided to  turn  its
         attention to the group identified by  the  UT  as  separatists  and
         destabilisers.  As to the adequacy  of  the  reasoning,  whilst  it
         could  have  been  more  explicit,  its  basis   was   sufficiently
         demonstrated.  The UT had heard a great deal of evidence which  was
         subjected to forensic examination."

8.   Lord Justice Underhill in paragraph 50 of MP said that he  agreed  with
    the analysis of Lord Justice Maurice Kay but wished  to  emphasise  one
    point:

         "The clear message of the  Upper  Tribunal's  guidance  is  that  a
         record of past LTTE activism does not as  such  constitute  a  risk
         factor for Tamils returning to Sri Lanka because  the  government's
         concern is now only with current or future threats to the integrity
         of Sri Lanka as a unitary state; and that that is so  even  if  the
         returnee's past links with the LTTE were of the kind  characterised
         by UNHCR as 'more elaborate'."


9.   He goes on to say, however:


         "Even apart from cases falling under heads (b) - (d)  in  paragraph
         356(7) there may, though untypically, be other cases (of  which  NT
         may be an example) where the evidence shows particular grounds  for
         concluding that the government might regard the applicant as posing
         a current threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as  a  single  state
         even in the absence of evidence that he or she has been involved in
         Diaspora activism."

10.  Paragraph 356(7) of GJ is replicated in the head note of  GJ  and  sets
    out the current categories of persons  at  real  risk  of  persecution.
    These are:

    (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil  separatism  within  the  Diaspora  and/or   a   renewal   of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka.


    (b)  Journalists (whether in print or  other  media)  or  human  rights
         activists, who, in either case,  have  criticised  the  Sri  Lankan
         government, in particular its  human  rights  record,  or  who  are
         associated with publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.




    (c)  Individuals who have given evidence to  the  Lessons  Learned  and
         Reconciliation Commission.


    (d)  A  person  whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
         accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those against  whom
         there is an extant court  order  or  arrest  warrant.   Individuals
         whose name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped at the  airport
         and handed over to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
         pursuance of such order or warrant.


11.  Mr Tarlow drew attention to the interview record sheet,  in  particular
    question 128 when the appellant was asked  "why  would  the  army  have
    released you even on the payment of a bribe if they were interested  in
    you?"  The appellant replied, as far as I can read it:

         "Because my arrest did not go high enough, it did not  go  to  high
         authorities so they just kept me there, that is all I can think of.
          If the intelligence was involved or knew of my  arrest  then  they
         would have got the information about me."

12.  Judge Taylor accepted that the appellant's  account  was  credible  and
    the credibility points taken by the respondent had been answered  to  a
    considerable extent.  The appellant's account was that  he  had  joined
    the LTTE in 1992 and worked for them until 2008 as a  driver.   He  was
    driving for Pottu Aman, who was the chief of intelligence of the  LTTE,
    and the officer paid the appellant his wages.  He started  working  for
    him in 1998 and on and off until 2002.  He  also  worked  as  a  supply
    driver to pick up casualties on average about twenty times a month.  He
    was not involved in combat but was injured by shelling.  He  picked  up
    individuals from the front.

13.  After the ceasefire in 2004 he worked in Jaffna parking  cars  for  the
    LTTE and registered as a member of the LTTE.  He studied and  lived  in
    LTTE camps and worked for an  intelligence  officer  named  Newton  but
    returned to work for Pottu Aman after Newton  was  kidnapped.   He  was
    hiding in the jungle from November 2008 and not  involved  in  fighting
    but was arrested on 16th July 2010  in  Vavuniya  when  the  army  took
    control of the area.  He  was  detained  for  two  and  a  half  years,
    questioned about his LTTE activities, asked  about  LTTE  camps,  where
    weapons  were  hidden,  beaten,  tortured  and  detained  in   solitary
    confinement.  He was taken to  locations,  shown  maps  and  asked  for
    information.   The  judge  accepted  this  evidence  ([19]   First-tier
    Tribunal determination).

14.  The background information in the  country  guidance  supports  that  a
    known  LTTE  operative  would  be  at  risk  of   such   treatment   in
    interrogation.   At   paragraph   18   of   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    determination the judge found that the authorities may  well  not  have
    known the exact role of the appellant in the LTTE but it was known that
    he was involved in some way in the LTTE as he had been  in  hiding  and
    they had received information.

15.  The judge in paragraph 20 then identified the four categories of  those
    who were at risk.  In the third sentence from the end of  paragraph  20
    the judge says:

         "The appellant has submitted no evidence that he is in any  of  the
         risk categories as listed in GJ and neither has he claimed to be in
         such categories.  He did not claim to be politically active in  the
         UK."


16.  With great respect to the judge that is the wrong question.  It is  not
    a matter for the appellant to say "I am in a particular risk  category"
    or "I claim to be in a particular  category".   The  evidence  was  put
    forward by the appellant and he claimed that he would  be  at  risk  if
    returned to Sri Lanka.  That evidence should have  been  considered  by
    the judge in the light of  the  background  material  that  was  placed
    before him and considered in the light of the country guidance case  as
    to whether or not those facts for this appellant were such  as  brought
    him within one of the four risk categories.

  17. I am satisfied that there is an error of law in the  determination  of
      the First-tier Tribunal such that I  set  aside  the  decision  to  be
      remade.


  18. Mr  Talacchi  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  accepts  that  there  is
      sufficient material before me to enable me to remake the decision  and
      both he and Mr Tarlow confirmed that  they  had  said  all  that  they
      wished to say in connection with a possible remaking of the decision.

  19. In MP the Court of Appeal considered the case  of  the  appellant  NT.
      His appeal had been dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper
      Tribunal had upheld that dismissal finding that NT did not fall within
      the four risk categories.  In paragraph 13 the Court of Appeal comment
      on NT who had been an LTTE cadre who had been  detained  and  tortured
      around the time of the end of the civil war.   His  release  had  been
      prompted by the payment of a large bribe.  He had not  taken  part  in
      Tamil separatist activity in the UK.

  20. The Court of Appeal went on to look at NT and summarised the basis  of
      NT's claim and concluded in paragraph 42:

              i. "It is not disputed that NT's separation from his family in
                 the Chettikulan camp occurred only  two  days  after  their
                 arrival.  Nor is it disputed that he was transferred by the
                 CID to the Anuradhapura  camp  where  he  was  interrogated
                 under torture many times.  There is, however,  one  feature
                 of the determination of the UT which causes me concern.  It
                 stated in paragraph 424 of GJ:


             ii. 'It appears from the evidence that he was not of sufficient
                 concern in 2009 to be one of the 11,000 active LTTE  cadres
                 who were considered to  require  re-education  through  the
                 rehabilitation programme before being reintroduced into Sri
                 Lankan civil society.'

  21. Lord Justice Kay goes on to say in paragraph 43:

              i. "The problem with this approach is that the  appellant  was
                 released following payment of a  'huge'  bribe  only  three
                 months after the commencement of  his  determination.   The
                 selection process for  rehabilitation  or  prosecution  was
                 still taking place at least until mid 2010.  It seems  that
                 the UT failed to have regard to this when  concluding  that
                 the appellant was not of sufficient concern in 2009  to  be
                 one of the 11,000 active LTTE cadres who were considered to
                 require re-education through the rehabilitation programme."

  22. The appellant, the subject of this appeal, was detained for  some  two
      and a half years.  It appears from the background material as referred
      to in GJ that he must on that basis have been considered to be someone
      in whom the authorities were extremely interested and that he would be
      able to provide them with a considerable amount  of  information.   He
      was detained during that period and required to identify  arms,  camps
      and various other matters.  He was also a  driver  for  the  chief  of
      intelligence of the LTTE  and  another  intelligence  officer.   As  a
      driver he would have been a trusted LTTE member and it does  not  take
      much imagination to realise that he would have been privy to  a  large
      number of potential secrets.

  23. The issue is whether that is sufficient to bring him within 356(7)(a):
      individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to the integrity
      of Sri Lanka when that is read in the light of the findings of  NT  by
      the Court of Appeal and what Lord Justice Underhill says in  paragraph
      50 that there may,  though  untypically,  be  other  cases  where  the
      evidence shows particular grounds for concluding that  the  government
      might regard him as posing a current threat.

  24. I am satisfied that this appellant on the very particular  facts  that
      have been found in  his  case  has  such  a  risk  profile.   This  is
      particularly because of the length of time that he was detained,  that
      throughout that period he was taken to places to identify camps and so
      on and because of  the  link  that  he  had  with  those  involved  in
      intelligence.

  25. I do not accept the submission by Mr Talacchi that the appellant would
      be on a stop list.  He is not the subject of an arrest warrant  or  an
      extant court order.  The  fact  that  he  has  been  released  through
      payment of a bribe and that release took place relatively recently  is
      not on the basis of GJ sufficient to cause him to be on  a  stop  list
      although of course it may put him on a watch list  but  a  watch  list
      does not prevent him getting through the airport.

  26. However, as I have said earlier, the role that he played in Sri Lanka,
      that he was specifically arrested and then detained during that period
      when individuals were being detained for lengthy periods  of  time  in
      order to obtain extensive information from them and then he is  coming
      from the UK I am satisfied that he would be  perceived  to  have  been
      involved in post-conflict Tamil separatism because of  the  extent  of
      those links that he had and because he has come from London.

  27. On that basis I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on  refugee
      grounds.




   Conclusion


   There is an error of law such that I set aside the decision to be remade.


   I remake the decision and allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 15th July 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
