
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05689/2015
                                                               AA/05690/2015
                                                               AA/05691/2015
                                                               AA/05692/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 08 June 2016                               |On 03 August, 2016           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                    [Z K]
                           (AND THREE DEPENDENTS)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T.D.H. Hodson of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    No anonymity direction was made in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  no
    application was made to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to  refuse  a
    protection claim.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Martins  ("the  judge")
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 02 February 2016.

3.    Upper Tribunal Judge Gill granted permission to appeal in  a  decision
    dated 30 March 2016. She found that it  was  arguable  that  the  judge
    erred in her assessment of the cause of the death  of  the  appellant's
    husband and the assessment of risk on return to Pakistan. She  proposed
    to set aside  the  decision  on  that  basis  subject  to  any  written
    representations made by the parties. In a decision dated  09  May  2016
    Upper Tribunal Judge Gill noted that there had been no objection to the
    proposal and formally set aside the First-tier Tribunal  decision.  The
    positive credibility findings made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    and her record of the evidence contained in the decision [38-77],  were
    to stand. The decision to dismiss the appeal in relation to  Article  8
    was also preserved. The appeal was  listed  for  hearing  in  order  to
    remake the decision in relation to the protection claim.

4.    Save for particular findings identified  as  erroneous,  or  where  no
    clear findings were made, the First-tier Tribunal  judge  accepted  the
    core aspects of the appellant's account of past events.  The  appellant
    and her husband left Pakistan in 1987. She says that he was detained on
    two occasions in 1986 because of his  nationalist  activities  for  the
    Jeay Sindh Congress. The appellant  and  her  husband  lived  in  Saudi
    Arabia for a period of 28 years. During that time her husband continued
    to organise cultural and nationalist events and raised money for  Sindh
    nationalist groups operating in Pakistan. Her husband wrote a  book  of
    nationalist poems, which was distributed in Sindh and Saudi Arabia.

5.    In September 2012 her husband returned to their home area of  Dadu  in
    Pakistan to visit his dying mother. Three days before  he  was  due  to
    return on 30  September  2012  the  appellant  lost  contact  with  her
    husband. Her son Mustafa travelled to Pakistan on 03 October  2012.  He
    discovered that his father had been  found  dead  on  the  street.  The
    family believe that he was killed by the intelligence  service  because
    they understood he had been shot / tortured. A  journalist  obtained  a
    video of her husband's  body,  which  showed  his  head  was  bandaged.
    Mustafa says that he filed a First Information Report (FIR) at the Dadu
    police station on 13 October 2012. On 14 October 2012 he says  that  he
    was detained for six days, tortured and told to withdraw  the  FIR.  He
    was released with the intervention of a local tribal leader but refused
    to  withdraw  the  report.  Mustafa  returned  to  Saudi  Arabia.   The
    appellant's position in Saudi Arabia was  dependent  on  her  husband's
    work permit. Her son was able to sponsor her for  a  further  year  but
    after that she came to the UK. The  appellant's  son,  Shehzad,  is  an
    active member of the World Sindhi Congress and a founding member of the
    Baloch Student and Youth Association in London. The appellant says that
    relatives in Pakistan have been questioned about  Mustafa  and  Shehzad
    and have conducted searches.

6.    The appeal comes before the Tribunal to remake  the  decision  subject
    to the matters that were preserved. The main issues  to  be  determined
    are:

       i) In the absence of any clear finding by the  First-tier  Tribunal,
          whether there is  a  serious  possibility  that  the  appellant's
          husband was detained and  tortured  before  leaving  Pakistan  in
          1987.
      ii) Whether there is a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the
          appellant's husband's death  was  connected  with  his  political
          opinions and activities.
     iii) In the absence  of  any  findings  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
          whether there is a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the
          authorities made subsequent visits to other family members.
      iv) Whether the appellant is likely to be at  real  risk  of  serious
          harm if returned to Pakistan.

7.    The hearing proceeded by way of submissions only.  After  the  hearing
    the appellant's representatives sought  permission  to  adduce  further
    background evidence in response to a particular question  asked  during
    the course of the hearing. I took into account  the  fact  that  asylum
    claims must be considered with the most anxious  scrutiny.  By  way  of
    directions issued on 09 June 2016 I admitted the further  evidence  and
    gave the respondent  time  to  respond  to  the  evidence.  No  further
    submissions were received. As such, I was satisfied I could proceed  to
    decide the appeal.

Decision and reasons

8.    I have not had the opportunity of hearing from the witnesses who  gave
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal. However, the judge  summarised
    their evidence in some detail in her decision. She made clear that  she
    found them to be credible witnesses [102]. The judge accepted that  the
    appellant's husband and her  son  Shezad  were  both  active  in  Sindh
    nationalist politics [103 & 106]. She also accepted that such political
    involvement "was not and  is  not  acceptable  to  the  authorities  in
    Pakistan." The judge noted that the appellant's evidence was  that  her
    husband was arrested and tortured before he left Pakistan in  1987  but
    found that there was no "independent  evidence"  other  than  the  oral
    testimony of the appellant and her son. The judge accepted that he  may
    have left Pakistan as a result of "harassment and  the  displeasure  of
    his politics to the Pakistani authorities"  but  appeared  to  give  no
    specific consideration to  the  background  evidence  relating  to  the
    treatment of Sindh nationalists in coming to that finding [103].

9.    Similarly, whilst  she  accepted  that  the  appellant's  husband  was
    killed when he returned to Pakistan in 2012, the family's  belief  that
    he was killed by the intelligence service was rejected  on  the  ground
    that  there  was  no  "independent  evidence"  that   his   death   was
    attributable to the Pakistani authorities [104].

10.   The apparent requirement for  corroborating  evidence  was  the  first
    error of law identified by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill when she set aside
    the decision. I agree. The judge accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a
    credible witness, that her husband was an active Sindh nationalist  and
    that such activities  were  "not  acceptable"  to  the  authorities  in
    Pakistan. She should have gone on to consider the  background  evidence
    to assess whether the credibility  of  the  account  of  detention  and
    torture was plausible.

11.   The background evidence relating to the current situation  is  broadly
    consistent with the account given  by  the  appellant  and  her  family
    members. The US State Department report dated 25 June 2015 stated  that
    the most serious human rights problems were extrajudicial and  targeted
    killings, torture, lack of rule of law and sectarian violence. Lack  of
    government  accountability  remained  a  problem.  Abuses  often   went
    unpunished;  fostering  a  culture  of  impunity.  Authorities   seldom
    punished government officials for human rights violations. The US State
    Department noted that there were reports  of  alleged  kidnappings  and
    killings of individuals in Sindh. There were reported  kidnappings  and
    forced disappearances of persons from various backgrounds in nearly all
    areas of the country. Some police and security forces  reportedly  held
    prisoners  incommunicado.  Human  rights  organisations  reported  many
    Sindhi nationalists among the missing. Nationalist political parties in
    Sindh reported disappearances and claimed some of their members were in
    the custody of intelligence agencies.

12.   The US State  Department  also  noted  that  the  Asian  Human  Rights
    Commission (AHRC) alleged state security agencies  arrested  more  than
    100 nationalists from Sindh and place them in  extrajudicial  detention
    without formally charging them with a crime. There  were  reports  that
    security forces, including  the  intelligence  services,  tortured  and
    abused used individuals in custody. Later in the report  the  US  State
    Department notes that some  Sindhi  nationalist  groups  claimed  their
    members were marked for arrest and detained based  on  their  political
    affiliation or beliefs. The law requires court issued  search  warrants
    for property. Police sometimes ignores this requirement and stole items
    during searches. Authorities seldom punished police for illegal  entry.
    Sometimes police  detained  family  members  to  induce  a  suspect  to
    surrender.   Several   domestic   intelligence    services    monitored
    politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, and the media.

13.   An urgent action report of the Asian Human Rights Commission dated  12
    June  2015  outlined  a  case  concerning  the   abduction   by   state
    intelligence agents of the son of a prominent intellectual  and  writer
    who was active in a Sindh nationalist organisation. The report asserted
    that the police refused to file a case of abduction  and  disappearance
    because the abductors were part of the security establishment.

14.   The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) report for 2014  stated
    that  there  was  a  worrying  trend  of   enforced   and   involuntary
    disappearances in Balochistan, KP and Sindh where  dozens  of  students
    and political workers of nationalist parties were picked  up,  tortured
    to death  "and  their  bodies  thrown  in  far-flung  areas".  Enforced
    disappearances are increasingly seen as a legitimate method to  counter
    terrorism in the  absence  of  a  judicial  system  capable  of  speedy
    justice.  According  to  the  Commission   of   Inquiry   on   Enforced
    Disappearances (CIED) report submitted to the Interior Ministry at  the
    end of 2014 there were as  many  as  1,265  cases  of  missing  persons
    pending with the Commission. The HRCP report went on to quote a Supreme
    Court  judge  who  went  on  record  saying:  "...the  involvement   of
    intelligence departments has been  found  in  every  case  [of  missing
    persons] which the court took for hearing". The HRCP was not  aware  of
    any case in which the security forces or  intelligence  agencies  faced
    prosecution or even an inquiry for  unlawful  deprivation  of  liberty,
    arbitrary  arrest  and  illegal  confinement  in  Pakistan.  The   HRCP
    expressed  alarm  at  the  rising   number   of   cases   of   enforced
    disappearances and dumping bodies in Sindh in 2014. Accordingly to HRCP
    media monitoring 11 political activists had disappeared from  Sindh  in
    2014. The persons picked up and dumped later were all young men,  often
    associated with nationalist political parties. In the  cases  reported,
    the involvement of agencies and security forces was either confirmed by
    eyewitnesses or actively suspected due to the precedent they  have  set
    in dealing with dissent over the last few decades in Pakistan.

15.   Other reports from various  different  sources,  including  media  and
    online blogs, report incidents where family members of nationalists  in
    Baluchistan and Sindh were targeted  by  the  authorities.  While  most
    references relate to the targeting of young male relatives there is one
    blog report from a  source  of  unknown  reliability  relating  to  the
    disappearance of a female Baloch activist whose husband was abducted.

16.   In light of the judge's credibility findings I find that there  is  no
    good reason to reject the appellant's  account  that  her  husband  was
    arrested, detained and tortured. The appellant's bundle does not appear
    to contain any evidence relating to  the  situation  in  1987.  Perhaps
    there are good reasons for that given the passage of time.  However,  a
    broad reading of the current evidence shows that Sindh nationalism  has
    been an ongoing issue in Pakistan for many years.  The  evidence  shows
    that disappearance,  arbitrary  arrest  and  torture  in  detention  is
    widespread and ingrained. For these reasons, I am satisfied that  there
    is a serious possibility that the appellant's husband was detained  and
    tortured for reasons of his  Sindh  nationalist  activities.  His  past
    persecution forced the family into exile in Saudi Arabia in 1987.

17.    The  background  evidence  shows  an  increasing  trend  of  enforced
    disappearance, extrajudicial killing and  then  dumping  of  bodies  in
    Sindh province with suspected security service involvement. The account
    given by the appellant and her son of her husband's disappearance,  and
    then his body being found on the street with apparent  gunshot  wounds,
    is  consistent  with  this  evidence.  The  judge  accepted  that   the
    appellant's husband was active in Sindh nationalist politics  and  that
    he was known to the authorities.

18.   I note that the respondent relied upon a Document Verification  Report
    (DVR), which stated that the police station in Dadu was  contacted  but
    could not confirm a record of the FIR filed by Mustafa  on  13  October
    2012. Setting aside for one moment the fact that the local  authorities
    the appellant fears  appear  to  have  been  contacted  through  direct
    enquiries made by  the  British  authorities  into  an  FIR,  Mustafa's
    account of the  pressure  brought  to  bear  on  him  to  withdraw  the
    complaint is generally plausible and  consistent  with  the  background
    evidence. The appellant's evidence at the hearing was that she  thought
    it possible "that they have deliberately failed to register it properly
    or have subsequently removed the record, or otherwise do  not  want  to
    acknowledge it. It is much easier to pretend that  it  never  happened,
    which would be very convenient for the Pakistani  Authorities  and  she
    believes that the Secretary of State has been very na�ve  about  this."
    [53]. I accept  that  the  possible  explanation  put  forward  by  the
    appellant is plausible in light of the background evidence. As such,  I
    find that it is difficult to place any significant weight on the DVR in
    circumstances when the information was obtained from the very source of
    the alleged persecution.

19.   Mustafa's account of his subsequent  detention  and  ill-treatment  is
    broadly consistent with the evidence relating to the  pressure  brought
    to bear on relatives. It is plausible that,  if  the  authorities  were
    involved in his father's death, they would want to put pressure on  him
    to withdraw the complaint. The subsequent visits to family  members  in
    Sindh is documented  through  affidavits  from  his  cousins  who  give
    accounts of visits to their homes and searches. The  affidavits,  taken
    alone, may not carry much weight in the absence of  an  opportunity  to
    hear from such distant witnesses. However, if they  are  considered  in
    the round with the positive credibility findings, and in light  of  the
    background evidence, their account is consistent  and  credible.  Their
    evidence is that the security services had a particular interest in the
    activities of  Mustafa  and  Shehzad.  The  timing  of  the  visits  to
    relatives in Sindh  is  also  broadly  consistent  with  the  start  of
    Shehzad's political activities in the UK. At least one report  relating
    to a Baloch activist in the UK shows that pressure was brought to  bear
    on his relatives in Pakistan, which suggests some  political  activists
    abroad may be monitored.

20.   For the reasons given above I am satisfied that  the  evidence,  taken
    as a whole, is sufficient to show that there is at least  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood of a connection between the appellant's  husband's
    political opinions and his death.  The  background  evidence  shows  an
    increase in enforced disappearances and dumping of bodies in  Sindh  in
    recent years. The circumstances of his death, and the negative response
    to the formal report made  to  the  police,  gives  rise  to  a  strong
    inference that the authorities were likely to be involved.

21.   When she assessed  the  risk  on  return  the  judge  found  that  the
    authorities "may well" want to  question  Shehzad  if  he  returned  to
    Pakistan but concluded, without any further reasoning, that this  would
    "not necessarily result in his persecution" [106]. While  acknowledging
    that the appellant "would be asked of the whereabouts of her sons"  the
    judge concluded that she would not be at risk of treatment amounting to
    persecution [107]. Upper Tribunal Judge Gill identified an error of law
    in these findings because the judge failed to  take  into  account  the
    background evidence relating to the treatment of those perceived to  be
    active in Sindh nationalism, as well as the evidence of widespread ill-
    treatment in detention.  Again, I agree.

22.   The background evidence indicates that the authorities are  likely  to
    have an adverse interest in those seen as active in  Sindh  nationalist
    politics and their family members. While  the  evidence  suggests  that
    young men appear to be more likely targets there is  some  evidence  to
    suggest that women have also been targeted. The  evidence  relating  to
    risk of ill-treatment if detained for questioning is clear. I  bear  in
    mind that the appellant does not need to show with any  certainty  that
    she would be at risk  of  ill-treatment  amounting  to  persecution  if
    returned to Pakistan. The standard of  proof  is  low  because  of  the
    serious nature of the possible consequences of return.

23.   In this case the appellant's family was forced into exile as a  result
    of the past persecution of her husband  for  reason  of  his  political
    opinions. Despite the long period of time spent away from  Pakistan  it
    seems that there is at least a reasonable degree of likelihood that  he
    was killed by members of the security forces when  he  returned  for  a
    brief visit in 2012. When his son sought to register a complaint  about
    his death in order to prompt an inquiry, in turn, he was  detained  and
    tortured. While it is acknowledged that he was released  following  the
    intervention of a local tribal leader and allowed to leave the country,
    subsequent evidence suggests that the authorities continued to show  an
    interest in the family after Shehzad began his political activities  in
    the UK in 2013.

24.   The fact that a person has already  been  subject  to  persecution  or
    serious harm, is a serious indication of the person's well-founded fear
    of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there are
    good reasons to consider that such persecution or serious harm will not
    be repeated. The appellant does  not  suggest  that  she  has  suffered
    physical harm. However, I have found that there is a reasonable  degree
    of likelihood that close members  of  her  family  have  suffered  past
    persecution. The fact that other members of the  family  have  suffered
    past persecution is an indicator that the appellant may also be at risk
    of similar ill-treatment. As the judge noted, the  focus  of  attention
    might well be on the activities of her sons. However,  I  am  satisfied
    that the background evidence  shows  that  incidents  of  ill-treatment
    during detention and questioning, and  in  particular  in  relation  to
    those with Sindh nationalist sympathies, is such that there is at least
    a real risk of serious harm if the appellant is  questioned  about  her
    family connections.

25.   The respondent's reasons  for  refusal  letter  raised  the  issue  of
    internal relocation but given that the appellant fears persecution from
    state actors I find that a safe area of relocation is not likely to  be
    available. While the risk is likely to be heightened in her  home  area
    there is nothing to suggest that the authorities would not show adverse
    interest towards a family member with the appellant's profile elsewhere
    in the country. It seems likely that the authorities may  have  kept  a
    record of the enquiry made by the British authorities  in  relation  to
    the FIR. It is reasonably likely that the authorities have a continuing
    interest in the activities of the appellant's sons. There  is  evidence
    to suggest that pressure is sometimes brought to bear on  relatives  in
    such circumstances. Even if I am wrong in terms of the availability  of
    internal relocation, if the appellant moved to another  area  perceived
    as less of a 'hotspot' than her home area,  she  is  unlikely  to  have
    family or other support in another area.  Given  her  age,  gender  and
    background it is likely that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  her  to
    attempt support herself and her dependent children as a lone  woman.  I
    make that finding in the alternative although my primary view  is  that
    there would not be a safe area of relocation if the risk of persecution
    emanates from the state.

26.   The appellant raised other protection  issues  relating  to  a  family
    land dispute and the risk to her  daughters  of  forced  marriage,  but
    those issues were not pursued at the hearing and do not appear to  form
    part of the ongoing case.

27.   For the reasons given above I conclude  that  there  is  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that the appellant would be  at  risk  of  serious
    harm amounting to persecution for reasons of her  attributed  political
    opinion and/or membership of a  particular  social  group  (family)  if
    returned to Pakistan at the current time.


DECISION

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal


Signed   [pic]   Date 02 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








