
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05658/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 June 2016                        |On 11 July 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     B S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Bankfield Heath,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, BS, is a citizen of Albania.   By  a  decision  dated  1
    October 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.





 2. At a resumed hearing at Bradford on 14 June 2016,  Mr  Diwncyz,  Senior
    Home Officer Presenting Officer, appeared for  the  respondent  and  Mr
    Hussain of Counsel appeared for the appellant.  The appeal  is  subject
    to a transfer order as Judge Plimmer is currently unwell.

 3. I had the papers which had been  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    Judge Plimmer in the  Upper  Tribunal  together  with  updated  medical
    evidence including a letter  dated  13  June  2016  from  the  Mulberry
    Practice which recommended intense counselling for  the  appellant  and
    referral to a psychologist, her mental health  having  deteriorated  in
    recent months.  I also had a letter from Dr Catherine Longshaw which is
    dated 16 May 2016.  This  records  that,  although  the  appellant  has
    family members living in Albania, she does not have  any  contact  with
    them and that she feels socially isolated and has  repeatedly  suicidal
    thoughts and  intrusions.   The  report  confirms  that  the  appellant
    continues to be severely depressed with severe anxiety  problems.   The
    doctor noted that,

         "Since the beginning of 2016  it  has  been  noticeable  that  [the
         appellant's] mental  health  has  actually  declined  and  she  has
         increasingly become socially isolated.  She used to go  to  English
         classes and other activity classes in the past  but  now  these  no
         longer hold any enjoyment or interest for her."

    The report records  that  the  appellant's  medication  has  also  been
    increased.

 4. It is accepted that the appellant has been trafficked from Albania  and
    that she cannot return to Tirana.  The issue remaining in the appeal is
    whether the appellant could exercise  the  option  of  internal  flight
    within Albania to an area where she would not be at risk.

 5. The appellant replies on the expert report of  Sonya  Landesmann  dated
    18th November 2015.  Significantly, Mr Diwncyz told me at  the  resumed
    hearing that the  respondent  took  no  issue  with  the  findings  and
    observations of Dr Landesmann.  At [8] Dr Landesmann concluded that  it
    was not "safe for BS to be returned to Albania.  BS, has been shown  as
    a highly vulnerable individual who has experienced being trafficked and
    who is at threat from her father."  Dr Landesmann goes  on  to  explain
    that the threat from the father is a real one within her home area  and
    that, given the nature of Albanian  society,  the  appellant  would  be
    regarded as "shamed and disowned" and as an "outcast" if she were to be
    removed to a different area of Albania.  Dr Landesmann  observed  that,
    "To be alone shakes the very foundations of Albanian society.  BS would
    be considered an ignominious outcast.  As such she would be  considered
    fair game to anyone who wanted to abuse her.  Re-trafficking would be a
    real and substantial risk."





 6. The respondent,  as  I  have  noted,  does  not  take  issue  with  the
    observations of the expert and nor do I.  Her expertise on Albania  (as
    revealed by her curriculum vitae) is substantial.

 7. I heard evidence at the resumed hearing from Rachel  Mullan-Feroze  who
    through  Ashiana  has  assisted  the  appellant.   She  described   the
    appellant  as  "shut  down  and  very  withdrawn".   That  evidence  is
    consistent with the medical evidence to which I  have  referred  above.
    All the evidence needs to be  considered  in  the  context  of  country
    guidance available, AM and BM (trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT
    80 (IAC).  At the headnote of AM at (b) it states:

         b)     At its worst the psychological damage inflicted on a  victim
         of trafficking can  lead  to  difficulties  in  reintegrating  into
         Albanian society and has implications  on  whether  or  not  it  is
         possible for the victim of trafficking, should she fear persecution
         in her own area, to relocate.

 8. I have not been asked by the respondent's representative to depart from
    the very clear medical evidence that the appellant's  mental  condition
    at the present time is poor and had deteriorated in recent months.   It
    is clear from  the  medical  evidence  that  the  appellant's  suicidal
    thoughts are, at least to some extent, linked to her feelings of social
    isolation.  Such family members as the appellant has in Albania  appear
    to be in Tirana where I find (as had the previous  First-tier  Tribunal
    on relying on the expert evidence) the appellant would be at risk  from
    her father.  I consider it likely in addition (again  by  reference  to
    the expert evidence) that it may be possible for the appellant's father
    and family members to locate her anywhere  within  Albania  and  having
    done so to harm her.  However, even  if  the  appellant  were  able  to
    escape the threat from her father by living elsewhere in Albania I have
    to consider whether it would be unduly harsh to expect her  to  do  so.
    There was no clear evidence that the appellant  would  actually  become
    destitute though I query her ability to work given her current  medical
    condition.  More significantly, in my opinion, is the likelihood  that,
    were she to live in an area of Albania where she had no social contacts
    whatever and where her single status might well attract  suspicion  and
    abuse,  her  feelings  of  social  isolation  and  her  already  severe
    depression would become worse.  As I have noted, there is a clear  link
    in the evidence  between  the  appellant's  social  isolation  and  her
    suicidal thoughts.  I cannot  say  that  the  appellant  would  attempt
    suicide in such circumstances but I do find that her medical  condition
    (which has deteriorated  in  the  months  leading  up  to  the  resumed
    hearing) is such that it would be unduly harsh to expect  her  to  live
    outside her home area of Albania.  As such, the appellant  succeeds  in
    her asylum appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated
3 June 2014 is allowed on  asylum  grounds  and  human  rights  (Article  3)
grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 4 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee order.


Signed                              Date 4 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
