
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05334/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 5th December 2014              |On 29th December 2014             |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           Mr Sivalingam Saibavan
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jonathan Martin (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This was an appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Birk promulgated on 12th September 2014, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 1st September 2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was born  on  25th
    October 1982.  He appealed against the  refusal  of  his  asylum  claim
    dated 19th September 2007,  which  refusal  was  made  because  of  his
    failure to attend interviews on 5th September 2007 and  13th  September
    2007, whereafter he  was  recorded  as  an  absconder.   After  further
    representations  were  made,  he  was  eventually  interviewed  on  6th
    September  2011.   On  9th  July  2014,  the  Respondent  refused   his
    application and issued removal directions.  The appeal is against  that
    decision.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he had been  arrested  by  the  army  and
    taken to Uduvil Camp where he was detained and beaten and tortured.  He
    required hospital treatment.  He was charged under the Terrorism Act as
    a member of the LTTE.  He went to court.  He was released on bail after
    his uncle consulted with a lawyer.  He was required to report after  he
    was released.  There were three periods of detention.  He did not  know
    whether an arrest warrant or court summons had now been issued  because
    he had lost contact with his uncle who had told him not to get in touch
    for his own safety.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge recorded the fact that the Appellant had  been  detained  and
    tortured on three separate occasions by  the  army  and  the  CID  (see
    paragraph 24).  However, he had failed to state he was tortured when he
    mentioned his detention in interview (see question  76).   Although  he
    was told to keep his replies brief  he  did  not,  in  fact,  keep  his
    replies brief (see paragraph 24).

 5. With respect to  his  detention  in  Uduvil  Camp,  he  was  unable  to
    specifically say whether this was for two or three weeks  and  remained
    uncertain.  There was a consultant medical practitioner's  report  from
    Mr Martin and the judge said that he "is experienced in this field  and
    is a consultant in emergency medicine" (paragraph 26).

 6.  However,  the  judge's  conclusion  was  that  with  respect  to   the
    Appellant's scars, which were  not  immediately  visible,  the  medical
    report "states that it is possible for there to be  alternative  causes
    for these injuries ..." (paragraph 38).  The fact  that  the  Appellant
    failed to attend interviews was suggestive of his  claim  not  being  a
    viable one (paragraph 33).  In any event, he had a very  low  level  of
    involvement (paragraph 35) and had not been involved  in  any  diaspora
    activities in the UK (paragraph 35).

 7. The judge had regard to the latest country guidance in  GJ  (Post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  and  this  has  been
    confirmed in MP v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  829,  which  authorities  make
    clear that "not all Tamils are at risk  and  that  Tamil  ethnicity  of
    itself is insufficient to require international protection"  (paragraph
    36).  The appeal was dismissed.



Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge misdirected herself  in
    dismissing the appeal on the basis that the timings of the  Appellant's
    departure from Sri Lanka were inconsistent and that there had  been  no
    explanation forthcoming from the Appellant as to the  discrepancies  of
    these dates.  The judge had excluded corroborative  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's  Sri  Lankan  lawyer.   The  factual  findings   were   not
    sustainable.

 9. On 30th September 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

10. On 10th October 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 5th  December  2014,  Mr  Jonathan  Martin,
    appearing on behalf  of  the  Appellant,  submitted  that  the  judge's
    treatment of the Appellant's credibility is sparse, being  confined  to
    only paragraphs 22 to 24, because it is only here that the  Appellant's
    account is dealt with.   Even  if  the  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant not having been tortured are correct, that does not  mean  to
    say that the findings in relation to detention are correct as well.

12. The Appellant had, after all, been  taken  to  Colombo.   He  had  been
    detained three times.  Nothing in  the  determination  deals  with  the
    second detention.  The judge goes straight on to a consideration of the
    medical report (at paragraph 24).  However, this is treated  separately
    from the main account.

13. It is well-established that the evidence, including the medical  report
    evidence, must be treated in the round and as a whole  with  the  other
    evidence.  The doctor had described the injuries as "highly consistent"
    with ill-treatment.  The letter from  the  lawyer  confirms  the  third
    detention of the Appellant, and this ties in with what  the  judge  had
    recorded at paragraph 30, in terms of the Appellant's movements through
    France, and to the UK.

14. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that he would rely upon  the  Rule  24
    response.  There was no  error  of  law.   It  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's scars were "highly consistent" (in the words of the medical
    practitioner) with his  having  been  mistreated  (see  paragraph  38).
    However, the  scars  could  also  be  consistent  with  an  alternative
    explanation (see paragraph 30).  Moreover, the  cases  that  the  judge
    does cite in the body of the determination (at  paragraph  36)  confirm
    that mere membership of  Tamil  ethnicity  does  not  qualify  one  for
    refugee status.

15. The Appellant had not been engaged in diaspora activities.  He may have
    been involved in activities a decade ago in Sri Lanka, but  the  latest
    cases showed that, without anything further since then in the  UK,  one
    could not assume that he would be put at risk upon return to Sri Lanka.

16. In reply, Mr Jonathan Martin submitted that one had to consider whether
    it was reasonably likely for this Appellant, upon return to Sri  Lanka,
    to be detained because he would be  on  a  "stop  list".   Once  it  is
    accepted that he had been detained three times,  then  it  must  follow
    that he would be at risk upon return to Sri Lanka.  He was, after  all,
    detained under the Prevention of Terrorism Act.  This  was  at  a  time
    when there was a ceasefire.  The position would  be  far  worse  for  a
    person in that situation compared to one who had been  detained  simply
    when there were ongoing hostilities.

No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law, such  that  I  should
    set aside the decision.  My reasons are as follows.

18. First, this is a case where the Appellant avoided having to attend  for
    interview in order to put his asylum claim.   It  is  well-established,
    including in European refugee law, that making a prompt asylum claim is
    in the interest of a genuine asylum seeker.

19. Second, after the claim had been made, the Appellant failed to  mention
    that he had been tortured during his interview (see question 76).  When
    he does mention this fact he does not in his account explain  what  his
    internal injuries were.  In any event, the judge's conclusion was  that
    "this incident was as a result of random gathering of people because of
    the LTTE having  thrown  [a  bomb  which]  caused  an  explosion"  (see
    paragraph 24).  The judge had, accordingly, had full regard to all  the
    material circumstances in  the  Appellant's  account.   The  judge  had
    indicated what she found plausible and what she did not find plausible.



20. Third, in relation to the Appellant's detention itself, the  judge  was
    unpersuaded that the account given was credible because  the  Appellant
    "was unable to recall whether it was two or three weeks when this was a
    significant detention when he was severely tortured and received wounds
    on his account" (see paragraph 25).

21. Fourth, it is not the case that the judge neglected the evidence of the
    medical practitioner.  On the contrary, the judge observed of Mr Martin
    that he is "experienced in this field and is a consultant in  emergency
    medicine" (see paragraph 26).

22. Fifth, the judge has  regard  to  the  three  main  injuries  that  the
    Appellant refers to in his examination with  Mr  Martin,  but  observed
    that, "I do not find it credible that he failed to mention  it  in  his
    interview" (paragraph 27).  When considering this further, the judge is
    clear that "it is not possible to comment further as  to  whether  this
    injury was caused accidentally or intentionally as any sharp instrument
    could have been used" (paragraph 27).  The judge was entitled  to  come
    to this view.

23. Sixth, the judge considers the injuries to the back of  the  Appellant,
    which he said were caused by his being beaten by  a  blunt  instrument.
    The judge treats this account in a  fair  and  dispassionate  way  (see
    paragraph 28).  The judge also has regard  to  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant was arrested, charged, and jailed, and then released on  bail
    after a week (see paragraph 29).  However, what  ultimately  leads  the
    judge to conclude that the Appellant was not at risk are the  following
    points.

24. First, there was a discrepancy in the account of the  dates  which  had
    not been explained by the Appellant (see paragraph  30).   Second,  the
    Appellant was unable to say whether there had been an arrest warrant or
    a court summons, and the judge did not find it  credible  that  he  had
    failed to enquire about this from his uncle, if what he had said  about
    his ill-treatment was correct (paragraph 31).  Third,  the  actions  of
    the Appellant were not found by the judge to be  "those  of  a  genuine
    asylum seeker.  He stated that when he came to London he went with  his
    uncle to see a solicitor who advised him not to make a claim".  Indeed,
    "when he did  make  a  claim  he  failed  to  attend  the  Respondent's
    interviews until 2011" (paragraph 33).   These  are  not  insignificant
    matters.  They are substantial reasons for the rejection  of  a  claim.
    Fourth, the Appellant has not been involved in diaspora  activities  to
    any significant extent, and the judge was entitled  to  take  the  view
    "that this was a 'very low level involvement'" (paragraph 35).   Fifth,
    and no less importantly, the judge has regard  to  two  of  the  latest
    cases  given  by  way  of  country  guidance  after  the  cessation  of
    hostilities in Sri Lanka.  The judge rightly observes here that not all
    Tamils are at risk and that Tamil ethnicity is itself  insufficient  to
    require international protection.

25. Finally, the judge is able to conclude on this basis that the Appellant
    has failed  to  establish  that  he  is  of  adverse  interest  to  the
    government,

         "due to absconding whilst on bail in respect of terrorist  charges.
         I find that he has failed to establish that  he  is  likely  to  be
         perceived as a risk to the integrity of the country or as a  person
         who is still actively opposed to the government or that  he  is  on
         any 'stop' or 'watch' list" (paragraph 57).

    In these findings, the judge has provided a complete answer to why this
    claim is not a viable one.  I come to this  conclusion  notwithstanding
    Mr  Jonathan  Martin's  very  eloquent,  fulsome,   and   comprehensive
    submissions before me.  However, the facts as found by  the  judge,  on
    the basis of the applicable law, do not suggest that the judge erred in
    law.

Decision

26. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

27. Anonymity order is hereby made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        27th December 2014
