
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05531/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 10 June 2015                              |On 18 June 2015               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     N C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hoshi instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  me  to
    rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 28  April  1968.
    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with  his  wife  and  three
    children on 15 April 2014.  He claimed asylum on the basis that he  had
    a well-founded fear of persecution if he returned to  Pakistan  because
    of his religious beliefs, namely that he is a  Christian.   He  claimed
    that he operated a Christian music studio in  Rawalpindi.   He  claimed
    that on 21 March 2014, he had been approached by three people from  the
    local mosque, one of whom was the Imam, to hire his studio but  he  had
    declined as his schedule was  busy.   They  threatened  him  and  threw
    equipment on the ground and pushed him when  he  tried  to  stop  them.
    That evening, he was told by a neighbour that the police  were  outside
    his studio and a poster was pasted on the studio wall which accused him
    of blasphemy.  An FIR has been  lodged  against  him;  there  is  fatwa
    issued against him;  and  he  is  subject  to  a  court  summons.   The
    appellant fears that if returned to Pakistan he will be  at  risk  from
    Islamists and will face an unfair prosecution for blasphemy.

 4. On 17 July 2014, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum, for humanitarian protection and  under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  As a consequence, on 18 July 2014, the Secretary of State made a
    decision to remove the appellant to Pakistan.

 5.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  that
    decision.   A  hearing  took  place  on  19  December   2014.    In   a
    determination signed on 9 January 2015 and promulgated  on  13  January
    2015, Judge Britton allowed the appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds.
    He accepted the appellant's account and concluded that there was a real
    risk that the appellant would face a threat to his  life  or  would  be
    subject to persecution on the basis of an unfair trial if  returned  to
    Pakistan.

 6. On 27 January 2015, the Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal
    on the basis that the judge had erred in law in that he had  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for his findings favourable to the  appellant  in
    paras 35-40 of his determination.

 7. Subsequently, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  P  J  M  Hollingworth)
    granted the Secretary of State on the ground:

         "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  extent  of
         the judge's reasoning upon which his findings depend."

 8. On 26 February 2015, the appellant filed a Rule 24 reply resisting  the
    Secretary of State's appeal on the  basis  that  the  judge  had  given
    adequate reasons for his findings and consequently no error of law  was
    established.

 9. The appeal came before me on 10 June 2015.

The Appeal

10. Mr Mills, who represented the  Secretary  of  State,  relied  upon  the
    ground of appeal upon which permission had been  granted,  namely  that
    the judge had failed to give adequate reasons.

11. However, additionally he sought to amend the grounds of appeal to add a
    further ground, namely that the judge had erred in law  by  failing  to
    apply the relevant country guidance decision of AK and SK  (Christians:
    risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 00569 (IAC).  That decision was not drawn
    to the judge's attention.  Indeed, it had not been reported at the date
    of the hearing on 19 December 2014.  The Upper Tribunal's website makes
    clear it was reported on 23 December 2014 although promulgated  to  the
    parties in those appeals on 15 December 2014.  That was  not  clear  at
    the hearing before me but is now.  Mr Mills sought to amend the  ground
    in order to argue that the judge's failure to consider AK and  SK  was,
    nevertheless, an error of law as it was  reported  before  the  Judge's
    decision was signed on 9 January 2015 and  promulgated  on  13  January
    2015.

12. Mr Hoshi opposed the application to amend the grounds on the basis that
    it was now too late to include a new ground by way of amendment on  the
    day of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

13. I will return to these issues after I have considered the  ground  upon
    which permission was granted.

Discussion

14. There  were  three  issues  which  Judge  Britton  had  principally  to
    determine in reaching his decision:

      1) Had the appellant established that he owned a recording  studio  in
         Rawalpindi?

      2) Had the appellant established  that  he  had  been  threatened  and
         subject to an FIR, fatwa and court summons as a result  because  he
         was wrongly accused of blasphemy having refused three persons  from
         the Mosque access to his studio?

      3) Was the appellant at risk on return if his account was accepted?

15. Mr Mills submitted that the Judge's reasoning was inadequate.   It  was
    not clear on what basis the Judge had found in the appellant's favour.

16. Mr Hoshi submitted  that  the  judge  had  given  adequate  reasons  in
    relation to all three of those issues.  Mr  Hoshi  submitted  that  the
    judge was not required to give extensive reasons but only sufficient so
    that the losing party knew why she had lost.

17. It is trite law that a judge must give adequate reasons for his or  her
    decision (see the case law  set  out  in  MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)
    Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC) at [7]-[12]).

18. That duty is not, however, more than to explain the essentials  of  any
    finding or decision.  In Shizad (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set  aside)
    [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC), the (then) Chamber President (Blake J) said  this
    at [10]:

         "We would emphasise that although there is a legal duty to  give  a
         brief explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on  which
         the appeal is determined, such reasons need not be extensive if the
         decision as a whole makes sense,  having  regard  to  the  material
         accepted by the judge."

19. Blake J went on to state:

         "Although a  decision  may  contain  an  error  of  law  where  the
         requirements to give adequate reasons are not  met,  this  Tribunal
         would not normally set aside it as in the First-tier Tribunal where
         there has been no misdirection of  law,  the  fact-finding  process
         cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country  Guidance  is  taken
         into account, unless the conclusions that the judge draws from  the
         primary data before him were not reasonably open to him."

    At [11], Blake J identified the Tribunal's task as follows:

         "We have, therefore, concluded that our task is to carefully review
         the evidence before  the  judge  relating  to  this  basis  of  the
         appellant's claim, to determine whether it is capable of supporting
         the conclusions to which he came."

20. In MK,  the  current  Chamber  President  (McCloskey  J)  affirmed  the
    approach in Shizad at [11] as follows:

         "The depth and extent of the duty to give reasons  will  inevitably
         vary from one case to another.  The duty is contextually sensitive.
          Thus, as the Upper Tribunal observed  in  Shizad  [2013]  UKUT  85
         (IAC), a Tribunal's reasons need not be extensive if  its  decision
         makes sense.  See also R  (Iran)  v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982."
         (emphasis in original)

21. Judge Britton's reasoning and  findings  are  at  paras  35-40  of  his
    determination.  They are undoubtedly brief.  Nevertheless, I accept  Mr
    Hoshi's submissions that  his  reasons  are  adequate  to  support  his
    findings.

22. First, as regards the appellant's account that he was at  risk  because
    of his refusal to allow his music studio to be used by three men one of
    whom was an Imam, Judge Britton heard oral evidence from the  appellant
    and also had evidence from the appellant's brother-in-law, Dr L and  an
    affidavit from a co-worker, JR attesting to the  appellant  owning  the
    recording studio.  At para 36 of his determination, Judge Britton  said
    this:

         "I accept that the photograph taken and produced (page  30  of  the
         appellant's bundle) is the mosque opposite the appellant's  studio.
         I accept that the appellant did have that studio in Rawalpindi  and
         before that in Islamabad.  I accept the evidence of the appellant's
         brother-in-law Dr [L] who had seen for himself the recording studio
         in Islamabad.  He had not seen the one in Rawalpindi but was  aware
         of the appellant's move from Islamabad  to  Rawalpindi.   There  is
         also the affidavit of [JR] who used to work for Tritones Production
         and studios.  I accept  the  appellant  was  producing  95%  gospel
         music.  I am satisfied that the  appellant  did  have  a  recording
         studio in Islamabad and in Rawalpindi."

23. Secondly, as regards the threats to the appellant and the  position  he
    now claimed to be in facing a fatwa and prosecution, at para  39  Judge
    Britton set out why he accepted the appellant's account and  basis  for
    his claimed future risk.  Again,  he  had  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    appellant and also the affidavit evidence of his co-worker JR.  He also
    relied upon the documentary evidence, in particular the fatwa and  FIR.
    At para 39 the judge said this:

         "I accept the appellant's evidence of what happened to  him  on  21
         March 2014 when 3 people came into his studios, one of whom was  an
         Imam and damaged his equipment and  he  was  beaten.   Two  of  his
         employees,  [SM]  and  [JR]  witnessed  what  had  happened.   [JR]
         describes what happened in his affidavit.  I accept  the  appellant
         was falsely accused of  blasphemy  and  that  a  Fatwa  was  issued
         against the appellant (p28) and an FIR (p26 and 27).  I accept  the
         appellant's evidence that there would be a threat to his life if he
         returned to Pakistan.  I accept that he  may  not  receive  a  fair
         trial and his situation has  gone  beyond  discrimination  but  has
         become one of persecution."

24. At para 37 the judge set  out  his  reasons  for  accepting  that   the
    appellant had escaped from Islamabad on the basis that  he  worked  for
    PIA at Islamabad Airport as follows:

         "The appellant is a Christian.  The pastor who  helped  him  escape
         has not produced a statement.  However, I  accept  the  appellant's
         evidence of how he left Rawalpindi and  Islamabad.   The  appellant
         worked for PIA and had access  to  Islamabad  airport  which  would
         normally not be available.  He said he went through  the  VIP  exit
         and his family went through normal channels.  I  accept  that  that
         could easily have been done."

25. In relation to the documents, the judge pointed out at para 19  of  his
    determination that although the refusal letter relied upon the "general
    availability of forged documents in  Pakistan",  the  letter  did  not:
    "state why they are of the view that his  documents  cannot  be  relied
    upon."

26. The judge was obviously, therefore, alive to the possibility  that  the
    document might not be reliable.  It is trite law  that  the  judge  was
    required to assess their reliability in the context of all the evidence
    (see Ahmed (Tanveer) v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00439).

27. The judge had an opportunity to  consider  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    appellant and that of Dr L.  Dr L's  evidence  supported  that  of  the
    appellant both in relation to his owning a  recording  studio  and  the
    events that the appellant claimed had led to him and his family leaving
    Pakistan.  The judge was entitled to accept the evidence he heard.   He
    was also entitled to accept, and give weight to,  the  evidence  of  JR
    even though his evidence was only in written form.  The grounds do not,
    as such, suggest otherwise.  Simply, the grounds argue that the judge's
    reasons were inadequate.  The judge carefully set out all the  evidence
    at paras 4-26 of his determination.  He clearly had it in mind together
    with the parties' submissions which he summarised at paras 27 and 28 of
    his determination. Having accepted (as he was entitled to) the evidence
    of the three witnesses, taken together with  the  documentary  evidence
    which the reliability of which the judge  properly  considered  in  the
    light of all the evidence, the  Judge's  reasons  albeit  were,  in  my
    judgment, adequate to support his positive findings.  In  my  judgment,
    on issues (1) and (2) above, the judge gave adequate  reasons  for  his
    findings.  It is clear the basis upon which he made those  findings  in
    favour of the appellant and against the respondent.

28. Turning to issue (3), Judge Britton considered the  objective  evidence
    and expert report of Mrs Moeen at para 35 as follows:

         "From  the  objective  evidence  produced  it  is  clear  there  is
         discrimination against Christians and the problems they have  under
         the blasphemy law is a serious matter.  This is clearly set out  in
         Mrs Moeen's report and the BBC News document and headed  'What  are
         the Pakistan's blasphemy laws?'  and  ABC  document  entitled  'Men
         accused of blasphemy, Zafar Bhatti and  Muhammad  Asghar,  shot  in
         Pakistan jail'.  Further  objective  evidence  in  the  appellant's
         bundle fully sets out the position of Christians in Pakistan."

29. It is not suggested that the background  evidence  in  the  bundle,  to
    which the judge refers in the final  sentence  of  para  35,  does  not
    support his conclusion.  The expert's report is (now) at  pages  79-112
    of the Upper Tribunal bundle.  Mr Mills made no submission in  relation
    to this report which is clearly supportive of the judge's view that, if
    the appellant's account is accepted, he is likely to  be  arrested  and
    prosecuted on charges of blasphemy and there is  also  a  risk  of  him
    being targeted by Muslim extremists (see, for example paras 79  and  80
    of the report).

30. Acceptance of the expert report and the background  evidence  provided,
    in my judgment, adequate reasons for finding in the appellant's  favour
    on issue (3) that he would be at risk of persecution as a result of  an
    unfair trial for blasphemy (of which he had been  falsely  accused)  or
    there was a real risk to his life from Muslim extremists.

31. For these reasons, I reject the Secretary of State's challenge  to  the
    judge's decision as raised  in  the  grounds  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.

The New Ground

32. I now turn to the additional ground which Mr Mills sought to  introduce
    by way of amendment relying on the Country Guidance case of AK and SK.

33. The Tribunal has a discretion to permit a party to "amend  a  document"
    which would include the grounds of appeal under  rule  5(3)(c)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

34. In exercising that discretion I must  have  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective set out in rule 2 to deal with the case "fairly and  justly".
    Rule 2(2) sets out some non-exhaustive factors as follows:

         "2(2)    Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes -

             (a)  dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate  to
                  the importance of the case, the complexity of the  issues,
                  the anticipated costs and the resources of the parties;

             (b)  avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in
                  the proceedings;

             (c)  ensuring, so far as practicable,  that  the  parties  are
                  able to participate fully in the proceedings;

             (d)   using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
                  effectively; and

             (e)  avoiding delay, so far  as  compatible  with  the  proper
                  consideration of the issues."

35. Rule 2(4) imposes an obligation upon the parties to:

         "(a)      help  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  further  the   overriding
             objective; and

         (b)  co-operate with the Upper Tribunal generally."

36. The point which Mr Mills wishes to raise as an additional ground is, in
    principle, a good one.  It is  recognised  in  the  Senior  President's
    Tribunal's Practice Directions for the IAC at para 12.4:

         "Because of the principle that light cases  should  be  treated  in
         like manner, any failure to follow a clear,  apparently  applicable
         country guidance case or to show why it does not apply to the  case
         in question is likely to be regarded as grounds  for  appeal  on  a
         point of law."

37. Consequently, if Judge Britton  had  failed  to  take  into  account  a
    relevant country guidance case which had been reported at the  date  of
    the hearing, even if he was not referred to it, his failure to consider
    it would amount to an error of law.  In my judgment, that principle  is
    no less applicable where the country guidance case  is  reported  after
    the hearing but prior to the First-tier Tribunal's determination  being
    promulgated.   That  was  the  case  in  this  appeal.   Although   the
    representatives both assumed that AK and SK had  been  reported  on  15
    December 2014, four days before Judge  Britton  heard  the  appellant's
    appeal on 19 December  2014,  in  fact  it  is  clear  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal's website that the decision was only reported on  23  December
    2014; in other words after the hearing.  Nevertheless, it was  reported
    prior to the judge signing his determination on 9 January 2015 and  the
    decision being promulgated on 13 January 2015.   It  is  not  suggested
    that AK and SK is  not  relevant  to  the  appellant's  claim.   In  my
    judgment, therefore, Judge Britton's failure to consider is capable  of
    amounting to an error of law.

38. However is the Secretary of State entitled to amend her grounds  so  as
    to include this ground not contained in the  original  application  for
    permission dated 27 January 2015?

39. As Mr Hoshi submitted, the amendment to the grounds was proposed by  Mr
    Mills very late in the day.  As I understand it, Mr Hoshi had no notice
    of the Secretary  of  State's  application  until  shortly  before  the
    hearing.  There was  certainly  no  written  application  made  to  the
    Tribunal prior to the hearing or at all.  As I understood Mr Mills, the
    point which he wished to now raise had only arisen in his mind when  he
    saw the papers for the appeal shortly before the hearing date.

40. I accept, of course, that the lateness of the application  was  through
    no fault of Mr Mills himself.  However, the  case  of  AK  and  SK  was
    reported just over a month before the Secretary of  State  drafted  her
    grounds of appeal which made no reference to it.  Mr Mills  was  unable
    to offer any explanation why the grounds did not include this challenge
    or why no subsequent application had been made, until the  day  of  the
    hearing, to amend the grounds so  as  to  seek  to  include  it  as  an
    additional ground.  It is now over four months since the  grounds  were
    originally drafted and over five months since AK and SK  was  reported.
    This is, in my judgment, a  significant  and  unexplained  delay.   The
    country guidance system is well understood and country  guidance  cases
    are readily identifiable on the Upper Tribunal's website.   Of  course,
    the Secretary of State was actually a party to AK and  SK  and  so  had
    knowledge of it even  prior  to  its  being  reported.   It  is  wholly
    inexplicable why the point now relied upon was not raised earlier.

41. Mr Hoshi submitted that he was prejudiced in presenting the appellant's
    appeal if the grounds were amended as he had not had an opportunity  to
    consider AK and SK for the purposes of this appeal.  Whilst I  entirely
    accept Mr Hoshi's position if he  were  required  fully  to  argue  the
    merits of the appellant's claim against the touchstone of  AK  and  SK,
    that difficulty does not arise at the error of  law  stage.   It  would
    only arise if an error of law  was  identified  and  the  Tribunal  was
    remaking the decision in the light of AK and SK.  I did not  understand
    Mr Hoshi to resist the argument in principle that the  judge's  failure
    to consider AK and SK was an error of  law.   That  said,  the  obvious
    difficulty faced by Mr Hoshi in having to assimilate a  decision  which
    runs to some 264 paragraphs together with fourteen appendices could  be
    overcome by adjourning the appeal  to  a  future  date  to  remake  the
    decision.  In any event,  Mr  Hoshi  was  able  to  make  a  number  of
    submissions in relation to AK and SK to the effect that  it  would  not
    have made any difference to Judge Britton's decision and therefore  his
    error of law was not material.

42. In my judgment, it is relevant  in  assessing  whether  to  permit  the
    amendment to consider the arguability of the proposed ground  including
    whether the ground discloses a material error of law.  In my  judgment,
    it does not.  Paragraph  6  of  the  headnote  summarises  the  country
    guidance relevant to this appeal as follows:

         "Non state agents who use blasphemy laws  against  Christians,  are
         often motivated by spite, personal or business disputes,  arguments
         over land and property.  Certain political events may also  trigger
         such accusations.  A blasphemy allegation, without more,  will  not
         generally  be  enough  to  make  out  a  claim  under  the  Refugee
         Convention.   It  has  to  be  actively  followed  either  by   the
         authorities in the form of charges being brought or by those making
         the complaint.  If it is, or will be,  actively  pursued,  then  an
         applicant may be able to establish a real risk of harm in the  home
         area and an insufficiency of state protection."

43. Paragraph 8 of the headnote deals with relocation as follows:

         "Relocation is normally a viable option  unless  an  individual  is
         accused of blasphemy which is  being  seriously  pursued;  in  that
         situation  there   is,   in   general,   no   internal   relocation
         alternative."

44. Mr Hoshi submitted that in this appeal the judge's  acceptance  of  the
    appellant's evidence in its entirety demonstrated that he  fell  within
    the  "actively  pursued"  category  of  someone  facing   a   blasphemy
    accusation.  I accept that submission.  The judge found that there  was
    in existence a fatwa, an FIR and that the police had  become  involved.
    Equally, in accepting the appellant's evidence, the judge accepted that
    the appellant was subject to a court summons which, his  evidence  was,
    in respect of he had failed  to  attend  court  (see  para  22  of  the
    determination).   I  do  not  accept  Mr  Mills'  submission  that  the
    assessment of the circumstances accepted by the  judge,  including  the
    existence of the court summons, could lead to any other conclusion than
    that the blasphemy charges, falsely brought against the appellant, were
    being "actively  pursued".   The  appellant,  therefore,  falls  square
    within the risk category identified  in  AK  and  SK.   Had  the  judge
    applied AK and SK, he would, in my judgment, have come to precisely the
    same conclusion that the appellant was at  risk  of  prosecution  on  a
    false blasphemy charge and subject to an unfair trial.  He would be  at
    risk of persecution in his home area and could not safely re-locate.

45. It seems to me in assessing the application for  an  amendment  to  the
    grounds on the day of the hearing, no useful purpose would be served by
    granting permission to amend the grounds when the new ground could  not
    have any prospect of success.

46. For all those reasons, I refuse the Secretary of State's application to
    amend the grounds.  But, in any event, had I granted the application, I
    would have concluded that the error of law by the judge in  failing  to
    consider AK and SK was not  material  to  his  decision  to  allow  the
    appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds.   The  appellant  would  have
    succeeded applying AK and SK.

Decision

47. For all these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds did not involve the making  of
    an error of law such that the  decision  should  be  set  aside.   That
    decision stands.

48. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
