
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05542/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 October 2017 and 9 February    |On 6 March 2018                      |
|2018                                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                 RAMANAN [S]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Azani of Counsel
For the respondent:    M S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. The respondent is a national of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1981.
     However, for the sake of convenience, I shall continue to refer to the
    parties as they were referred to before the proceedings in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The respondent appeals to the Upper Tribunal against  the  decision  of
    First-tier  Judge  Thomas  promulgated  on  4  May  2017  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent  dated  13
    March 2015 refusing him  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  and  to
    remove him from the United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 3. This appeal had been initially dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  on
    17 July 2015. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal against that
    decision was allowed and the matter  was  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard de novo. It next came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Thomas on 21 March 2015  at  Sheldon  Court  in  Birmingham,  who
    allowed the appellant's appeal on refugee grounds.

 4. Permission to appeal  by  the  respondent  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pullig on 31 May 2017 stating that it was arguable  that
    the First-tier Judge failed to give adequate reasons by not identifying
    a risk category into which the appellant fell in line with the case  of
    CJ and others (post-- Civil War returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  00319
    (IAC).

 5. The Judge in his decision accepted the appellant's past persecution  in
    Sri Lanka and found him to be generally credible in  relation  to  that
    evidence and stated that some of  the  challenges  to  the  appellant's
    evidence by the respondent are not so significant such as to  undermine
    the appellant's general overall credibility in the appeal.

 6. The Judge accepted that the appellant was  a  member  of  the  LTTE  as
    claimed and that his sister was a member in the  commando  section.  He
    accepted that the appellant was detained and beaten by the  Sri  Lankan
    army in April 2012 due to his perceived activities with  the  LTTE.  At
    paragraph 40,  the  Judge  found  that"  taking  the  evidence  in  its
    totality, and given  all  findings,  I  find  that  the  appellant  has
    discharged  the  lower  burden  of  proof  that   his   detention   and
    mistreatment by the Sri Lankan authorities in April 2012 was because of
    actual  or  perceived  activities  with  the  LTTE  and   amounted   to
    persecution".

 7. Having found the appellant credible about his past persecution  in  Sri
    Lanka, the Judge then considered CJ at paragraph 41 as whether there is
    any future risk to the appellant if returned to Sri  Lanka.  The  Judge
    stated in the decision that the appellant was "detained and  mistreated
    when he returned to Sri Lanka in 2012 after being out  of  the  country
    for three years. He found that even if the appellant's name was not  on
    a watch list, given the events of 2012, which both stated  the  end  of
    the conflict in 2009, he is a person who, there is  a  real  risk,  the
    authorities are or would become interested in  after  his  arrival  and
    identity is verified in his home area. The appellant's history will  be
    relevant, as it was  in  2012,  when  he  was  detained  and  therefore
    perceived by the Sri Lanka authorities to be a risk to the state or the
    government. The appellant's involvement in LTTE events  in  the  United
    Kingdom is likely to be known to the sophisticated intelligence service
    of Sri Lanka. This is an assistant involvement  with  the  group,  will
    more likely than not, aggravated circumstances. Taking all matters into
    account, I find that there is nothing to suggest that the risk  to  the
    appellant now, would be any different to that he  faced  in  2012,  and
    which resulted in persecution. I therefore find that the  appellant  is
    at risk on return of the  person  who  the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka
    perceived as a threat in 2012 and given the history and  is  continuing
    support of the LTTE in  the  diaspora,  means  that  the  risk  remains
    prevalent. As a person  at  real  risk  from  the  Sri  Lankan  forces,
    internal relocation is not an option for this  appellant.  I  therefore
    find that the appellant is a risk of persecution or serious harm in Sri
    Lanka  under  the  qualification  regulations  and   is   entitled   to
    international protection".

 8. This was in the last paragraph of a 10-page decision and  the  entirety
    of the Judge's reasoning as to the appellant's future risk is noted  in
    this one paragraph. The rest of the  decision  is  focused  on  finding
    whether  the  appellant's  evidence  is  credible  as   to   his   past
    persecution.

 9. The Judge's reasons for why the appellant  poses  a  risk  to  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities is materially deficient.  The  appellant's  evidence
    has not been properly reasoned against all the risk factors set out  in
    CJ. The Judge failed to give cogent reasons for why the appellant would
    be perceived as posing a risk to the unitary Sri Lanka State  which  is
    the main requirement to assess risk on return.  The  Judge  relied  too
    heavily on the appellant's credibility as to his past  persecution  and
    while in most asylum cases past persecution  can  be  an  indicator  of
    future persecution, in the case of Sri Lanka.

10. It was eloquently argued on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  when  the
    entirety of the decision is read, the various risk  factors  have  been
    identified in the decision even if they do not appear in one paragraph.
    I cannot agree with this submission because  it  is  incumbent  on  the
    Judge to clearly set out which of  the  appellant's  actions  would  be
    perceived by the authorities as posing a risk to the Government and  be
    regarded as posing a current threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as  a
    single State.

11. In CJ the Tribunal held that the current categories of persons at  real
    risk of persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in
    detention or otherwise, are: (a) Individuals who are, or are  perceived
    to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because
    they are, or are perceived to have a significant role  in  relation  to
    post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal  of
    hostilities within Sri Lanka. (b) Journalists whether in print or other
    media) or human rights activists, who, in either case, have  criticised
    the Sri Lankan government, in particular its human  rights  record,  or
    who are  associated  with  publications  critical  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    government. (c) Individuals who have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
    Learned  and  Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the  Sri  Lankan
    security forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in  alleged
    war crimes.  Among those who may have witnessed war crimes  during  the
    conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only those who
    have already identified themselves by giving  such  evidence  would  be
    known to the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only they are at real
    risk of adverse attention or persecution  on  return  as  potential  or
    actual war crimes witnesses. (d) A  person  whose  name  appears  on  a
    computerised "stop" list accessible at the airport, comprising  a  list
    of those against whom there is an extant court order or arrest warrant.
     Individuals whose name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped at the
    airport and handed over to the appropriate Sri Lankan  authorities,  in
    pursuance of such order or warrant.

12. The Judge made a material error  by  not  identifying  the  appellant's
    evidence which go to the specific risk factors and giving  reasons  and
    had this  be  done,  the  decision  might  have  come  to  a  different
    conclusion.

13. I therefore direct that the appeal be placed before the Upper  Tribunal
    for submissions to be heard as to whether the appellant fits  into  any
    of the risk categories in CJ. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's  findings
    of fact as to the appellant's past persecution in Sri Lanka are not  to
    be disturbed. The only issue to be decided is whether the appellant can
    be returned safely to Sri Lanka when his evidence is taken against  the
    risk factors set out in the country guidance case of CJ.

    Rehearing on 9 February 2018

14. The appeal came before me on 9 February 2018. I heard submissions  from
    both parties as to whether the appellant can be safely returned to  Sri
    Lanka. I have considered all the background evidence  and  the  written
    submissions in reaching my decision.

15. The appellant claims that  his  past  activities  with  the  LTTE,  his
    previous detention and his diaspora activities in  the  United  Kingdom
    will bring him within the risk categories set out in GJ.

16. In GJ the Tribunal  held  that  (i)  this  determination  replaces  all
    existing country guidance on Sri Lanka;  (ii)  The  focus  of  the  Sri
    Lankan government's concern has changed since the civil  war  ended  in
    May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri Lanka itself is a spent force and there have
    been no terrorist incidents since the end of the civil war;  (iii)  The
    government's present objective is to identify Tamil  activists  in  the
    diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism and  to  destabilise  the
    unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in Amendment 6(1) to the Sri  Lankan
    Constitution in 1983, which prohibits  the  'violation  of  territorial
    integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus  is  on  preventing  both  (a)  the
    resurgence of the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and
    (b) the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka; (iv) If a person  is
    detained by the Sri Lankan security services there remains a real  risk
    of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring  international  protection;  (v)
    Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka for a  person  at
    real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities,  since  the  government  now
    controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils are required to return to  a
    named address after passing through the  airport;  (vi)  There  are  no
    detention facilities at the airport.  Only those whose names appear  on
    a "stop" list will be detained from the airport.  Any risk for those in
    whom the Sri Lankan authorities are or become interested exists not  at
    the airport, but after arrival in their home area, where their  arrival
    will be verified by the CID or police within  a  few  days;  (vii)  The
    current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution  or  serious
    harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention  or  otherwise,  are:
    (a) Individuals who are, or are  perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka as a single  state  because  they  are,  or  are
    perceived to have a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil
    separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal of  hostilities  within
    Sri Lanka. (b) Journalists whether in print or other  media)  or  human
    rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised the  Sri  Lankan
    government,  in  particular  its  human  rights  record,  or  who   are
    associated with publications critical of the Sri Lankan government. (c)
    Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons  Learned  and
    Reconciliation Commission implicating the Sri Lankan  security  forces,
    armed forces or the Sri  Lankan  authorities  in  alleged  war  crimes.
    Among those who may have witnessed  war  crimes  during  the  conflict,
    particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May  2009,  only  those  who  have
    already identified themselves by giving such evidence would be known to
    the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only they are at real risk  of
    adverse attention or persecution on return as potential or  actual  war
    crimes witnesses. (d) A person whose name  appears  on  a  computerised
    "stop" list accessible at the  airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
    against whom  there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
    Individuals whose name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped at  the
    airport and handed over to the appropriate Sri Lankan  authorities,  in
    pursuance of such order or warrant.  (viii) The Sri Lankan authorities'
    approach is based on sophisticated intelligence, both as to  activities
    within Sri Lanka and in the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities  know
    that many Sri Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic  migrants  and
    also  that  everyone  in  the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
    involvement with the LTTE during the civil war.  In  post-conflict  Sri
    Lanka, an individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent
    that it is perceived by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
    present risk to  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
    Government.  (ix) The authorities maintain a computerised intelligence-
    led "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not
    reasonably likely to be detained at the airport but will  be  monitored
    by the security services after his or her return.  If  that  monitoring
    does not indicate that such a person is a  Tamil  activist  working  to
    destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or revive the  internal  armed
    conflict, the individual in question is  not,  in  general,  reasonably
    likely to be detained by the security forces.  That will be a  question
    of fact in each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried  out
    by such an individual.

17. In MP (Sri Lanka) and NT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829,  18
    June 2014 the CA upheld the CG case of GJ and Others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and  found  that  there
    was no legal error in the in the UT's country  guidance  on  Sri  Lanka
    despite the fact that it had narrowed the risk categories from those in
    the Eligibility Guidelines of the United Nations High Commissioner  for
    Refugees. It was stated however that the UT had  not  prescribed  "that
    diaspora activism is the only basis on which a returning Tamil might be
    regarded as posing" a future threat and  thus  of  being  at  risk  on
    return. "There may,  though  untypically,  be  other  cases  where  the
    evidence shows particular grounds for concluding  that  the  Government
    might regard the applicant as posing a current threat to the  integrity
    of Sri Lanka as a single state even in the absence of evidence that  he
    or she has been involved in diaspora activism".

18. It is accepted that the appellant was a member of the LTTE  as  claimed
    and that his sister was a member in the commando section. It  has  also
    been accepted that the appellant was detained and  beaten  by  the  Sri
    Lankan army in April 2012 due to  his  perceived  activities  with  the
    LTTE. Therefore, the appellant has been persecuted in the past and  Sri
    Lanka. Past persecution is relevant and can be an  indicium  of  future
    persecution, but past persecution does not automatically mean that  the
    appellant will be invariably of adverse interest of the authorities  on
    his return given the Sri Lankan authorities interest is in  only  those
    who pose a current risk to the unitary Sri  Lankan  State  or  the  Sri
    Lankan Government.

19. In PP (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ it was found that the  UT  had  assumed  that  the  change  in
    circumstances identified in GJ, namely  the  defeat  of  the  LTTE  and
    subsequent realignment of the political situation would have a  similar
    effect on the ground in the Tamil territories in the north and east  of
    Sri Lanka. In terms of intelligence capacity, it was known from GJ that
    the Sri Lankan government's method of identifying LTTE sympathisers was
    much more sophisticated and technically based than  it  had  previously
    been. But it did not follow that similar changes would have occurred in
    the Tamil areas which remained militarised zones with high  proportions
    of soldiers to civilians. So, the  position  on  the  ground  for  that
    purpose had not significantly changed. The high level of militarisation
    might have been such as to put vulnerable individuals, such as those in
    the Claimant's position (a raped woman), at risk.

20. The question therefore is does the appellant pose a  risk  to  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities now because he will be perceived by them as  someone
    who can and can progress the cause of the  unitary  State  and  pose  a
    genuine risk  to  the  authorities  in  that  regard.  The  Sri  Lankan
    government now has a much  more  sophisticated  and  technically  based
    system to identify those who pose a risk.

21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant  while  studying
    in  2003-2009  distributed  leaflets,  watched  and  reported  on  army
    positions and offered food and accommodation to the LTTE. In the United
    Kingdom the appellant has attended Tamil martyr's commemorative day  in
    2011, 2013, 2015 and in 2010 protested in Hyde Park. The appellant  was
    detained for 10 days in Sri Lanka and ill-treated and on April 2012  he
    was released on the payment of a bribe. His parents  were  asked  about
    his whereabouts by the authorities. The appellant left the airport with
    his own passport and there is no arrest  warrant  against  him  in  Sri
    Lanka. The appellant was a student in Sri Lanka prior to him coming  to
    the United Kingdom.

22. The appellant's activities for the LTTE are as follows. He joined  them
    in July 2003 while he was studying for  his  A-levels  after  the  LTTE
    pressurised him and told him that every person should help if they want
    to live in Sri Lanka. The appellant said at question 43 of  his  asylum
    interview that when they continuously spoke and talked to him and  they
    eventually convinced him. The appellant therefore had to  be  convinced
    to join the LTTE which demonstrates to me that he did not subscribe  to
    their ideology at that time.

23. The appellant was then trained for four months with the LTTE and at the
    same time continued with his studies. The appellant's evidence is  that
    his  training  consisted  of  tuition  lessons  about  the  police  and
    importance of LTTE and training about an AK-47 rifle. He said  that  he
    was trained "to use a grenade and how to disguise himself and in  self-
    defence". The LTTE told the appellant to inform  them  if  he  had  any
    suspicions  about  the  army  or  LTTE  members,  all  those  who  have
    connection with the army. He was  given  parcels  to  deliver  to  some
    people and asked to do odd jobs. He also said that he would  distribute
    leaflets, invite people to attend the LTTE program and would go to each
    home to invite them. He said that he would also  arrange  accommodation
    for civilian people who travelled from Vanni and provide them with food
    and vehicle arrangements. The packages that he delivered for  the  LTTE
    which was on 5 to 6 occasions mainly consisted of letters. He said that
    while he was in  Colombo,  he  continued  studying  and  would  receive
    instructions from senior LTTE members to arrange accommodation for LTTE
    and to  pass  the  information  about  ministers'  movements.  He  also
    continued to deliver letters and parcels for the LTTE.  These  are  the
    activities that the appellant says that he performed for the LTTE while
    in Sri Lanka.

24. I find that these activities are that of  an  ordinary  member  of  the
    LTTE. The appellant was not in a senior position but would take  orders
    and deliver letters from senior members. These activities would not  be
    considered significant enough to bring  the  appellant  into  the  risk
    category of someone who wants to violate the territorial  integrity  of
    Sri Lanka.

25. The appellant has a sister who is also a member of the LTTE, but I find
    that his sister's involvement would not  bring  the  appellant  to  the
    adverse attention of the authorities because he is of  no  interest  to
    the authorities. It was found in  CJ  that  everyone  in  the  northern
    province had some level of involvement with the LTTE during  the  Civil
    War. The appellant's sister's involvement would not bring the appellant
    to the adverse attention of the authorities for that reason.

26. The appellant was released on a payment of a bribe.  In  GJ  there  was
    evidence before the  tribunal  from  Professor  Good  that  release  on
    payment of a bribe  was  extremely  common.  The  Tribunal  effectively
    accepted that assertion at paragraph 262. It appears to  have  related,
    however, to the up to date position as at that time.  These  cases  are
    left in as they may assist on credibility points but they must  now  be
    read in line  with  GJ.  In  VS  (Risk-LTTE-escape)  Sri  Lanka  (2003)
    UKIAT0003 (formerly a CG case but removed from  the  list  8.8.07)  the
    Tribunal stated that the situation  in  Sri  Lanka  at  that  time  had
    improved and to succeed a case had to  be  exceptional.   The  Tribunal
    followed  PT  (Risk-Bribery-Release)  Sri  Lanka  (2002)  UKIAT   03444
    (formerly a CG case) . In PT the appellant in that case claimed to have
    been detained by the authorities and released on payment  of  a  bribe.
    The Tribunal  observed:  "When  someone  has  been  in  custody  for  a
    significant period of time it is reasonable to presume that some record
    was made of the detention and  this  record  may  still  exist  and  be
    available for inspection by the authorities. If the record  does  still
    exist one may also reasonably presume that it includes a  reference  to
    the individual's  current  status.  By  this  we  mean  whether  he  is
    currently wanted by the authorities, or whether his  release  concluded
    the authorities'  adverse  interest  in  him.  These  presumptions  are
    supported by the statement from the CID superintendent, set out  above,
    that their computer only holds the name and address and age  of  wanted
    people. We also note in passing that this record kept by the  CID  does
    not include people who failed to  comply  with  reporting  restrictions
    after a release. It is then frequently argued on behalf  of  Appellants
    that the payment of a bribe means  even  in  relatively  routine  cases
    there was an assisted escape rather than a release and this  will  mean
    that the escapee is on the  wanted  list".  The  Tribunal  went  on  to
    endorse the view of a previous Tribunal that "it is  highly  improbable
    to say the least that a police officer, releasing a man on payment of a
    bribe, would record it as an escape.  There is certainly no need to  do
    so.  If the police wanted to keep an  interest  in  him  all  that  was
    necessary was to note that he might  be  of  interest  in  the  future.
    Normally if someone is released on payment of a bribe or  otherwise  it
    is indeed because the authorities take the view that there is  no  good
    reason to detain him even if there is some involvement with the LTTE at
    a very level ".  The Tribunal in PT  concluded  that  "bribery  related
    releases, especially from army custody, would not, in  the  absence  of
    some special and credible reason, be likely to be treated as escapes ".



27. Given this guidance, the fact that the  appellant  was  released  on  a
    bribe will not bring him to the adverse attention of  the  authorities.
    There is no warrant of arrest for the appellant and therefore his  name
    will not be on the stop list  at  the  airport.  He  left  through  the
    airport with his own passport which would not have been able to  do  if
    he was of interest to  the  authorities.  The  appellant  will  not  be
    perceived to be someone who  would  pose  a  risk  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities because the fact of the matter is he does not pose a risk.

28. The appellant first entered the United Kingdom with a student  visa  on
    14 September 2009. On 22 January 2011 he applied for further  leave  to
    remain as a student which was subsequently  granted  until  31  October
    2012. The appellant returned to Sri Lanka on 28 March 2012 and returned
    to the United Kingdom on 18 April 2012. He claimed asylum  on  19  July
    2012. At his screening interview at question 4.1 the  appellant  stated
    that he came to this country to save his life because he  was  arrested
    by the Sri Lankan army on 26  April  2012  and  detained  for  10  days
    because he was accused of helping the LTTE. Therefore, it was when  the
    appellant returned to Sri Lanka from the United  Kingdom  on  28  March
    2012 that he was  arrested  a  month  later,  on  26  April  2012.  The
    appellant must have been aware that his activities with the LTTE  might
    bring  him  to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  on  his   return.
    Nevertheless, he returned to Sri Lanka because he knew that he  was  of
    no adverse interest to the authorities. If he had been  afraid  of  the
    authorities he would not have returned to Sri Lanka.

29. This conclusion is strengthened by his answer at question  162  of  his
    asylum interview when he was asked why he decided to come to the United
    Kingdom. The appellant said "after the end of the war in 2009, the army
    were looking for people  in  Colombo.  If  someone  wants  to  stay  in
    Colombo, either a student on working person. I was continuing  doing  a
    course; otherwise they would be stopped on the way  and  arrested.  The
    question was repeated to the appellant and he said "fear, avoid arrest,
    I was even advised by my family to come to the  United  Kingdom".  This
    shows  that  the  appellant  who  was  advised  to  leave  the  country
    nevertheless returned to Sri Lanka to marry. This also demonstrates  to
    me that the appellant knew that his activities with the LTTE  were  not
    of sufficient significance to bring him to the adverse interests of the
    authorities.

30. I do not accept the appellant's explanation  at  question  166  of  his
    asylum interview for why he returned to Sri Lanka. He said that it  was
    because "three years had gone I was told that the Ex-LTTE members  were
    given rehabilitation and problems were solved. My father called me  and
    one of my cousins proposed for my marriage and I came and get married."
    If the  appellant  knew  that  his  work  for  the  LTTE  was  of  such
    significance, he would not  have  returned  because  he  had  not  been
    rehabilitated as he was in the United Kingdom.

31. The appellant was able to leave the airport  after  his  detention.  He
    said at question 175 of his asylum interview that he did not  have  any
    problems at the airport. The appellant claims that he was asked whether
    he was going to re-establish the LTTE by the army while  in  detention.
    Therefore, if the authorities thought that he was going to re-establish
    the LTTE, he would not have been released and nor would  he  have  been
    able to leave the country through the airport without any problems. The
    fact that they released the appellant demonstrates  that  they  had  no
    further interest in him.

32. The European Court of Human Rights judgement of I v  Sweden  -  Chamber
    Judgement [2013] ECHR 813 stated "This leads to the crucial question of
    whether the isolated fact that the  person  who  has  been  subject  to
    torture suffices to demonstrate that he or  she,  if  deported  to  the
    country where the ill-treatment took place, will face a  real  risk  of
    being treatment contrary to Article 3. Moreover, as  stated  where  the
    Court's established caselaw is that in principle it is for  the  person
    to be expelled to adduce evidence capable of proving that there are  as
    any substantial grounds for believing that if the measure complained of
    were to be implemented he or she would be exposed to  a  real  risk  of
    being subjected to  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3....  The  court
    considers that where an asylum seeker, that the first applicant, evokes
    that he or she has previously been subjected to ill-treatment,  whether
    undisputed or supported by evidence, it may  nevertheless  be  expected
    that he or she  indicates  that  there  are  substantial  and  concrete
    grounds for believing that upon return to the home country  he  or  she
    would be exposed to a  risk  of  such  treatment  again.  For  example,
    because of the asylum seekers political  activities,  membership  of  a
    group in respect of which reliable sources confirm a continuing pattern
    of ill-treatment on the  part  of  the  authorities,  appending  arrest
    warrant or other concrete difficulties with the authorities concerned.

33. Taking into account all the risk factors set out in CJ and the  country
    guidance, I find that the appellant will not be ill-treated or  exposed
    to a risk of such treatment again because of the authorities  his  past
    interest in him in Sri Lanka. I find on the evidence that the appellant
    will not be exposed to ill-treatment on his return to Sri Lanka.

34. In respect of the appellant's role in the diaspora  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom, this will not bring him to the adverse attention of the
    authorities because I find that his activities in this country are  not
    of such significance such as to bring him within the risk category. The
    background  evidence  states  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  have
    considerably opened up because  journalists,  media  professionals  and
    human rights activists are able to express themselves more  freely  and
    communicate  publicly.  The  change  in  government  policy   therefore
    demonstrates the Sri  Lankan  authorities  are  allowing  human  rights
    activists to report human rights abuses.

35. The CPIN of June 2017 policy as formulated by the United Kingdom states
    that the LTTE in Sri Lanka has not held any military power or political
    authority since the end of the Civil War in  2009.  It  states  that  a
    person  being  of  Tamil  ethnicity  would  not   in   itself   warrant
    international protection. It states that neither,  in  general,  but  a
    person who evidence is past  membership  or  connection  to  the  LTTE,
    unless they have or are perceived to have had a significant role in it;
    or if they are, or are perceived to be active, and post conflict  Tamil
    separatism and thus the threat to the state.  Further  it  states  that
    participating in diaspora activities such as attending  demonstrations,
    is not  in  itself  evidence  that  the  person  will  attract  adverse
    attention on return to Sri Lanka.

36. The war ended in 2009 and we are now in 2018 which is some  nine  years
    ago. Considering all the  evidence  in  the  round,  I  find  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk on his return to Sri Lanka.  He  can  be
    safely returned.


Signed by,

.............................................
Ms S Chana  Dated this 4th day of March 2018
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

