
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05793/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 April 2015                              |On 17 June 2015               |
|Prepared 29 April 2015                        |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                 EBRINA NJIE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel, instructed by Queen's Park
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of the Gambia, date of  birth  25  May  1989,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision,  dated  25  July  2014,  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain in the United Kingdom by reference to  a
    claim  under  the  Refugee  Convention  under  paragraph  336  of   the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 and a refusal of the claim under  humanitarian
    protection ground, paragraph 339C and with reference to  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.

2.   An appeal against that decision came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    P Wellesley-Cole (the judge)  who,  on  or  about  25  September  2014,
    dismissed the appeal.  Permission to appeal that decision was given  by
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 18 February 2015.

3.    Ground  1  seeking  permission  essentially  challenged  the   judge's
    conclusion that the Appellant's Facebook entry of various items was not
    open to the public.  The argument in the grounds as drafted was  simply
    that the Appellant's Facebook page  showed he had  1,015  friends,  the
    majority of whom are Gambians, and  that  each  of  these  friends  has
    direct access to  his 'postings' and 'sharings' on  his  Facebook  page
    and by inference the likelihood of discovery increased.

4.   It is clear that as a matter of  approach  the  Facebook  page  can  be
    protected from access by restrictions to friends, friends  of  friends,
    and a discrete group of nominated persons.  Similarly, there is nothing
    to suggest that a country's security service could not  get  access  to
    Facebook and have their own account as well as access  others.   It  is
    clear that the issue was not apparently  raised  before  the  judge  by
    direct evidence that it was a public site, but rather an inference that
    was drawn.

5.   Accordingly  it  was  said  the  judge's  assessment  of  risk  to  the
    Appellant from the security services of the Gambia  underestimated  the
    likelihood of awareness of matters and articles which he has posted  on
    his site.  Mr Jafar argued from a general  position  that  because  the
    Appellant has a Facebook page upon which various matters are posted, it
    followed that his page could and would be accessed by the  authorities.



6.   In this respect, Mr Jafar argued, in contrast to other countries  where
    there was more detailed information, it was not clear on  the  evidence
    that was put to the judge that there was a general access  to  Facebook
    to  suggest the Appellant would   be  identified  as  critical  of  the
    authorities.  Further, the judge took the  view  that  the  Appellant's
    activity on Facebook in the United Kingdom did not give rise  to  risk,
    not least for what appears to be a similar reason, of  lack  of  public
    access or by the authorities in Gambia.

7.   At the hearing before me Mr Jafar relied upon  the  Appellant's  asylum
    interview record (annex B in the Respondent's bundle) particularly  Q/A
    85 - 103 to demonstrate the Appellant's activities.  In short Mr  Jafar
    asserted that the Appellant had no protective filters on  his  site  to
    prevent anyone from having access to it: A point which does not  appear
    to have been drawn out before the judge bearing in mind the Appellant's
    age.

8.   The way this issue was presented to the judge   appears  to  have  been
    over-simplified and  shows  a  lack  of  preparation  of  the  relevant
    evidence.  There needed to be an  assessment  of  the  photographs  and
    'posts' or 'postings' on the Facebook page of the Appellant,  in  terms
    of their political significance.
    Secondly, there needed to be evidence as to why, or if, there  were  no
    protective  filters  so  as  to  prevent  scrutiny  by  third   parties
    maintained.
    Thirdly, there needed to be evidence, expert if need be, of the  extent
    of Gambian state scrutiny of Facebook.
    Fourthly, if it was said one of the Appellant's Facebook friends  could
    reveal his 'postings' or 'posts' why there was  a  real  risk  of  that
    happening.
    Fifthly, whether there is a basis to conclude  how  the  Gambian  state
    authorities were likely to scrutinise his Facebook messages.

9.   It seemed to me that as the matter was put to the judge she dealt  with
    the evidence [D11, 12, 13, 14 and 15] and why she rejected it.   Indeed
    the grounds simply assert the Appellant's Facebook page is open to  his
    friends. This is  not the same as being open to the public. It  may  be
    that 'postings' and 'sharing's' are  available  to  1015  friends  (and
    others) as Appeal Ground 1 Part A asserts but that is a long  way  from
    establishing a real risk of the state taking an  adverse  interest  in,
    let alone knowing of the relevant  page  or  the  Appellant's  identity
    given his partly concealed Facebook identity.

10.  I find the above points indicate a failure by  the  Appellant  to  show
    why there is a real risk that his Facebook page and its contents  would
    attract the adverse attention of the State.

11.  Ultimately it seemed to  me  that  these  challenges  were  essentially
    trying to put the case in a different way than it was put to the  judge
    as to the significance of the Facebook page and the entries upon it.  I
    do not find that the way the judge considered the matter  was  at  odds
    with the way it had been put to her. Accordingly I do not find ground 1
    part A disclosed an arguable error of law.

12.  As to ground 1 part B, the judge's finding that the sharing  of  banned
    articles  was  a  criminal  activity,  the  point  is  perhaps  not  as
    straightforward  as  the  judge  may  have  thought  because  producing
    articles of that kind may be made criminal  offences,  but  it  is  the
    reason for making it a criminal offence and the extent it  is  used  to
    suppress freedom of speech and thought that is relevant.

13.   The  significance  of  it  really  turns  on  the  likelihood  of  the
    Appellant's Facebook activities, being a  matter  of  interest  to  the
    authorities and identified by them. It  appears  the  Appellant  infers
    from the activities of the Gambian National Intelligence  Agency  (NIA)
    that they were taking an interest in him in 2013 when they visited  his
    sister Kaddy in December 2013 and  when  his  brother,  a  resident  of
    Sweden, paid a visit to the Gambia  to  enquire  into  the  Appellant's
    circumstances in 2014 but was detained.

14.  It is to be noted that whatever  the  Appellant  had  claimed  to  have
    taken place, when he and others entered the Gambian  Embassy  in  2012,
    and his involvement at a demonstration, that had not presented  a  risk
    when he returned to the Gambia in 2013.

15.  In  those  circumstances  the  question  is  really  was  the  evidence
    sufficient before the judge to show that were the Appellant to come  to
    the attention of the authorities and for them to be interested in  what
    he had done in the United Kingdom, he was at risk  of  proscribed  ill-
    treatment, persecution or torture and similar ill-treatment.  It seemed
    to me that it was an error by  the  judge  to  categorise  postings  of
    critical articles about the government as not significant.   I  do  not
    find that error amounts to a material error of fact or  law  or  raised
    the likelihood of risk.

16.  Part C of ground  1  is  critical  of  the  judge  because  whilst  she
    accepted that high ranking categories of human rights activists may  be
    subject to monitoring and security forces'  activities,  but  that  the
    Appellant did not fall into such  category.   It  is  said  that  as  a
    generality the government takes an adverse interest in  anyone  who  is
    critical of it, be they high or low in position.   I  was  taken  to  a
    particular reference which  asserted  the   proposition  that  citizens
    generally may face adverse attention.   It seems to me that  the  judge
    has simply pinpointed the  greater  likelihood  of  attracting  adverse
    attention depending on seniority and societal position.  As such, I  do
    not find that that amounted to an error of law.

17.  Ground 2 essentially amounts to the point that the judge  having  found
    the  Appellant's  claim  was  unmeritorious  and  that  his  sur  place
    activities were simply to bolster or embellish  his  claim,  failed  to
    recognise that such insincerity and such  activities  may  nevertheless
    give rise to risk because of  how  the  matter  was  perceived  by  the
    country to which an Appellant was to return.   What  is  said  is  that
    Gambia is one such country where such matters are taken very  seriously
    and give rise to the real risk of material ill-treatment.

18.  Ultimately the fact that the judge may not have  remarked  on  how  the
    Appellant's home authorities  might  embark  upon  it,  including  some
    fairly aggressive assertions of  how  people  would  be  treated.   For
    Gambia there was not the same background evidence before the  judge  of
    the kind, for example identified in  relation  to  Iran,  to  show  the
    extent to which the security forces are using Facebook, social media or
    the internet in order to suppress criticism of the authorities.

19.  There was limited background evidence on the evidence as to the  extent
    to which the scrutiny of blogs, articles on the internet, social  media
    sites and so forth are actually visited by the security  services.   It
    is at least reasonable to infer that there must  be  some  interest  in
    those particular media.  However,  the  relevance  of  the  matter  was
    really back to the issue of the likelihood of the Appellant being found
    by that route.  Part of that assessment was not unrelated to the issues
    considered about the  national  intelligence  list  maintained  by  the
    government in respect of anti-government activities.  I  do  not  think
    the evidence before the judge showed that there was no risk, but rather
    that there was no real likelihood of the Appellant  coming  to  adverse
    attention bearing in mind he had, between the very  significant  events
    of attending a demonstration and intrusion into  the  Gambian  Embassy,
    been able to return home for about a month.  He travelled  through,  it
    seemed, an international airport and departed the same way. Yet he  was
    not subject to adverse attention albeit it must have been apparent that
    he was coming from abroad and from spending at  least  some  period  of
    time abroad in the UK, come what may.

20.  There was no challenge to the judge's findings in relation  to  Article
    8 of the ECHR and they did not form part of the grounds of appeal.   In
    the circumstances, whilst the judge  did  not  helpfully  set  out  the
    assessment of the sur place claim, nevertheless at  paragraph  15  made
    findings which show that she did assess the risks associated  with  his
    claimed activities in the United Kingdom and  the  likelihood  of  them
    coming to the attention of the Gambian authorities.

21.  The Original Tribunal made no  material  error  of  law.  The  Original
    Tribunal's decision stands.

22.  No anonymity order was sought or appropriate. The appeal is  dismissed.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 10 June 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey






