
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05345/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th January 2016                 |On 1st February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                 ARIF ULLAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A White of Counsel, instructed by Coventry Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge North of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  (the  FTT)  promulgated  following  a  hearing  on  22nd
    September 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Afghanistan born 6th April 1994  and
    so was 20 years of age when he appeared before the FTT.

 3. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally in  April  2009  and
    claimed asylum.  His application was refused on  28th  July  2009,  but
    because he was a minor he was granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain
    until 6th October 2011.

 4. Prior to the expiry of that leave, the Appellant on 28th September 2011
    applied for further leave to remain which application  was  refused  on
    25th June 2012 and the Appellant appealed against that decision.

 5. On 30th July 2012 the Respondent  withdrew  the  decision  and  made  a
    further decision on 10th July 2014, to refuse to vary leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom, and to remove  the  Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 6. The Appellant appealed against that decision.  The FTT  heard  evidence
    from the Appellant and found that he would not be at risk  if  returned
    to Afghanistan and he was therefore not entitled to a grant  of  asylum
    or humanitarian protection, and there would be no breach of Articles  2
    or 3 of the ECHR.  The FTT considered Article 8 of the ECHR outside the
    Immigration Rules and concluded that the Appellant's removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would be proportionate in pursuance  of  the  legitimate
    aim of fair and firm immigration control, and therefore there would  be
    no breach of Article 8.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    There was no challenge to the FTT findings that the Appellant would not
    be at risk in Afghanistan.  Permission to appeal was sought in relation
    to the consideration of Article 8 by the FTT.   The  Appellant's  claim
    had been based upon his private life, and the FTT had accepted that  he
    had established a private life, and that his proposed removal would  be
    an interference with that private life.

 8. It was contended that the FTT had erred in considering  proportionality
    and had  failed  to  apply  the  provisions  of  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002  Act).   It  was
    contended  that  the  FTT  had  not  considered  the  effect   of   the
    Respondent's delay in making a decision, taking into account  that  the
    initial decision dated 25th June 2012 had been withdrawn, and  was  not
    replaced with a further decision until 10th July 2014.   The  Appellant
    had made his application on 28th September 2011.

 9. It was also contended the FTT had failed to examine the effect  of  the
    Appellant being sent to Afghanistan, a country with  which  he  has  no
    ties or connection as his case was that he had been  born  in  Pakistan
    and had always lived there, although his parents were Afghan  citizens.
    The Appellant had only visited Afghanistan on three occasions  when  he
    was a child, staying for a few days on each occasion.  In addition  the
    Respondent had failed to attempt to trace the Appellant's  family.   It
    was contended that the FTT had failed to take  into  account  that  the
    Appellant had spent the first fourteen years of his life  in  Pakistan,
    and his remaining formative teenage years in the United Kingdom and  is
    westernised.

10.  Permission  to  appeal  was  initially  refused  by  Designated  Judge
    MacDonald, but following a renewed application,  permission  to  appeal
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds in the following terms;

         "It is arguable that the judge failed to take into account relevant
         considerations when reaching  a  decision  on  the  proportionality
         balance under Article 8 relating to his private life.  This being a
         case where he had been granted discretionary  leave  in  2009  that
         would expire in  October  2011  and  prior  to  that  had  made  an
         application for leave which had not been decided  until  10th  July
         2014.  The Grounds of Appeal originally before the Tribunal set out
         that the  transitional  provisions  applied  and  therefore  it  is
         incumbent upon the judge  to  consider  the  appeal  on  Article  8
         grounds.  It is further arguable that he had failed  to  take  into
         account the Appellant's personal circumstances when considering his
         private life and in particular that the removal directions were not
         to Pakistan, where it appeared he had resided prior  to  coming  to
         the United Kingdom but to Afghanistan a place where it was asserted
         he had no connections.  Whilst the grounds make  reference  to  the
         judge's failure to consider section 117B  of  the  Immigration  Act
         2014, it is  not  stated  how  that  would  have  made  a  material
         difference.  However I grant permission on all  grounds.   For  the
         avoidance of doubt, there is no challenge to the  judge's  findings
         that he would not be at risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  if
         returned to Afghanistan."

11. Following the grant of permission to appeal  the  Respondent  lodged  a
    response dated 3rd March 2015 pursuant  to  rule  24  of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 contending, in summary, that  the
    FTT directed itself appropriately.   The  FTT  took  into  account  the
    Appellant's private life, and the grounds fail  to  demonstrate  how  a
    consideration of section 117B of the  2002  Act  would  have  made  any
    difference to the outcome of the appeal.

12. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FTT  decision
    should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

13. Miss White relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal and confirmed that the challenge  related  to  the
    FTT assessment of proportionality and the Appellant's private life.

14. Miss White submitted that section 117B was relevant, in that there  had
    been a delay by the Respondent, and this should have been considered in
    relation to the maintenance of effective immigration control.  The  FTT
    appeared to  have  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  brought  up  in
    Pakistan,  but  had  not  properly  considered  this  when  considering
    proportionality.  Moreover the Appellant had been disadvantaged because
    the Respondent had not undertaken family tracing.

The Respondent's Submissions

15. Mr McVeety submitted that the FTT decision disclosed no material  error
    of law.  The Appellant was being returned to Afghanistan because he had
    no legal status in  Pakistan.   With  reference  to  section  117B,  Mr
    McVeety submitted that there was no provision that  dealt  with  delay.
    Section 117B confirmed that the maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control is in the public interest, and there were no factors  contained
    within section 117B that would have assisted the Appellant's case.

16. In  relation  to  tracing,  Mr  McVeety  submitted  that  this  had  no
    relevance, as the Appellant was being returned to Afghanistan, and  his
    case was that his family were in Pakistan.

The Appellant's Response

17. Miss White submitted that the Respondent's delay should have been taken
    into  account,  when  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control was considered.

My Conclusions and Reasons

18. I find no material error of law in the FTT decision for  the  following
    reasons.

19. The FTT did not accept that the Appellant had established  family  life
    that would engage Article 8, and that finding was not challenged.   The
    FTT accepted that the Appellant had established  a  private  life,  and
    that his removal from the United Kingdom  would  disrupt  that  private
    life.  The FTT went on to consider proportionality in relation  to  the
    Appellant's private life.  It is not suggested that the  FTT  erred  in
    applying the principles in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

20.  The  FTT  took  into  account  all  material  factors  when  assessing
    proportionality.  The FTT found that the Appellant would not be at risk
    if returned to Afghanistan, and this finding has not  been  challenged.
    The FTT took into account that the Appellant had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since April 2009 and that he was a minor when he  entered  this
    country, and 20 years of age at the date of  hearing.   The  FTT  found
    that the Appellant had a relationship with his girlfriend, but  it  did
    not go beyond  boyfriend  and  girlfriend.   The  FTT  found  that  the
    Appellant spoke Pushtu  and  that  he  is  an  Afghan  citizen.   These
    findings, made by the FTT, are not disputed.

21. The FTT also found that the Appellant had been brought up  in  Pakistan
    but had previously visited Afghanistan on three occasions when he was a
    minor, staying for only three or four days in Jalalabad.

22. I do not accept that the FTT  failed  to  examine  the  effect  of  the
    Appellant  being  sent  to  Afghanistan.   The  FTT  in  paragraph   18
    considered the  country  guidance  case  law  and  concluded  that  the
    Appellant would not  be  at  risk.   In  addition  the  FTT  stated  in
    paragraph 18;

         "I accept that the Appellant may face some  practical  difficulties
         in starting  a  new  life  in  Afghanistan  and  dealing  with  the
         uncertainties  and  moving  to  a  new  country;  however,  he  has
         demonstrated an ability to deal with such difficulties  during  his
         stays in various countries on his way  to  the  UK  and  after  his
         arrival here."

23. With reference to the tracing issue, the FTT did  not  err  in  finding
    that the Appellant had not been disadvantaged.  The  Appellant  claimed
    that his family were in Pakistan, and that his parents had been killed,
    and the Appellant was being returned to  Afghanistan,  the  country  of
    which he is a citizen.

24. The FTT did err in failing to make any reference to section 117B of the
    2002 Act.  This error is not material.  The  Upper  Tribunal  found  in
    Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) that it is not an error  of
    law to fail to refer to ss.117A-117D considerations if  the  judge  has
    applied the test he or she was  supposed  to  apply  according  to  its
    terms; what matters is substance, not form.

25. Section 117B(1) states that the maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest.  It  is  clear  that  the  FTT  had
    regard to this  in  considering  proportionality.   There  is  specific
    reference in paragraph 22 to the  "legitimate  aim  of  fair  and  firm
    immigration control."  The FTT balanced the  Appellant's  circumstances
    against the need to maintain effective immigration control.

26. There  is  no  reference  within  ss.117A-117D  to  delay.   There  are
    circumstances  when  delay  by  the  Respondent   may   strengthen   an
    Appellant's claim.  In this  case  there  was  a  delay  following  the
    withdrawal of the decision in July 2012, as a new decision was not made
    until 10th July 2014.  This was noted by the FTT in the first paragraph
    of the decision.  The delay meant that the Appellant had  spent  longer
    in the United Kingdom, and there is no indication that the FTT did  not
    take into account the length of time that the  Appellant  had  been  in
    this country.

27. The Upper Tribunal in AM (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260  (IAC)  found
    that an Appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave  to
    remain from either s.117B(2) or (3), whatever the degree of his fluency
    in English, or the strength of his financial resources.   Therefore  if
    the FTT had specifically considered those factors, it  would  not  have
    assisted the Appellant, if he had given evidence that he was fluent  in
    English and financially independent.

28. If the FTT had considered s.117B(5) then it  would  have  had  to  have
    accorded little weight to the private life established by the Appellant
    when his immigration status is precarious.  The Appellant has only ever
    had a precarious immigration status,  because  he  has  only  ever  had
    limited leave to  remain  in  this  country.   The  FTT  erred  in  not
    considering this, but in the circumstances the error is  not  material,
    as this could not have  assisted  the  Appellant's  case,  and  on  the
    contrary, would have meant that little weight could have been  attached
    to the private life that he had established since April 2009.

29. The grounds display disagreement with the conclusion reached by the FTT
    in relation to Article 8 but they disclose no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law such that the decision must be set aside.   I  do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the FTT.  There has been  no  request  to
the Upper Tribunal for anonymity and I see no  need  to  make  an  anonymity
order.


Signed   Date 22nd January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or is payable.  The appeal is dismissed.   There  is  no  fee
award.


Signed   Date 22nd January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

