
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05389/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10th August 2016                      |On 12th August 2016                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                            Mr Hashwin Singh Gaba
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel (instructed by Broudie Jackson &
Canter)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
      permission, in relation to a Decision and Reasons  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Holt) promulgated on 4th March 2015. In that  Decision
      and Reasons Judge Holt dismissed the Appellant's Asylum Appeal.


   2. The Appellant's asylum claim was straightforward.  He claimed to be  a
      Sikh from Afghanistan who would face a risk of persecution  by  reason
      of  his  religion  if  returned.   His  wife  and  children  are   his
      dependants.

   3. The Secretary of State doubted his nationality  and  that  formed  the
      main plank of the appeal hearing.  The  Judge  found  that  he  was  a
      national of Pakistan rather than Afghanistan.

   4. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted  and  expanded
      upon by Miss Patel before me, are as follows.

   5. It is asserted that the Judge adopted a flawed approach  to  assessing
      nationality based  primarily  on  the  Appellant's  language.  At  the
      Appellant's screening interview it was  recorded  that  the  Appellant
      spoke Punjabi with a "Mutni" dialect.  The dialect was later clarified
      as being "Multani".

   6. The Judge found in the Decision and Reasons that the dialect "Multani"
      is used in and around the City of Multan in Pakistan.   It  is  argued
      that there was no evidence before  the  Judge  to  suggest  that  that
      language came from the City of Multan and alternatively no evidence to
      suggest it was only spoken there.  Miss Patel argued that there  is  a
      considerable movement of people around that area and it  was  entirely
      plausible for someone in Afghanistan to speak with that dialect.   She
      did not argue that the Multani dialect did not originate in Multan.

   7. It is also submitted that the Judge appeared to use the fact that  the
      Appellant used a Punjabi interpreter at the hearing  as  a  matter  to
      doubt his nationality and submitted that it is now trite law  that  it
      is inappropriate to use an interpreter as evidence.  It  is  submitted
      that Punjabi is a language spoken in Afghanistan and prevalent amongst
      the Sikh community.  The fact that the Appellant spoke  Punjabi  ought
      not to have been given the weight it was in relation to nationality.

   8. It is also asserted that the Judge  was  wrong  to  find  against  the
      Appellant on the basis that he did not speak Dari or  Pushtu  when  in
      fact he claimed at interview that he  did  and  in  his  statement  he
      claimed that he did.

   9. It is also asserted that the Judge erred in  finding  the  Appellant's
      credibility damaged because he had stated at Screening Interview  that
      he had no family in the UK and yet family  witnesses  attended  court.
      It was the Appellant's case that at the Screening Interview he did not
      know that he had family in the UK and only discovered  their  presence
      afterwards.

  10. It is asserted that the Judge erred in failing to give reasons  as  to
      why she found that the witnesses had prevaricated and she was under  a
      duty to do so.  It is also said that she erred in finding that a  late
      change in the identity of witnesses was a  deliberate  tactic  by  the
      Appellant to ambush the Respondent.  It is argued  that  the  original
      witnesses were present at an earlier hearing which  was  adjourned  at
      the Court's behest but were unavailable for this hearing.  It is  also
      further pointed out that the Representative for the Secretary of State
      made no application for an adjournment in relation to their evidence.

  11. It is also argued that the Judge failed to attach any  weight  to  the
      evidence of the witnesses and the Appellant himself that he did indeed
      speak Pushtu and Dari.

  12. It is claimed that the Judge has erred  in  her  finding  additionally
      that the fact that  the  Appellant's  wife  and  children  spoke  only
      Punjabi was further evidence that they were not from Afghanistan  when
      the  background  evidence  makes  clear  that  as  a  result  of   the
      persecution of Sikhs in Afghanistan women and children remain at home.
       As  such  they  would  therefore  not  have  been  exposed  to  other
      languages.

  13. The Judge is also criticised for an adverse finding on the basis  that
      the Appellant produced a letter from the Sikh Temple in London  rather
      than Manchester where he lives when the Sikh Temple in  London  is  in
      fact the  one  specifically  for  Afghans;  such  is  clear  from  the
      letterhead.

  14. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Harrison argued, in  line  with
      the Rule 24 response, that the Judge had dealt with  the  evidence  in
      detail.  She built her argument  for  dismissing  the  appeal  and  it
      cannot be said that she did not take proper account  of  the  evidence
      before her; she considered it with care.  The grounds in  reality  are
      no more than a disagreement with the Judge's  conclusions  which  were
      properly open to her on the evidence adduced.

  15. I am not persuaded by Miss Patel's argument that the  Judge  made  any
      material errors of law in her Decision and Reasons.

  16. The Appellant claimed in his  statement,  made  some  time  after  his
      interviews (paragraph 27 of the statement),  that  he  told  the  Home
      Office he spoke Dari and Pushtu and asked at his  Screening  Interview
      for a Dari interpreter as this is an Afghan language.  He says he  was
      told that a Punjabi interpreter had been booked.

  17. The Judge dealt with this and finding no evidence that such  was  ever
      the case disbelieved that he  had  in  fact  ever  asked  for  a  Dari
      interpreter particularly as at the Screening Interview  he  failed  to
      mention that he could  speak  Pushtu  or  Dari.   Furthermore,  it  is
      remarkable indeed that an Appellant who claims to speak Dari  and  who
      claims to have requested a Dari interpreter  for  his  Interview  then
      chose to request a Punjabi interpreter for  the  hearing.   The  Judge
      found he could not speak Dari or Pushtu but rather spoke a dialect  of
      Punjabi that originated from Multan in Pakistan.  I can find no  error
      in that reasoning.  Whilst it is of course the case that dialects  can
      be found outside their area of origin, it is  usually  because  it  is
      spoken by somebody from that area of origin.  It is synonymous with  a
      person speaking with a Scouse accent in London.  They could only learn
      that accent from being brought up in a household with such  an  accent
      and that arises only if  you  are  resident  in  the  Liverpool  area.
      Localised dialects originate  in  the  particular  locality.   Persons
      speaking with that dialect may move elsewhere but it is learned in the
      area of the locality.  Thus it is entirely reasonable for the Judge to
      conclude, given the Appellant spoke the  Multani  dialect  of  Punjabi
      that in fact he came from Pakistan and not Afghanistan.

  18. The burden of proof rests with the Appellant, he was  aware  from  the
      outset that his  nationality  was  an  issue  as  was  his  choice  of
      language.  He nevertheless chose to adduce no evidence to the First  -
      tier Tribunal that he spoke Dari or Pushto save for  bare  assertions.
      The Judge was entitled to find that inadequate.

  19. Whilst if the Judge found against the Appellant in  isolation  on  the
      basis that the wife and children spoke only  Punjabi  there  may  have
      been some force in the argument that Sikh women and children tended to
      stay at home in Afghanistan; however  in  light  of  the  findings  in
      relation to the main Appellant she was entitled  to  reach  a  similar
      conclusion in relation to his wife and children.  The fact  that  they
      spoke Punjabi with a Multani dialect indicated equally that they  also
      originate from Pakistan.  Again it was open to the Appellant to adduce
      evidence that he spoke an Afghan language and he chose not to do so.

  20. Miss Patel criticised the Judge for concluding that the Appellant  had
      stated at his Asylum Interview that his parents were in Pakistan  when
      she argued that was not what he said.  How the Judge  interpreted  the
      answer to the question was a matter  for  her.   It  could  have  been
      interpreted in the way that the Judge did.

  21. The Judge was also criticised for finding against the Appellant on the
      basis of a lack of detailed knowledge about Afghanistan  when  he  had
      answered a considerable number of questions about that  country.   The
      Judge found it not credible that an Afghan Sikh  would  not  be  aware
      that an Afghan Sikh woman had been elected a Member of  Parliament  in
      Afghanistan as it was such an important matter.  She was  entitled  to
      that view.

  22. Simply because the Appellant offered explanations for matters did  not
      mean that the Judge had to accept them.

  23. With regard to the witnesses' evidence, the  Judge  gave  reasons  for
      attaching  little  weight  to  their  testimony;  namely   that   they
      prevaricated.  Miss Patel's argument was essentially  that  the  Judge
      should have given reasons for her reasons.  That is not required.  The
      Judge did give reasons for rejecting the oral evidence.

  24. It is clear  that  the  Judge  attached  considerable  weight  to  the
      language issue. However, that is not an error of law.  It was  clearly
      an issue that she found, as she was entitled to, to  be  determinative
      of the appeal.  She did not err in using an interpreter  as  evidence;
      rather she noted that the  particular  language  was  one  spoken  and
      originating in Pakistan, not Afghanistan and  there  was  no  evidence
      that the Appellant spoke any of the languages of Afghanistan.

  25. I agree with Mr Harrison that the grounds  amount  to  a  disagreement
      with the Judge's conclusions,  which  were  adequately  reasoned.  The
      Judge made no material errors of law in the Decision and  Reasons  and
      the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

  26. There was no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  I  see  no
      justification for making one.



The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 10th August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



