
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05721/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2016                   |On 15 January 2016                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    M J M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs F Farrell, of P G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born in 1996.

 2. By determination  dated  10  October  2015  Judge  Boyd  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  on  asylum  and  on  all
    other available grounds.

 3. On  7  December  2015  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "...

          3. The grounds which complain that the  judge  failed  to  follow
             correct country guidance  since  MOJ  and  Others  Somalia  CG
             [2014] UKUT00442 did  not  entirely  replace  AMM  and  Others
             Somalia CG [2011] UKUT00445 and that  he  failed  to  indicate
             which evidence of the expert he did not accept  are  arguable.
             Although the  judge  referred  to  AMM  he  arguably  did  not
             indicate which country guidance he was applying, and  arguably
             failed to indicate the extent to which he did not  accept  the
             expert evidence or why.

          4. It is unlikely that the judge made a mistake of  fact  capable
             of amounting to a material error of law; but since  permission
             is to be granted, all grounds may be argued."

 4. In a Rule 24 response dated  18  December  2015  the  SSHD  submits  as
    follows:

         "4       ...  The  judge  ...  having  found  [the  appellant]  not
             credible and having considered the report ... determined  that
             there was not a risk which engaged the  applicability  of  the
             conditions in AMM ... the  judge  did  not  need  to  go  into
             minutiae about elements of the report  and  makes  appropriate
             references to  the  report  as  to  why  AMM  would  not  have
             assisted.  In any event the grounds do not particularise  what
             in AMM the judge failed to consider and why it would have  led
             to a different outcome.

         5  While the grounds allege that the report states Al Shabaab is in
             control of villages around Afgoye, this does  not  demonstrate
             that Al Shabaab is in control within Afgoye.  Given that there
             is security in the day and the appellant can travel to  Afgoye
             in the day, the judge was entitled to find that the  appellant
             could return.

         ..."

 5. Mrs Farrell's submissions were along the lines of the  grounds  and  of
    the grant of permission.  She did not contend that the judge  had  made
    any material error of fact.  She submitted that although MOJ said  that
    conditions were improving in Mogadishu, that did not apply  to  all  of
    Somalia, and there had to be an assessment of the potential risk to the
    appellant if returning  to  Afgoye.   The  judge  had  found  that  the
    appellant would have been entitled to humanitarian  protection  if  his
    home area was in Mogadishu.  There was error in relation to Afgoye such
    that the determination should be set aside and the  appeal  allowed  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

 6. Mr Matthews in his submissions pointed out that  nothing  was  made  of
    those paragraphs of the grounds which alleged that the judge had fallen
    into factual error.  Other parts of the grounds disclosed no points  of
    law and were simply narrative.  The judge had  considered  the  country
    guidance, the background materials and the expert report by Dr Mullen -
    see paragraphs 19, 20, 21 and 22.  The expert report was based  on  the
    appellant  having  given  a  truthful  account,  but  the  judge   made
    unchallenged findings to the contrary.  He had given the expert  report
    some weight but had not found it ultimately decisive in the appellant's
    favour.  The degree of weight to be given to each item of evidence  was
    a matter essentially for the judge.  He was  not  shown  to  have  gone
    wrong, and the grounds did not amount to more  than  disagreement  with
    the outcome.  The appellant had failed to show why any analysis of  the
    country  guidance  should  yield  an  outcome  in  his  favour  on  the
    particular facts of his case.  It was the expert's view that Afgoye was
    safe, although not at night, but the judge was not bound to accept  his
    view even to that extent.

 7. In reply, Mrs Farrell submitted that expert report was  to  the  effect
    that Afgoye was not a safe place to which to return.  If the  appellant
    could not stay there at night, he could not stay  there  at  all.   The
    expert had cited UNHCR and other reports to similar  effect.   It  also
    had to be born  in  mind  that  if  the  appellant  could  not  get  to
    Mogadishu, then he could not get anywhere else.

 8. I reserved my determination.

 9. The grounds and submissions for the appellant do  not  amount  to  more
    than a disagreement with the outcome of the case.  They  do  not  yield
    any analysis as to why, on findings which the  judge  was  entitled  to
    reach, there was anything in country guidance or elsewhere  to  produce
    an outcome in his favour.  The judge found at paragraph 23 that it  was
    not established that Al Shabaab had sufficient presence  in  Afgoye  to
    pose any particular threat to the appellant.  He was entitled  to  find
    that decisive.

10. An anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal.  The matter
    was not addressed by either party in the Upper  Tribunal.   There  does
    not appear to be any particular reason for departing from the principle
    of open justice, but in absence of any submissions  this  determination
    has been anonymised and the order will remain in place unless and until
    a tribunal or court directs otherwise.

11. No error of law has been shown.  The determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           14 January 2016
