
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/05290/2015
     AA/05295/2015
     AA/05296/2015
     AA/05304/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th October 2016                           |On 24th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                THE SECRTARY OF state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     g T
                                     L T
                                    M M G
                                     R G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Slatter of Counsel instructed by Tamil Welfare
Association


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondents (I shall refer to them as the Claimants) are  a  family
    and citizens of  Sri  Lanka  whose  appeals  to  require  international
    protection were allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hembrough  in  a
    decision promulgated on 16th August 2016.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged.  They contended that given that the
    judge had rejected  a  sizeable  part  of  the  Appellant's  claim  the
    conclusion that the principal Claimant would be at risk  on  return  in
    accordance with GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT  319  (IAC)  was  inadequately  reasoned.   The  judge  had
    singularly failed to explain which risk category the Claimant fell into
    and why.  If the judge did have in mind 7(a) of the  head  note  of  GJ
    that he was perceived to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a
    single state such a finding was not reasoned.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis of what was  set  out  in
    the grounds.  On behalf of the successful Claimants a  Rule  24  notice
    was lodged.  Therein it was said that the judge had applied himself  to
    GJ.  The judge had accepted the core  of  the  Claimant's  claim.   The
    complaint made  by  the  SSHD  was  essentially  a  reasons  challenge.
    Reference was made to well-known case law to the  effect  that  it  was
    possible to understand why the  SSHD  had  lost.   The  judge  had  not
    breached the legal duty to give proper reasons.

 4. Before me Mr Jarvis for the Secretary of State referred me to a  number
    of passages in GJ which indicated that,  on  this  Claimant's  profile,
    there was not enough for him to be associated with the LTTE.  There had
    been material changes in Sri Lanka and it was unclear which category of
    GJ the judge considered the Claimant fell into.  Furthermore there  was
    no finding whether or not the judge accepted  that  the  CID  had  made
    enquiries with the Claimant's  parents  in  July  2013.   As  such  the
    decision could not stand.  So far as further  procedure  was  concerned
    the matter did not necessarily  have  to  go  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as it could be returned to Judge Hembrough  for  clarification
    of his findings.

 5. For the Claimants reliance was placed on the Rule 24 notice.  The judge
    had accepted quite a lot of the  Claimant's  account.   The  fact  that
    there was no finding whether the CID had  attended  the  home  was  not
    conclusive as it could be inferred from the judge's  findings  that  he
    did accept a visit had been made.  From there it could be said that the
    Appellant did fall into one of the risk categories set out in GJ namely
    that he was perceived as a threat  to  the  integrity  of  Sri  Lanka's
    single state.  Furthermore any error  of  law  by  the  judge  was  not
    sufficiently material to permit the decision to be set aside.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. Judge Hembrough clearly found this a difficult case noting, as he  did,
    in paragraph 63 that on the balance  of  probabilities  he  would  have
    dismissed the appeal but having regard to the lower standard applicable
    in this jurisdiction he allowed it on asylum  grounds.   What  troubled
    the judge was that the Claimant's account was  undermined  by  numerous
    inconsistencies which he accepted "may" be explained by  his  traumatic
    experiences and PTSD and what he found to be a fabrication of  evidence
    regarding the fate of Jegan, his failure to claim asylum on arrival and
    the absence of supporting evidence.

 8. Weighing it all up the judge found that  taking  into  account  GJ  and
    paragraph 339K of the Rules he allowed the Claimant's appeal.

 9. Unfortunately the reasoning goes no further than  that.   It  might  be
    obvious in some cases that a Claimant does fall within a  category  set
    out in a country guidance case but given the changes in Sri  Lanka  and
    the mixed credibility findings in this case it was incumbent  upon  the
    judge to be more specific  and  identify  the  particular  category  of
    persons at real risk of persecution that the Claimant fell into.  It is
    not unfair to say that paragraph 63 is almost devoid of reasoning as it
    is a conclusion only and why it is concluded that GJ  applies  to  this
    Claimant  is  unclear.   Not  to  provide  adequate  reasoning  for   a
    conclusion is often a material error of law and it  is  in  this  case.
    Furthermore there is no factual finding as to whether or  not  the  Sri
    Lankan CID did make enquiries with his parents as to his whereabouts in
    July 2013 which is arguably an important issue as it goes to  the  risk
    on return.  Given the mixed credibility findings I do  not  think  that
    the judge's acceptance of that matter can be inferred as was  suggested
    to me by Mr Slatter.  Had the Claimant been found wholly credible  then
    an inference in his favour could probably  have  been  drawn.   However
    this is a Claimant who has,  on  the  judge's  findings,  fabricated  a
    significant part of his account which is a finding that  does  not  sit
    easily with his appeal being allowed.

10. For these reasons I am satisfied that the judgment is not safe and must
    be set aside.  I have concluded that because  further  fact-finding  is
    necessary that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    to be heard by a judge other than Judge Hembrough.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier  Tribunal.  Meantime  the  anonymity  order  will  be
    continued.



Notice of Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

13. I set aside the decision.

14. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 24th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


