
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05775/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On  27 January 2016                  |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                            UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                 D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                             RAJMONDA KARAJFILAJ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harding, Cousel, instructed by Kliby Jones, sols.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, HOPO.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  Judge
         Simpson made following a hearing  at  Manchester  on  11  September
         2014. The  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
         respondent's decision of 28 July 2014 to refuse to grant her asylum
         in the UK.

      2. The appellant  claimed  to  be  at  risk  on  return,  having  been
         trafficked to the UK from Albania.

      3. Both parties accepted that the judge had materially erred in law in
         reaching her decision. First, she had not  given  adequate  reasons
         for finding that the appellant could reasonably relocate away  from
         her home area, having accepted to the relevant  standard  that  she
         had been forced into  prostitution  there.  She  had  not  properly
         applied the guidance in AM  &  BM  (Trafficked  women)  Albania  CG
         [2010] UKUT80.

      4. Second, she had not made any finding on the core issue  of  whether
         the appellant had in fact been trafficked to the UK. It was  agreed
         that the findings of fact would have  to  be  reconsidered  in  the
         First tier Tribunal.

      5. The appellant has in her possession an updated report  from  Social
         Services dated 15 December 2015 which must be served  on  the  Home
         Office and the Tribunal 7 days before the hearing.

      6. This appeal is to be listed before a judge other than  Mrs  Simpson
         at Manchester to be reheard with all issues at large.


Signed   Date


                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
