
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/05213/2015
     AA/05214/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 March 2016                              |On 5 April 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                   Ms L K
                                  Miss O P
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms E Daykin, Counsel instructed by Tuckers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are two linked appeals against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 30 September 2015.  The first appellant, born 3
    August 1984, is Albanian.  She is the mother of the  second  appellant,
    born 15 February 2013.   She  is  the  dependent  child  of  the  first
    appellant and the first appellant's  partner.   The  first  appellant's
    partner is also Albanian, has been present and settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom for seventeen years and was issued with a British  passport  on
    13 September 2004.  They have a second daughter  who  was  born  on  12
    October 2014 who is a UK citizen.

2.   The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 31 October  2013  and
    claimed asylum.  That claim was refused by letter of 24  February  2015
    and a decision made to remove her from the United Kingdom under Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

3.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  the  appellant's  claim   under
    Appendix FM.  In particular, under E-LTRP.2.2. the Tribunal noted  that
    it was a requirement that the appellant was not in the UK in breach  of
    Immigration  Rules  unless  paragraph  EX  applied.   However,  in  the
    Tribunal's consideration of  EX.1,  in  respect  of  eligibility  as  a
    partner, it only considered EX.1.(b) and not  EX.1.(a).   The  Tribunal
    had thus failed to consider the appellant's parental relationship  with
    the youngest child, who was a British citizen.  At paragraph 51 of  the
    determination the judge states that even if EX.1. was considered he did
    not find it unreasonable to expect the  youngest  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom since she would be removed as part  of  a  family  unit.
    However, that was wholly to ignore the accepted Home Office policy  set
    out in Immigration Directorate Instruction Family Migration  of  August
    2015 and paragraph 11.2.3. in particular.  That states as follows:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child."


    It goes on to state that where a decision  to  refuse  the  application
    would require a parent to return to a country outside the EU  the  case
    must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable  to
    expect a British citizen child to leave the  EU  with  that  parent  or
    primary carer.  The  fact  that,  as  the  Tribunal  pointed  out,  the
    appellant could apply from Albania for entry clearance  was  irrelevant
    since it was not  known  whether  or  not  that  application  would  be
    successful and, in any event, the policy did not admit of any temporary
    forced removal from the United Kingdom of a British citizen child to  a
    country outside the EU.


4.   Mr Whitwell for the respondent fairly accepted that  the  Tribunal  had
    taken the wrong approach to this case.  In particular, he accepted that
    the policy of the respondent was as set out at paragraph 11.2.3. quoted
    above and on that basis it was unreasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom.   Accordingly, the requirements  of  EX.1.(a)
    were met in this case.

5.   However, Mr Whitwell pointed out that  that  policy  was  not  entirely
    inflexible. It stated there may be  circumstances  where  it  would  be
    appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the conduct  of  the  parent
    gives rise to considerations of such weight as to  justify  separation.
    However, he accepted that no such considerations arose here.

6.   In the circumstances we are  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  fell  into
    material error in its assessment as to whether the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of Section E-LTRP and Section EX.1.  We are further of the
    view that the Tribunal's departure from the clear  policy  set  out  in
    paragraph 11.2.3. of the Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  without
    giving reasons constituted a material error.

7.   We acknowledge that that policy is not entirely inflexible and  may  be
    the subject of exception in certain circumstances but none were present
    in this case.  We shall accordingly allow this appeal.  We  shall  also
    make an anonymity direction.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 4 March 2016


Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

