
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05077/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 April 2015                     |On 6 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS SILMAT SILMAT
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G McGowan, Quinn, Martin & Langan


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Fox.  Judge Fox allowed  an  appeal  by  Mrs
    Silmat Silmat (hereinafter referred to as  "the  claimant")  against  a
    decision to remove her following refusal of her asylum and human rights
    claims.  Judge Fox found that the claimant was entitled  to  protection
    as a refugee.

 2) The basis of the claimant's asylum claim is set out at paragraph  6  of
    the determination  by  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    claimant is a national of Pakistan.  She was born on 22 March 1986 in a
    village in the Swat Valley, where she lived until 2010.  Her father  is
    a prominent Taliban commander.  After the  Taliban  attacked  a  police
    station she was taken into custody by the police.  She then  married  a
    man of whom her father disapproved.   Fearing  for  their  safety,  the
    claimant and her husband fled Pakistan and ultimately came to  the  UK.
    The claimant's husband's father was killed by  the  claimant's  father.
    Once in the UK the claimant was a victim of domestic abuse at the  hand
    of her husband.  She is now separated from him and she  does  not  know
    where he is.  The claimant suffers from mental health problems.

 3) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal accepted to the  low  standard  of
    proof appropriate for asylum appeals  that  the  claimant's  father  is
    connected with the Taliban and may indeed be a leader  of  considerable
    influence.  The judge  accepted  that  the  claimant's  husband  was  a
    manipulative person determined to pursue his own interests and that  he
    perpetrated domestic  violence  against  the  claimant.   The  claimant
    believed he had returned to Pakistan and the judge thought this  was  a
    reasonable belief.  The judge concluded that the claimant is  a  victim
    of domestic violence.  Were she to return to  Pakistan  it  was  likely
    that her husband would be able to trace her as his father used to be  a
    policeman and he would have access to his father's  contacts.   If  the
    claimant's husband was able to find her then  the  domestic  abuse  she
    suffered would continue and intensify.  There  would  not  be  adequate
    protection for her in Pakistan.   The claimant belonged to a particular
    social group, namely women who had been married.  She was returning  to
    a culture in which a woman in her position would not be welcomed.

 4) The Secretary of State set out a number of grounds in  the  application
    for permission to appeal.  It was pointed out that there  were  earlier
    determinations dismissing appeals by the claimant's estranged  husband.
    The judge  did  not  consider  that  he  was  required  to  take  these
    determinations into account.  As the separation of the claimant and her
    husband happened after the appeals  were  dismissed,  however,  it  was
    contended that the negative findings  in  relation  to  the  claimant's
    husband should stand in this appeal.

 5) Secondly, the Secretary of State noted that the judge had accepted that
    the claimant's estranged husband would be in a position to trace her on
    her return to Pakistan.   It  was  contended  that  this  was  entirely
    speculative as both the claimant and her estranged  husband  said  they
    were fleeing their  families.   Even  though  the  estranged  husband's
    father was said to  have  been  a  police  officer,  this  was  not  an
    indication that there would be a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that
    her estranged husband would be able to trace her anywhere in  Pakistan.
    In any event, the claimant's husband's account of  his  background  and
    history was not accepted by previous judges and there is no reason  why
    the claimant's separation  from  her  husband  should  undermine  those
    findings in respect of the alleged experiences of the couple.

 6) Thirdly, the Secretary of State referred to the  judge's  finding  that
    the claimant would be returning as a single woman  who  had  once  been
    married.  The judge failed to give any reasons why this would  lead  to
    any risk to the claimant, given that there was no evidence that she had
    broken or offended societal mores in Pakistan.

 7) Permission to appeal was given on the basis of these three grounds.  In
    granting permission the judge pointed out that there were certain other
    difficulties with the  determination.   In  particular,  there  was  an
    incomplete sentence at paragraph 20 and a finding made at paragraph  16
    seemingly without any evidential basis.

 8) In his submission at the hearing Mr Matthews relied on the  grounds  in
    the application.  He submitted first that the judge had taken the wrong
    approach to the previous determinations in respect  of  the  claimant's
    husband.  He stated at paragraph 11 of his determination  that  he  had
    read these and taken them  into  account,  which  appeared  to  be  the
    correct approach.   However,  the  judge  did  not  give  the  previous
    determinations  the  potential  significance  in  accordance  with  the
    decisions in TK (Georgia) [2004] UKIAT 00149 and  AA  (Somalia)  [2007]
    EWCA Civ 1040.  The  previous  determinations  in  relation  to  family
    members should form a footing for the later decision maker on the  same
    factual matrix.  The asylum claim by this claimant was the same  except
    for the allegation of  domestic  violence  against  her  husband.   For
    example, the claimant said that following  the  attack  on  the  police
    station the homes of the  Taliban  were  attacked  and  she  was  taken
    hostage.  All of this was disbelieved.  The judge did not  tackle  this
    head-on.  He stated at paragraph 14 that her husband had taken  control
    of the evidence-gathering process but it is not clear  what  the  judge
    meant.  He minimised the impact of the previous determinations but this
    would not suffice as the claimant relied on the same evidence.

 9) Mr Matthews continued that the second ground, relating to  whether  the
    claimant's estranged husband would be able to trace  her  in  Pakistan,
    indicated that the judge had misunderstood the evidence.  The  rule  24
    response lodged on behalf of the claimant appeared to  be  based  on  a
    misunderstanding of the evidence.  No  proper  consideration  had  been
    given to the fact that  the  claimant's  husband's  evidence  had  been
    disbelieved.  There  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  the  claimant's
    estranged husband could find her if she returned to Pakistan.   It  was
    of no significance if her estranged husband's father had  been  in  the
    police and there was no finding to this effect.

10) In relation to the third ground, relating to the claimant's  return  to
    Pakistan as a single woman, the judge's finding was unsustainable.  The
    judge's view on risk was not supported by the country guideline case of
    KA and Others (domestic violence - risk on return) Pakistan  CG  [2010]
    UKUT 216.  The judge did not refer to this decision.  In addition,  the
    judge did not give adequate reasons for finding  a  risk  to  a  single
    female in Pakistan.  There was no evidence as to the whereabouts of the
    claimant's husband although the claimant said she believed  he  was  in
    Pakistan.

11) Mr Matthews continued that overall some passages in  the  determination
    were difficult to read and there was one  incomplete  paragraph.   This
    was not necessarily an error but when added to the grounds the decision
    should be set aside.

12) Mr McGowan relied on the rule 24 response on behalf  of  the  claimant.
    He accepted that paragraphs 20, 21 and 26 of the determination appeared
    incomplete.  Clarification had been requested but  there  had  been  no
    response.  Nevertheless the determination should  be  looked  at  as  a
    whole.  The question was whether the claimant was a victim of  domestic
    violence and, if so, whether she would be at risk on return.  This  was
    a free-standing appeal on domestic violence.  If the judge had  grasped
    the core of the claim and properly reasoned the decision in respect  of
    this, then the other errors were not material.

13) In relation to the previous determinations Mr McGowan pointed out  that
    the claimant was not the appellant in  respect  of  these.   The  judge
    properly addressed the determinations in paragraph 11 and gave  reasons
    in paragraphs 14  and  15  for  departing  from  their  findings.   The
    claimant's husband had used deception to enter the  UK  and  relied  on
    false documents, raising section 8 issues.  The  previous  judges  were
    not aware that the claimant had nothing to do with this.  The judge had
    found the claimant's husband to be manipulative.  The only evidence  of
    the claimant referred to in the previous appeals was a claim  that  her
    brother had been detained and that her husband was  only  at  a  police
    station briefly.  This was the only discrepancy between the  claimant's
    evidence and her husband's.  The claimant had covered the discrepancies
    in the previous appeals in her evidence but  her  explanation  was  not
    referred to in the determination.  The judge  was  entitled  to  depart
    from the previous findings and accept that the claimant was a  credible
    witness.

14) Mr McGowan continued that it was not the claimant's evidence  that  her
    husband's father was a police officer.  It is not clear from where  the
    judge acquired this supposed fact.  The claimant's husband's father was
    now deceased.  It was known that a computerised ID  card  was  required
    for living in Pakistan.  This gave a  person's  name  and  address  and
    included a former address.  There was a national database through which
    the claimant could be found.

15) In relation to return as a single female,  Mr  McGowan  submitted  that
    there was country information before the judge, including a schedule of
    relevant passages.  He submitted that Pakistan was still a  patriarchal
    and misogynist society.  It was dangerous to report domestic  violence.
    Each passage in the country information needed to be  examined  on  the
    plight of women in Pakistan.  The case of KA referred to a  woman  with
    family support to help her relocate.  Even if  the  claimant  could  go
    into a shelter, what would  happen  when  she  left?   If  she  had  no
    effective protection in Pakistan then she  would  qualify  for  asylum.
    The judge found that the claimant's father is in the  Taliban  and  the
    claimant had married against her father's wishes.  She would  not  have
    family support.  It was next to impossible for a single woman  to  live
    alone in Pakistan.

16) In response Mr Matthews argued that there was a  difference  between  a
    submission which said that unreasoned findings were  supported  by  the
    evidence and a submission stating that findings could  have  been  made
    but were not.  In this decision the judge had made inadequate  findings
    and given inadequate reasons for those findings he had made.  The judge
    had erred in relation to the claimant's husband's determinations and he
    had erred over the issue of whether the claimant's husband's father was
    in the police.  There was evidence that the claimant's husband had left
    her.  The issues had not been resolved by proper findings.  There  were
    no findings at all on the breakdown of the  marriage.   The  claimant's
    evidence in her witness statement was that she had left her husband.

17) Mr Matthews asked for the decision to be  set  aside.   The  issues  of
    credibility had not been resolved and as a result  there  should  be  a
    fresh hearing.

18) Having heard the submissions I accept that the judge  was  entitled  to
    find that the claimant was a victim of domestic violence and there  was
    some scope for him to find that the adverse credibility  findings  made
    against the  claimant's  husband  in  his  earlier  appeals  would  not
    necessarily undermine the credibility  of  the  claimant's  account  of
    events in Pakistan.

19) Nevertheless, when it comes to the judge's assessment of  the  risk  on
    return, there is an identifiable lack  of  relevant  findings  and,  in
    addition, a lack of adequate reasoning.  In particular  the  judge  did
    not have regard to a relevant country guideline case of KA and  Others.
    The judge made findings at paragraph 26 that the claimant was a  victim
    of domestic violence who would not have adequate protection in Pakistan
    and that because her husband's father had been in the police, he  would
    be able to use his father's contacts to trace her.  These findings were
    not adequately supported by the evidence.  In his submission before  me
    Mr McGowan referred to evidence on the vulnerability of single women in
    Pakistan.  As Mr Matthews pointed out in his response,  however,  there
    is a difference between showing that  findings  are  supported  by  the
    evidence and showing that findings could have been made on the basis of
    the evidence but were not.

20) The findings at paragraph 26 of the determination are little more  than
    vague generalisations without any adequate evidential basis and without
    adequate reasons.  For the judge to reach the  conclusions  which  were
    reached, a considerably more thorough analysis would have been required
    of the claimant's  evidence  and  of  the  country  information.   This
    analysis was lacking.  The conclusions  the  judge  reached  cannot  be
    sustained.

21) I am satisfied that the judge erred in law, in particular, in assessing
    the risk on return to the  claimant.   At  the  hearing  before  me  it
    appeared that both parties were agreed that if  the  decision  was  set
    aside further findings would be required.   Mr  McGowan  asked  if  the
    judge's finding in relation to domestic violence  could  be  preserved.
    Where an appeal is to be remitted for further evidence to be heard  and
    findings to be made, there  is  a  possibility  that  if  findings  are
    preserved these may unduly restrict the approach of the new Tribunal in
    assessing the  evidence  before  it.   Accordingly  I  direct  that  no
    findings made by Judge Fox should be preserved.

22) On the basis of the errors of law found in the determination, it is set
    aside.   In  my  view  the  fact  finding  required  to   re-make   the
    determination is such that it is appropriate that it be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for a hearing before  a  different  judge  with  no
    findings preserved.

Conclusions

23) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

24) I set aside the decision.

25) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  re-made  at  a
    hearing before a different judge with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

26) The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  for  anonymity.   No
    application for  such  an  order  has  been  made  to  me  and  in  the
    circumstances of this appeal, I  am  not  satisfied  that  there  is  a
    significant reason for making such an order at this stage.



Signed      Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
