
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05549/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 November 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     B Z

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M McGarvey of McGarvey Immigration and Asylum
Practitioners
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 24 February 1979.
     She arrived in the United Kingdom, along with her son  (whom  I  shall
    refer to as "K") on 16 August 2012.  She arrived illegally concealed in
    a lorry and claimed asylum on that  date.   There  followed  an  asylum
    screening interview on that date and a  full  asylum  interview  on  13
    September 2012.  On 23 May 2013, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application for asylum and  humanitarian  protection  under
    paras 336 and 339C of the Immigration Rules (HC  395  as  amended)  and
    made a decision to remove  the  appellant  to  Albania  as  an  illegal
    entrant by way of directions under Schedule 2 to  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.

 3. The Secretary of State did not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  been
    subject  to  sexual  exploitation  in  Italy  but,  even  if  that  was
    established, she was not at risk of persecution on return to Albania as
    the Albanian authorities would provide a sufficiency of protection.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    dated 18 July 2013, Judge M J Waygood dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and under Arts 2, 3 and 8
    of the ECHR.  The judge made an adverse credibility finding and did not
    accept that the appellant had been trafficked  from  Albania  to  Italy
    where she had been forced  to  work  as  a  prostitute.   Before  Judge
    Waygood, both the appellant and her son, K,  gave  oral  evidence.   At
    paras 38 to 69, Judge Waygood gave detailed reasons  for  reaching  his
    conclusion in para 69 that:

         "I  do  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was  subject  to  sexual
         exploitation in Italy as claimed and therefore does not come within
         a particular social group of Albanian women who have formerly  been
         the subject of sexual exploitation".

 5. In any event, Judge Waygood found that even if the appellant  had  been
    sexually exploited in Italy she could safely return  to  Albania  where
    the Albanian authorities would provide a sufficiency of  protection  to
    her and that, in any event, she could internally relocate, for  example
    to Tirana.  The judge applied the country guidance case of  AM  and  BM
    (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 00080 (IAC).

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Those
    grounds challenged the judge's adverse credibility  finding,  including
    on the basis that he failed to properly consider the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's son.  The grounds also argue that the judge fell into error
    by failing to make a finding on whether the appellant  was  trafficked.
    The  grounds  do  not  challenge  the  judge's  finding,   taking   the
    appellant's case at its highest, that she  would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return to Albania, even if she had been subject to sexual  exploitation
    and the judge's finding that the Albanian authorities would  provide  a
    sufficiency of protection and that, in any event, she could safely  and
    reasonably relocate within Albania.

 7. On 20 August 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E M Simpson)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal, in particular on  the  ground  that
    the judge had arguably erred in law in reaching his adverse credibility
    finding by failing to properly consider the evidence of the appellant's
    son.

 8. In a rule 24 response dated 30 August  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State
    opposed the appellant's appeal and  argued  that  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding was sustainable and that the  judge  was  under  no
    obligation to  make  a  finding  on  whether  the  appellant  had  been
    trafficked.

The Appellant's Claim

 9. Before the judge, the appellant's case was that  she  was  an  Albanian
    national who, at the age of 16, married an  Albanian  man  ("AZ").   In
    June 1998, she and her husband had a son, K.  The  appellant's  husband
    lived and worked in Greece.  He sent money to her in Albania  returning
    for periods of time.  However, in 2000 those visits became less and  he
    stopped  financially  supporting   the   appellant   and   their   son.
    Consequently, the appellant began to work in Albania.

10. In October  2008  the  appellant  met  a  man  ("E").   A  relationship
    developed between them and in September  2009,  E  suggested  that  the
    appellant and her son should move to Italy with  him  to  start  a  new
    life.  In September 2009, they left Albania and travelled by  speedboat
    to Italy which they entered illegally.  They settled  in  Milan.   They
    were unable to find work and E moved to Rome in search  of  work.   The
    appellant and her son were left with a man ("B") and  his  wife  ("A").
    The appellant and her son lived with B and A.  After about two weeks, B
    told the appellant that she would have to work as a prostitute  as  his
    own wife, A did.  The appellant worked as a  prostitute  in  Milan  for
    about a year.  Thereafter, they  moved  to  Rome  where  the  appellant
    worked as a prostitute for about  a  further  year  and  eight  months.
    During the day, the appellant and her son and  A  were  locked  in  the
    house.  When the appellant was working at night her son was  locked  in
    the house also.  Both the appellant and her son  were  physically  ill-
    treated by B.  In May 2012, the police visited the house and showed the
    appellant and A a photograph of B who had been arrested for dealing  in
    drugs and human trafficking.

11. A week later, in June 2012, the appellant and her son together  with  A
    left Italy to return to Albania using  money  they  had  found  in  the
    house.  The appellant returned to her home town where she stayed with a
    friend ("S").  She remained there throughout June and  July  2012  but,
    having learned from S's brother that B had been released from prison in
    Italy, through an agent she arranged for herself and her son  to  leave
    Albania.  She left Albania by lorry on 13 August 2012 and  entered  the
    UK on 16 August 2012 concealed in a lorry.

Credibility

12. In his skeleton argument, Mr McGarvey succinctly  stated  four  grounds
    upon which Judge Waygood's decision is challenged.  Grounds 1, 3 and  4
    relate to his adverse credibility finding and I  will  return  to  them
    shortly.  I begin, however, with ground 2.

    A. Ground 2

13. This ground raises two discrete  points.   The  first  relates  to  the
    process that led  to  the  UKBA  as  a  competent  authority  taking  a
    "conclusive grounds" decision on 22 May 2012 that the appellant had not
    been trafficked.  The judge referred to this at paras 38 and 39.  It is
    not suggested, nor could it be, that he  was  wrong  to  disregard  the
    "conclusive grounds" decision in reaching his own  findings.   Instead,
    it is said that it was wrong for the "conclusive grounds"  decision  to
    be taken by the same individual who  rejected  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim on 23 May 2012.  It is said that there is an inconsistency  since
    the "conclusive grounds" decision dated 22 May  refers  to  the  asylum
    decision letter which is dated one day later on 23 May 2012.

14. There is no merit in this ground.  First, it does not  appear  to  have
    been a matter raised before Judge Waygood.  It is difficult to see  how
    he could have erred in law by failing to deal with an  argument  (which
    even if sustainable) was not made to him as a basis for his reaching  a
    decision in the appeal.  Secondly, in any event, Judge Waygood  had  no
    jurisdiction to consider  the  legality  of  the  "conclusive  grounds"
    decision.  That could only be challenged  by  judicial  review  and  Mr
    McGarvey informed me that no such challenge had been brought.  Thirdly,
    the appellant's case before Judge Waygood was not that the Secretary of
    State's asylum decision was unlawful but rather, on the merits, was the
    wrong decision.  That was precisely the ground of challenge which Judge
    Waygood dealt with in his determination in some detail.  In any  event,
    even if it had been raised, I see no basis for concluding that the same
    official, acting on behalf of the Secretary of State, is disentitled as
    a matter of law from making both the "conclusive grounds" decision  and
    in determining the underlying asylum claim.  Provided each decision  is
    approached fairly, having regard only to relevant  considerations  and,
    having considered all the evidence, a rational decision is  reached,  I
    see no basis for  disentitling  the  same  official  from  making  both
    decisions.  That, of course, accounts for  the  cross  references  and,
    what might otherwise appear a curiosity, that a  letter  dated  22  May
    refers to information contained in the asylum decision letter dated the
    following   day.    The   two   processes    were    clearly    ongoing
    contemporaneously.  I see nothing sinister or untoward in the fact that
    this cross-referencing has occurred.

15. In addition, Mr McGarvey argues that the judge erred in law in  failing
    to make a finding on whether the appellant  had  been  trafficked.   In
    this appeal, the judge was required to make findings relevant to, inter
    alia, the appellant's asylum claim.  It was her case that she had  been
    the victim of trafficking and had been sexually exploited in  Italy  by
    being forced to act as a prostitute.  The judge did not accept that she
    had been sexually exploited.  There was no  question,  therefore,  that
    the appellant had been trafficked.  Her  own  case  was  that  she  had
    travelled with E willingly as part of an economic relocation to  Italy.
    Once the judge found that her account of sexual exploitation could  not
    be accepted, the appellant's claim to have been  trafficked  fell  away
    also.

16. For these reasons, I reject ground 2 set out in Mr McGarvey's  skeleton
    argument.

17. I turn now to the remaining grounds which challenge the judge's adverse
    credibility finding.  Mr McGarvey addressed me at some length and  with
    some persuasive force that  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  finding
    could not stand.

    B. Ground 1

18. Mr McGarvey criticised the judge's reasons for rejecting  the  evidence
    of the appellant's son, K as not being of any  "particular  weight"  to
    support the appellant's claim to be the subject of sexual  exploitation
    in Italy is wholly persuasive.  Before the judge there  was  a  written
    statement from K and he also gave oral evidence before the  judge.   Mr
    McGarvey indicated to me that K had been asked  over  50  questions  in
    cross-examination.  The judge dealt with K's evidence at para 67 of his
    determination as follows:

         "I have taken into account the fact that [K] has made  a  statement
         in support of his mother.  [K] was very young at the time  that  he
         went to Italy and as indicated in his oral evidence he did not know
         what work his mother was doing in Italy.  With regard to  his  life
         in the flats in Milan and Rome he largely replicates the detail  in
         his mother's statement regarding the fact that he was locked  in  a
         bedroom and that sometimes [B] would shout at him and hit  him  and
         the police came to the flat.  In  addition  he  has  said  in  oral
         evidence today that he had learned what his mother  did  only  from
         the asylum papers.  I do not find  that  [K's]  evidence  adds  any
         particular weight to  the  Appellant's  claims  to  have  been  the
         subject of sexual exploitation in Italy."

19. I do not accept Mr Richards' submission that  K's  evidence  could  not
    carry much  (if  any)  weight  as  he  had  not  witnessed  the  sexual
    exploitation of the appellant.  As  Mr  McGarvey  pointed  out  in  his
    submissions, K's evidence  supported  the  appellant  in  a  number  of
    material respects.  It supported her evidence that they  had  travelled
    with E to Italy by boat; that they had lived in a  flat  in  Milan  and
    then subsequently in another flat with a man called B and his  wife  A.
    E then disappeared.  K's evidence also spoke of B locking  him  in  his
    bedroom and that the appellant went out at night and he did not see her
    return until the morning when she would be upset and sometimes cry.   K
    spoke of how B had shouted at him and had also physically hit  him.   K
    also spoke about their move to Rome where they stayed in a flat with  B
    and A and he was  again  locked  up  and  abused  by  B.   K's  written
    statement also spoke about a day when the police visited the  flat  and
    questioned the appellant and A before leaving.

20. That K's evidence was consistent with the appellant's evidence was  not
    a reason for giving it less weight or  not  recognising  its  probative
    value in supporting material parts of the appellant's  evidence.   This
    was so even if, as was K's evidence, he  only  became  aware  that  his
    mother was sexually exploited as a result of reading the asylum  papers
    in the UK.  It added credence to parts of the appellant's case close to
    or near the very core of the issue which the judge decided against  the
    appellant.  Indeed, at paras 47-48 the judge gave a number  of  reasons
    for not accepting that the appellant and A  had  been  visited  by  the
    police and questioned about B in May 2012.  It was not suggested before
    me that K's evidence was internally inconsistent or its integrity  had,
    in any way, been damaged during cross-examination.

21. In my judgment, the reasons given by  the  judge  at  para  67  of  his
    determination were not adequate to  justify  discounting  K's  evidence
    when assessing whether the appellant was a witness of  credit  and  her
    evidence was credible.

22. That error, in itself, is sufficient to undermine the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding.

    C. Grounds 3 and 4

23. Mr McGarvey also submitted that the Judge had fallen into  error  in  a
    number of other respects in reaching his adverse  credibility  finding.
    As I have indicated, the judge gave detailed reasons  for  disbelieving
    the appellant. I do not, by any means,  accept  all  of  Mr  McGarvey's
    challenges to the judge's reasons under Grounds 3 and  4.   There  are,
    however, a number of challenges which are, in  my  view,  well-founded.
    It suffices to identify the follow three.

24. First, in para 47 of the determination the judge doubts the appellant's
    account that the police came to her flat in May 2012 looking for B.  So
    far as relevant, the judge said this:

         "It  lacks  credibility  therefore  that  if  this  individual  was
         involved in people trafficking and drug dealing,  was  an  Albanian
         national and two Albanian women and a child were at  the  premises,
         with no legal basis to be in Italy, certainly in the  case  of  the
         Appellant and her son, that further questions were not  asked  them
         about their situation and they were not for example  taken  in  for
         questioning  or  asked  more  questions  about   their   situation,
         particularly as there was a child on the premises."

25. As I have already indicated, the judge made an  adverse  assessment  of
    this aspect of the appellant's evidence without giving  any  weight  to
    K's evidence that such a visit had in fact occurred.  That is an  error
    in itself.  In addition, however, the judge's reasons are inadequate to
    sustain his finding.  The appellant's evidence was that she and A  were
    questioned about B but they said that they did  not  know  him  because
    they were scared of B and his friends.  There is nothing incredulous or
    implausible in the police behaving in the way that the  appellant  said
    they did  and  K  said  they  did.   Both  the  appellant  and  A  were
    questioned.  B was, apparently, already  under  arrest.   It  is,  with
    respect to the judge, pure speculation as to  how  the  Italian  police
    would respond in this situation and whether further  questioning  would
    take place.

26. Secondly, at para 52 the judge relied on an inconsistency,  as  he  saw
    it, in the appellant's evidence, where she had said  in  her  screening
    interview (question 4.2)  that  she  had  managed  to  leave  Italy  by
    escaping through the help of a friend but in her asylum  interview  had
    said that she had escaped because B had been arrested  by  the  Italian
    police.  There are clear and recognised dangers in expecting detail  to
    be given by an individual in a screening interview.  There is, in fact,
    nothing significant in the two answers given.   It  is  true  that  the
    appellant did escape through the help of a friend, namely B's  wife  A.
    It is also true that this was enabled, on the appellant's case, by  the
    arrest of B in May 2012.  In my judgment, the apparent  differences  do
    not justify any adverse inference being drawn.

27. Thirdly, at para 56, the judge doubted the appellant's account, stating
    that:

         "What I do not find plausible however is that [E] would effectively
         groom the Appellant, according to her own account, for a year  with
         a child of 11 years old in tow when clearly in  Albania  there  are
         other women in a lower age profile with no  such  encumbrances  who
         are unfortunately regularly targeted".

28. The difficulty is that the appellant never claimed that  she  had  been
    trafficked by E.  Her case was that she had a genuine relationship with
    E and that they relocated to Italy.  Her evidence was  that  they  both
    sought work unsuccessfully before E abandoned her and B forced her into
    prostitution.  It is mere supposition on the part of the judge  that  E
    was "grooming" the appellant for year.  And, whilst the evidence  might
    well suggest as a more common target group for targeting younger  women
    than the appellant who had an 11 year old child, to  conclude  that  it
    was not "plausible" that the appellant in her  circumstances  could  be
    forced into prostitution was,  in  my  judgment,  raising  the  bar  of
    plausibility too high.

29. Given the errors I have identified under Ground 1 and  in  relation  to
    the above elements of Ground 3, I can deal with Mr McGarvey's remaining
    arguments briefly.  The adverse credibility finding cannot stand.

30. Mr McGarvey submitted that the judge had wrongly seen inconsistency  in
    the appellant's evidence (for example of the volume of clients she  had
    had in Milan) and in requiring  in  effect  corroboration  because  the
    appellant and her son, K were unable to give details  of  B's  friends,
    connections and overheard phone conversations (see paras 60-63  of  the
    determination).  In themselves, I do not consider  that  these  grounds
    are expressing  anything  other  than  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    assessment of the evidence and his reasons.

31. Likewise, I do not accept Mr McGarvey's submission that the  Judge  was
    wrong (at paras 58 and 59)  to  take  into  account  in  assessing  the
    appellant's credibility that the appellant had  not  mentioned  in  her
    interview (raising it only later) that she had been  sexually  molested
    at a bar and raped by B.  In that respect,  the  Judge's  approach  did
    not, in my judgment, contravene the Gender Guidelines  relied  upon  in
    para 27 of Mr McGarvey's skeleton argument.  The Judge was alive to the
    need for caution in assessing the evidence of a person claiming  sexual
    assault.   The Judge was entitled to find that the interview record was
    reliable and as the Judge pointed out the appellant had  not  mentioned
    the sexual harassment in the BAWSO report when, despite  Mr  McGarvey's
    attempt to persuade me otherwise, there was no reason  to  believe  she
    did not have the time and opportunity to mention these matters.

32. However, despite the fact that the  judge  gave  detailed  (and  other)
    reasons for his adverse credibility finding,  Ground  1  together  with
    such parts of Ground 3  that  I  have  identified  above,  lead  me  to
    conclude that the judge's adverse credibility findings cannot stand.

The Appellant's Case "at its highest"

33. Mr Richards did not seek to address me on the  detailed  challenges  to
    the judge's reasoning  and  approach  when  assessing  the  appellant's
    evidence set out in  ground  3  of  Mr  McGarvey's  skeleton  argument.
    Rather, he submitted that any error in reaching the adverse credibility
    finding was not material to the outcome of the appeal.  He pointed  out
    that the  judge's  findings  that  there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection and the possibility of internal relocation in  Albania  even
    if the appellant had been sexually exploited in  Italy,  had  not  been
    challenged.  He pointed out that those findings were  no  part  of  the
    grounds upon which permission to appeal had been sought  (or  granted).
    The findings were not challenged in Mr McGarvey's skeleton argument nor
    raised by him in his oral submissions.

34. In reply, Mr McGarvey sought  to  argue  that  there  was  an  implicit
    challenge to these findings of the judge.

35. No reading of the grounds or Mr McGarvey's skeleton argument could lead
    to the conclusion that the appellant  was  challenging  anything  other
    than the judge's adverse  credibility  finding.   The  entirety  of  Mr
    McGarvey's oral submissions were directed to that  finding  alone.   Mr
    McGarvey pointed to a copy of an ABC News item entitled "Albanian girls
    trafficked for sex" dated May 21  2013.   That  document,  however,  is
    referred to in para 22 of Mr McGarvey's skeleton argument to support  a
    submission, relevant to the judge's adverse credibility  finding,  that
    it was reasonably likely that the appellant would  not  have  contacted
    the Albanian police on return to Albania.  It was, in fact, a paragraph
    in his skeleton argument which Mr McGarvey resiled  from  in  his  oral
    submissions but, in any event, it does not relate to any  challenge  to
    the judge's finding that, putting the appellant's case at its  highest,
    she  could  not  succeed.   More  importantly,  however,  the   grounds
    contained no  suggestion  that  that  finding  was  challenged  by  the
    appellant.

36. It is extremely doubtful whether the appellant  should  be  allowed  to
    amend the grounds of  appeal  to  challenge  the  judge's  findings  on
    'sufficiency of protection' and 'internal relocation' at this very late
    stage - halfway through the Upper Tribunal hearing  (see,  Azimi-Moayed
    and others [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) at [16]).  That said, I  invited  Mr
    McGarvey to indicate what, if anything, he  wished  to  say  about  the
    judge's  adverse  findings  accepting  the  appellant's  case  "at  its
    highest".   He  submitted,  in  effect,  that  the  judge  had  wrongly
    interpreted the country guidance  case  of  AM  and  BM.   Mr  Richards
    submitted that the judge had properly applied AM and BM, in  particular
    he had considered the appellant's individual circumstances (at para 87)
    and had been entitled to conclude that  the  appellant's  claim  failed
    even at its highest.  If Mr Richards is correct, then the integrity  of
    the judge's adverse credibility finding cannot affect  the  outcome  of
    this appeal.

37. Under the  heading  "Consideration  of  the  Appellant's  case  at  its
    Highest", the judge stated at para 76 as follows:

         "If a contrary conclusion were reached to that which I have reached
         in relation to  the  appellant's  alleged  sexual  exploitation  in
         Italy, then consideration would need to be given to the  issues  of
         sufficiency of protection and relocation."

38. At para 77, the judge began his consideration of the case of AM and BM,
    stating that the Tribunal:

         "clearly indicated that with regard to such matters each case would
         need to be considered on a case-by-case basis."

39. Then, at paras 78 and 79 of his determination the Judge set out  [155],
    [156] and [158] of AM and BM which dealt with the situation of returned
    trafficked women to Albania as follows:

          "155.   On return, if the victim of trafficking does not agree  to
             go to her home or does not disclose where she came  from,  the
             border police are able to direct the victim of trafficking  to
             a shelter.  If that is the case, as the border police are  not
             empowered to detain a returnee for any  length  of  time,  she
             will not be detained.  Where the victim of trafficking decides
             that she does not wish either to return to her home or  to  go
             to a shelter the police would not be able to force her  to  do
             so.


         156. If the victim of trafficking does go to a shelter  then  there
             are some rehabilitation programmes where attempts are made  to
             find work for the victim of trafficking and even, it  appears,
             a system of micro loans to enable the victim of trafficking to
             set up in business.  Dr Schwandner-Sievers  was  sceptical  of
             these  programmes  and  of  the  ability  of  the  victim   of
             trafficking to  hold  down  a  job.   Although  we  accept  Mr
             Blundell's proposition that the statistics indicate  that  the
             numbers of victims of trafficking who are able to find work is
             in the same proportion as applies to the female population  as
             a whole, we also accept the argument that the figures of women
             in work in Albania in general is much higher  because  of  the
             'grey' economy as a very large proportion of women work on the
             land, an alternative to formal employment that  would  not  be
             available to a victim of trafficking who chooses not to return
             to her family.


              .....


         158. We find that it is clear from the evidence that  a  victim  of
             trafficking, especially if accompanied by a small child, would
             find it significantly more difficult to achieve re-integration
             into Albanian society than would be the  case  in  many  other
             countries.  But that does not mean that all  such  victims  of
             trafficking will fail to re-establish themselves.   Each  case
             will turn upon its particular facts.  Among  the  features  or
             characteristics that will be relevant to  such  an  assessment
             are these:


             1)    The  social  status  and  economic   standing   of   the
                  appellant's family;
             2)   The level of education of the appellant and her family;
             3)   The appellant's state of health, particularly her  mental
                  health;
             4)   The presence of an illegitimate child;
             5)   The area of origin of the appellant's family;
             6)   The appellant's age.


              We note that among the group who were interviewed by Dr Davies
             many hoped to return to Albania to build homes, have children,
             and set up in  business.  We  consider  women  from  wealthier
             backgrounds or those who are better  educated  would  find  it
             easier  to  reintegrate.   Women  from  those  groups   would,
             however, be far less likely to  be  trafficked  in  the  first
             place."

40. In paras 80-83 of his determination, Judge Waygood then considered  the
    particular circumstances of the appellant on return and concluded  that
    he did not accept that B would pursue the appellant in her  home  area.
    The judge said this:

          "80.    The Appellant is an educated, intelligent woman of 34  who
             has a 15 year old son who was born when  she  was  married  to
             [AZ].  She is not from a rural area she is from  the  town  of
             [F] and has already returned to that area  recently  in  2012.
             She has skills as a tailor and waitress having worked as  both
             in the past.  I  find  that  given  her  background  that  her
             circumstances would be reasonably positive upon return.  Given
             what was found on the case of AM and BM.

              ....

         82.  It was not argued before me that the Albanian State  could  be
             considered to be an actor of persecution, nor  indeed  was  it
             argued that the Albanian people  in  general  were  actors  of
             persecution.  Rather it was argued that both  the  traffickers
             from  whom  the  Appellant   allegedly   escaped   and   other
             traffickers were the actors of persecution.  At paragraph  168
             of the case of AM and BM the Tribunal considered that  whether
             or not the trafficker would pursue the Appellant as  a  victim
             of trafficking who had escaped from them or been  returned  is
             an issue which must be fact specific.

         83.  In the Appellant's case the allegation is that the person  who
             initially trafficked her was [E] although his brothers are all
             in Italy.  I do not find it likely that he would pursue her in
             the circumstances or  that  he  would  be  in  a  position  to
             persecute her upon return as she has not  seen  him  for  more
             than 3 years and there is no evidence  that  he  has  had  any
             contact with her during that time or that he  is  in  Albania.
             In addition there is  no  indication  that  she  has  had  any
             difficulty from his or indeed her own family when she returned
             to [F] for a period of more than two months in 2012.   Further
             while the Appellant referred  to  [B]  being  well  known  and
             having gang connections there is no evidence  whatsoever  that
             this is the case.  The Appellant on her own account never  met
             any of his alleged friends and was not able  to  name  any  of
             them.  There is no evidence that [B] was anything other than a
             person acting upon his own and he may well still be in  prison
             on the Appellant's own account.  There is no evidence that  he
             had control over any women other than his  wife  [A]  and  the
             Appellant.  This I find indicates that he was likely operating
             at  a  limited  level.   Furthermore  whilst   the   Appellant
             indicated that [B] was Albanian there is no evidence  that  he
             has any connection other than [E], with the  Appellant's  home
             area, he clearly  operates  in  Italy  and  according  to  the
             Appellant has connections with the Italian police.   I  cannot
             see any reason why he would wish to pursue  the  Appellant  to
             her own home area and given the conclusion of the tribunal  in
             AM and BM with regard to the age group of women who are either
             coerced or forced into prostitution, or as noted in  the  case
             are  prepared  to  enter  into  50-50  arrangements  why   the
             Appellant would now be pursued by this man  or  re-trafficked.
             The Tribunal also said that the Trafficker who acts on his own
             or with one or two accomplices is less likely to  be  able  to
             either re-traffic or hurt the victim of trafficking  than  the
             trafficker who is part of a large gang.  I conclude  from  all
             the evidence that there is a reasonable degree  of  likelihood
             that [B] is  a  small  time  operator  who  comes  within  the
             category of those less likely to be able to either  re-traffic
             or pursue the Appellant.  In addition the tribunal  considered
             victims of trafficking who were duped into being trafficked by
             a 'false marriage promise' or by  accepting  the  prospect  of
             working abroad are unlikely to be taken in the same way again.
              I conclude this equally applies to the Appellant."

41. The judge then cited [172]-[173] of AM and  BM  dealing  with  societal
    discrimination as follows:

         "172.    We have considered  the  issue  of  the  general  societal
             discrimination because the appellant was 'kurva'.  We  do  not
             consider that that in itself would amount to persecution  ....
             We do not consider, however, that any discrimination which may
             be faced by women because they are  on  their  own  in  Tirana
             would  reach  a  level  where  it  could  either   amount   to
             persecution  or  treatment  contrary  to  their  rights  under
             Article 3 of the ECHR.


         173. It is argued that women in Tirana -  either  those  that  came
             from Tirana or those who went to Tirana as a place of internal
             relocation  -  without  family  support  would   suffer   such
             deprivation that it would amount to persecution  or  treatment
             contrary to their rights protected by Article 3 of  the  ECHR.
             While we accept that there is discrimination and  that  family
             connections are the usual way to obtain work, that there is  a
             shortage of housing and that day-care facilities for  children
             are inadequate, it is the case that there is work,  there  are
             programmes  to  get  women  who  are   returned   victims   of
             trafficking back into the work force and there is some form of
             social benefits for those  that  are  destitute.   We  do  not
             therefore conclude that a woman returned to  Albania,  on  her
             own, would face treatment contrary to her rights under Article
             3 of the ECHR.  In reaching that conclusion we note the  terms
             of the determination of the Tribunal in MK (Lesbians) CG UKAIT
             00036 with which we agree on this issue."

42. At para 83, the judge concluded:

         "It is clear therefore  that  women  on  they  (sic)  own  who  are
         returned to Albania would not face  societal  discrimination  which
         would amount to persecution under Article 3 for that reason."

43. I see no basis upon which it can be said  that  the  judge's  reasoning
    that led him to conclude that B was not likely to pursue the  appellant
    to her home area and that she  would  not  be  at  risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked was not properly open to him having carefully considered the
    appellant's own personal circumstances.  Likewise, it was entirely open
    to the judge given the appellant's background to find that  her  return
    to Albania would not place her at risk of ill-treatment contrary to Art
    3 because of her past history.

44. As regards 'sufficiency of protection' the Upper Tribunal in AM and  BM
    summarised their views at [182] as follows:

         "... We accept that there is considerable corruption in Albania but
         we conclude that the steps taken by the  Albanian  authorities  are
         sufficient to meet the standard of sufficiency or  protection  from
         re-trafficking from 'new' traffickers as set out in the judgment of
         Lord Clyde in Horvath from which we have  quoted  above.   However,
         when considering  the  issue  of  whether  or  not  the  victim  of
         trafficking  has  a  sufficiency  of  protection  from  her  former
         traffickers, should they wish to re-traffic  her  or  harm  her  we
         consider that that issue must again be fact specific.  We note  the
         clear evidence of the brutality of those who  have  abducted  women
         and trafficked them to Europe.  We  consider  that  the  levels  of
         corruption  in  Albania  and  societal  attitudes  towards   women,
         particularly those that are thought of as 'kurva', are such that it
         is not possible to reach a conclusion that there is  in  all  cases
         for a victim of trafficking a sufficiency of  protection  from  her
         former traffickers.  we conclude that, for each  individual  it  is
         necessary to make an assessment taking into account the  particular
         factors of that individual.   These  would  include  her  age,  her
         social, economic and educational background, the network of support
         which she might have, whether or not she has an illegitimate  child
         and the way in which she has been trafficked in the past.   If  the
         victim is at real risk  of  persecution  from  her  family  or  her
         'husband'  then there is  little  evidence  that  the  State  would
         intervene, particularly in the north of the country."

45. In relation to that, the judge dealt with  the  appellant's  individual
    circumstances at paras 87-88 as follows:

         "87  ... With regard to the [issue of 'sufficiency of  protection']
             the Tribunal  said  that  the  steps  taken  by  the  Albanian
             authorities  are  sufficient  to  meet  the  standard   of   a
             sufficiency  of  protection  from  re-trafficking  from  'new'
             traffickers as set out  in  the  judgment  of  Lord  Clyde  in
             Horvath.  With regard to the Appellant, taking into account in
             deciding whether or not there is a sufficiency of  protection,
             I note that she is 34 years of age, mature,  that  she  has  a
             social background of working and  had  been  able  to  support
             herself and her child, that she has been educated, she clearly
             has a network of support as there were friends in  Albania  to
             whom she turned  when  she  returned  to  Albania  and  has  a
             legitimate child of 15.  In addition  the  Appellant  has  not
             evidenced that she is suffering from any health  problems  and
             there is no evidence that she is suffering in particular  from
             any mental health problems.  I have also  considered  the  way
             she was trafficked previously and find that she would be  must
             unlikely to be abducted, this has become much less of  a  risk
             in Albania, as noted in AM and BM and I find it most  unlikely
             that she would be duped in the same way she was before.

         88.  In addition as far as a sufficiency or protection is concerned
             it appears that the position  in  Albania  has  improved  even
             since the case of AM and BM.  The Respondent  in  the  refusal
             letter  referred  to  the  United  States   State   Department
             trafficking in Persons report 2012 on Albania.  It referred to
             the government of Albania sustaining its anti-trafficking  law
             enforcement  efforts  over  the  last  year   and   criminally
             prohibits sex and Labour trafficking.   It  is  also  recorded
             that the NGOs praised the sensitive response from  prosecutors
             appointed to trafficking cases  during  2011  including  their
             referral of victims to care.  Just as the tribunal in  AM  and
             BM came to the conclusion that generally there is  sufficiency
             of protection.   I  conclude  that  there  is  sufficiency  of
             protection for the Appellant in this case."

46. Mr McGarvey submitted that the judge's finding was not supported by  AM
    and BM.  That submission cannot be sustained in the light of  [182]  of
    AM and BM.  There was no evidence that the appellant's  family  or  her
    husband (who had long ceased to be part of her life) had  any  interest
    in harming her.  The judge took into account all the  factors  required
    by AM and BM including the appellant's age and working and  educational
    background in Albania and the fact that K, her son was  legitimate  and
    aged 15.  In my judgment, the judge's finding were entirely  consistent
    with the approach required of him by AM and BM and his  conclusion  was
    one properly open to him which cannot be characterised as  perverse  or
    irrational or otherwise unsustainable.

47. Given Judge Waygood's findings in relation to B's lack of  interest  in
    pursuing the appellant and that a sufficiency of  protection  would  be
    available, the appellant's appeal  necessarily  fell  to  be  dismissed
    taking her case "at its highest".  Any error in  reaching  the  adverse
    credibility finding was not material to the outcome of the appeal.

48. At paras 89-91, the judge also found that, in any event, the  appellant
    could internally relocate within Albania.  The judge began  by  setting
    out the correct approach in [187] of AM and BM as follows:

         "187.    We consider therefore that  Albania  is  a  country  where
             there is a real fear that traffickers might well  be  able  to
             trace those who have escaped from them or  indeed  those  whom
             they fear might expose them.  Whether such  persons  would  be
             motivated to do so is, of course, another matter, as  we  have
             discussed above.  It is therefore a country where,  at  least,
             internal  relocation  is  problematical  for  the  victim   of
             trafficking.  To that should be added the difficulties  for  a
             single woman to reintegrate into a society where the family is
             the principal unit for welfare and mutual support as well  as,
             it appears, the channel through which employment is most often
             obtained.   We  have   therefore   concluded   that   internal
             relocation is unlikely to be effective  for  most  victims  of
             trafficking who have a well founded  fear  of  persecution  in
             their home area, although once again we consider  that  it  is
             important to consider each case on an individual basis."

49. At paras 90-91 the judge said this in relation to internal relocation:

         "90. Firstly I do not consider that  this  Appellant  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution in her home  area.   She  returned
             there in June 2012.  She returned there for  two  months  when
             she did not have to.  In addition as I have already stated she
             has not seen [E] who was the person that initially  trafficked
             her since 2009.  There is  no  evidence  that  she  fears  the
             members of his family who remained in her home area and  there
             is no evidence whatsoever that [B] would or could  pursue  her
             and persecute her as a result of her having left Italy.  There
             is no evidence whatsoever that he would be motivated to do so,
             given her age and background.  I acknowledge the  difficulties
             for a single woman to reintegrate in society where  family  is
             the principal unit of welfare and mutual support,  however  it
             is clear that the Appellant  was  able  to  manage  previously
             without the help of a family or husband and was able to obtain
             employment in order to support herself and her son who is  now
             15.  In addition if  she  did  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution in her own area there is always the possibility of
             her moving for example  to  Tirana.   It  has  been  noted  as
             outlined above that there is work, there are programmes to get
             women who are returned victims of trafficking  back  into  the
             work force and there is some form of social benefits for those
             that are destitute.  The Appellant is from a town not  from  a
             rural area, she has worked in the past and  is  a  mature  and
             intelligent individual, there is no evidence  that  she  is  a
             particularly vulnerable individual and no  evidence  that  she
             has  any  medical  issues,  physical  or   mental.    In   the
             circumstances I find that it would be open to the Appellant to
             relocate to a city such as Tirana and therefore relocation  is
             available to the Appellant.

         91.  In coming to my conclusions  in  relation  to  sufficiency  of
             protection and re-location I have taken into account the  most
             up to date background information from  the  evidence  of  the
             USSD Trafficking in  persons  report  on  Albania  2013  which
             indicates that in Albania there are  state  run  and  NGO  run
             shelters  for  the  victims  of  trafficking  and   that   the
             Government provides some  support  for  NGO  shelters.   There
             would therefore be  shelter  and  support  for  the  Appellant
             should she require it.  In addition  as  pointed  out  by  the
             Respondent the Appellant could avail herself of the  Voluntary
             Assisted Return and Re-integration Programme (VARRP) assisting
             in  short  term  accommodation,  setting  up   business,   job
             training,  work  placements  or   education   and   vocational
             training."

50. Again, I see no basis for impugning the judge's finding for the reasons
    he gave which involved  a  careful  consideration  of  the  appellant's
    individual circumstances and concluding that the appellant could safely
    and reasonably live, for example, in Tirana.  In [187] of  AM  and  BM,
    although  the  Upper  Tribunal  noted  that  internal  relocation   was
    "unlikely to  be  effective  for  most  victims  of  trafficking",  the
    Tribunal nevertheless noted that: "Once again we consider  that  it  is
    important to consider each case on an individual basis."

51. That, in my judgment, is precisely  what  Judge  Waygood  did  in  this
    appeal and  given  the  appellant's  individual  circumstances  he  was
    entitled to reach the conclusion that  she  could  internally  relocate
    within Albania. That finding was an additional reason  why  the  appeal
    necessarily failed regardless of the appellant's credibility.

52. For these reasons, therefore, the appellant's appeal inevitably failed.
     Errors in relation to the credibility finding were not material to the
    outcome of the appeal and there is no basis upon which his decision  to
    dismiss the appellant's  appeal  should  be  set  aside  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Decision

53. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal did not involve the making of a  material  error  of
    law and its decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on  all  grounds
    stands.





                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal



