
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05131/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |           Decision & Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 17th April 2015                       |           On 23rd April 2015       |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                               MR JULJAN HYKAJ
                          (ANONYMITY NOT RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Savage


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 23rd August 1981 is a citizen  of  Albania.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Mills of Counsel.  The  Respondent  was
    represented by Miss Savage, a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom on  3rd  May  2012  and
    claimed asylum on  the  same  day.   The  Respondent  had  refused  the
    Appellant's application for asylum on 30th June 2014 and issued removal
    directions.  The Appellant had appealed that decision  and  his  appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyd sitting at Hatton Cross  on
    27th August 2014.  He had  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 3. An application for permission to appeal including  lengthy  Grounds  of
    Appeal had been issued and permission to appeal was granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers on 6th January  2015.   It  was  submitted
    that the grounds raised were  arguable  but  the  grant  of  permission
    should not be taken as any indication the appeal  would  be  successful
    for the reasons in part outlined at paragraph 5 of  the  permission  to
    appeal decision.

 4. Directions have been issued for the Upper Tribunal  to  firstly  decide
    whether or not a legal error had been made in this case and the  matter
    comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 5. Mr Mills of Counsel provided me with a skeleton argument in respect  of
    the grounds and referred to that  skeleton  argument  and  the  grounds
    contained within the permission application.

 6. In summary his grounds could be analysed under five headings.   Firstly
    it was said there was a procedural unfairness in the judge  had  relied
    upon the  different  spelling  of  a  surname  and  had  made  critical
    credibility findings in that respect.  Secondly it was  submitted  that
    there was a material error of fact when the judge had  suggested  there
    was no evidence the Appellant's brother had been injured when there was
    such evidence in support of that fact.  Thirdly it was  said  that  the
    judge had speculated about the legal process in Albania in  reaching  a
    conclusion.  Fourthly it was submitted that  in  various  respects  the
    judge had  made  findings  on  credibility  without  reference  to  the
    Appellant's evidence and  referred  me  to  various  features  of  that
    contained within paragraphs 35 to 44 of the judge's decision.   Finally
    it was submitted that there was a lengthy delay between the hearing  of
    the appeal and promulgation of the  decision  such  that  there  was  a
    significant risk of prejudice in that the judge may not have accurately
    recalled facts.  An example of an error at paragraph 1 of the  decision
    was referred to in this respect.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 7. Miss Savage relied upon the Home Office response of 23rd January  2015.
    In respect of the delay it was said that there was no evidence  of  any
    prejudice.  She then dealt with each of the submissions raised  on  the
    Appellant's behalf and in summary and in conclusion had submitted  that
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had dealt properly and  adequately
    with all matters.

 8. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    submissions and materials involved and I now provide that decision with
    my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 9. I deal in turn with the submissions raised by Mr Mills on behalf of the
    Appellant.  Dealing firstly with the general submission that the  delay
    in promulgation of this case inevitably caused or raised  an  issue  of
    unfairness or an inability of the judge to give anxious scrutiny to the
    evidence.

10. The judge heard the case on 27th August 2014 and  whilst  there  is  no
    date given when the judge signed that decision it was  not  promulgated
    until 10th December 2014.  Accordingly a proper assumption as the judge
    did not sign the decision until or shortly before 10th  December  2014.
    That is a delay of some fifteen  weeks.   It  is  a  not  insignificant
    period of time.  However the file reveals the judge  had  maintained  a
    detailed Record of Proceedings amounting to 27 handwritten  pages.   He
    clearly had before him,  additionally,  all  the  documentary  evidence
    supplied by both parties.  An examination of the  decision  shows  that
    the judge had a clear and detailed knowledge of the evidence  presented
    and had  read  and  considered  the  documentary  evidence.   The  only
    reference made by Mr Mills to an extract from  the  decision  that  may
    have disclosed an error potentially  brought  about  by  delay,  was  a
    reference at paragraph 1 to the existence of dependents.   That  was  a
    mistake, there were no  dependents.   It  is  not  a  mistake  repeated
    elsewhere nor is there any further reference directly or indirectly  to
    dependents.  That mistake had no bearing on the decision.  There is  no
    indication when reading the decision as a whole  that  the  passage  of
    time had affected the judge's understanding of the case, the issues  or
    the facts.  No doubt  he  was  assisted  by  those  lengthy  Record  of
    Proceedings.

11. Accordingly whilst the delay is regrettable there is no evidence it had
    any adverse affect upon the fairness of appeal procedure or the judge's
    ability to deal properly and carefully with all the evidence  provided.



12. It is said that the judge adopted a  procedurally  unfair  approach  in
    finding significance in the differing spelling  of  the  Appellant  and
    brother's name within documentation.  The judge refers to  this  aspect
    of the case at paragraph 31 of his decision.  In  particular  Mr  Mills
    submitted  that  the  Respondent  had  accepted  the  relation  of  the
    Appellant and brother and by inference must have accepted the differing
    spelling of the names.  That is not entirely correct.   The  Respondent
    had within the refusal letter accepted the Appellant and  brother  were
    related as claimed, the brother was a police officer as claimed and the
    Appellant was a DJ and well-known in Albania.  The judge did not resile
    from those concessions and adopted them at paragraph 33.  The  spelling
    difference (one letter difference) may or may not have  been  noted  by
    Respondent in the refusal letter.  It is unclear because  there  is  no
    reference to that matter one way or the other.  The differing  spelling
    also took a greater significance post refusal in that  the  Appellant's
    witness and cousin at the appeal hearing had  the  different  but  very
    similar surname  as  noted.   Mr  Mills  conceded  that  the  differing
    spellings  referred  to  by  the  judge  within  certain  documents  at
    paragraph 31 of his decision was a factually accurate assessment by the
    judge.   Whilst  the  differing  spelling  may  not  have  resulted  in
    questions at  the  hearing  nevertheless  on  a  close  examination  of
    documents put in by both parties the judge was entitled  to  reach  the
    views he did.  However even if it could be said a failure to raise  the
    discrepancy at the hearing and therefore not provide the  Appellant  an
    opportunity to deal with such was an error, it  did  not  amount  to  a
    material error of law because the judge made plain at paragraph  32  of
    his decision that he had looked at the case on the basis  that  it  was
    the Appellant's brother involved and  the  differing  spelling  of  the
    surname made no difference.  He said "I have though gone on to consider
    the situation if indeed it was his brother who was involved."  The bulk
    of the decision making thereafter is predicated on that basis.

13. It is said the judge speculated as to the legal process in  Albania  in
    reference to comments made at paragraph 32.  The judge was entitled  to
    note that whilst the Appellant  had  said  his  brother  was  seriously
    injured and had to go to hospital, such did not  appear  in  the  court
    document.  The judge had noted the document was  lengthy  and  detailed
    and he was entitled to infer that the nature of injuries  to  a  police
    officer could be of relevance in the context of a  criminal  conviction
    and sentence of a perpetrator.  Indeed a reading of  B19  part  of  the
    court document would allow such a proper inference to have been made.

14. It is submitted the judge made findings  on  credibility  but  did  not
    address the Appellant's evidence.  The judge clearly had  in  his  mind
    the evidence of the Appellant  both  within  the  documentary  evidence
    including a record of interview and witness  statements  together  with
    oral evidence.  He has set out a summary of that evidence at paragraphs
    5 to 29 of his decision.  He was entitled to reach the  conclusions  he
    did at paragraphs 34 to 42.  For example Mr Mills criticised the  judge
    for taking no account of the Appellant's explanation for  not  claiming
    asylum in Italy and Holland.  In reality the judge at paragraph 45 said
    that the Appellant had failed to give any good reason for that failure,
    a view he was  clearly  entitled  to  take  based  on  the  Appellant's
    explanation.

15. Finally, underpinning the judge's conclusions are  the  accepted  facts
    that the Appellant's brother (who on his account was at most risk  from
    the alleged criminals) had remained in Albania as a police  officer  at
    the same  home  address  with  his  wife  and  daughter  and  that  the
    Appellant's parents also remained in Albania with their  two  homes  in
    different towns as before.  The Appellant further remained  in  Albania
    for ten months after the alleged incident giving rise to matters.   The
    judge was entitled to conclude that those features above leaving  aside
    anything else seriously undermined the Appellant's case  and  such  was
    alluded to by the judge who granted permission to appeal.





16. This is a case where the judge provided  a  detailed  decision,  giving
    anxious scrutiny to the evidence and reached conclusions  open  to  him
    within a correct legal framework.

Notice of Decision

There was no error of law made by the judge in this case and  I  uphold  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity not retained.






Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever





