
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05914/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2015                            |On 17 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              W T (afghanistan)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Ms S Radford, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing on asylum  grounds  the  claimant's
    appeal against the decision by the Secretary of State to refuse to vary
    his leave to  remain,  the  claimant  having  previously  been  granted
    discretionary leave to remain as an unaccompanied asylum seeking minor.
     The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction, and I consider it
    is appropriate that the claimant should be accorded anonymity for these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is  a  national  of  Pakistan.   He  attended  the  Asylum
    Screening Unit on 4th October 2010,  stating  he  had  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom earlier that day,  hidden  in  the  back  of  a  freight
    vehicle.  He was given a screening interview for children.   In  answer
    to question 1.6 which was how old  he  was,  the  following  answer  is
    recorded: "13 years (disputed)".  In answer to question 1.7  which  was
    about his date of birth, the  following  answer  is  recorded:  "1-1-96
    (disputed)".

 3. His reason for coming to the UK was that his life was  in  danger  from
    his enemies who were distant relatives (4.1).  He passed  through  Iran
    on his way to the United Kingdom, but Iran was not a safe country.  His
    grandmother told  him  not  to  stay  in  Iran  (4.4).   In  answer  to
    supplementary questions (in the continuation sheet) he said he did  not
    know the names of his enemies, but his father had told him  about  them
    two to three years ago.  This was when his father went missing (Q &  A,
    1 and 5).

 4. On 20th October 2010 a witness statement was taken from  the  claimant.
    He gave as his date of birth 1st January 1997.  His father  had  worked
    as an imam in the local mosque until he was forced to flee the  village
    with the appellant's older brother more than one year ago.  His  father
    had a dispute with his distant cousins.  As  stated  in  his  screening
    interview, this dispute had been ongoing from his  grandfather's  time.
    All he knew about the dispute is what his mother had told  him.   After
    his father disappeared, his mother had explained that his father had an
    ongoing dispute with his distant relatives over some farm land.  He did
    not know the date that his father and brother disappeared, but  he  was
    aged 12 years at the time.  He and his mother remained  at  the  family
    home  for  six  to  seven  months  after  his  father   and   brother's
    disappearance.  A  few  days  after  their  house  was  raided  by  the
    authorities, and documents relating to the disputed land  were  seized,
    they all moved to a rented house in Peshawar in Pakistan.  They  stayed
    there for three to four months.  As they had no  money  to  survive  on
    they returned to the family home.   His  grandmother  then  sold  their
    house, together with the land next to their home,  to  send  him  to  a
    safer place.

 5. The day before the appellant signed his witness statement, his age  was
    assessed by the London Borough of Croydon Unaccompanied  Minor's  Team.
    The assessing  workers  were  Hayley  Kelly  and  Anand  Kumar.   Their
    conclusion was that the appellant was aged 14  years  with  a  date  of
    birth of 1st January 1996.  Their  reasoning  in  the  summary  of  the
    decision was as follows:

         [W] did not provide any evidence/document to  confirm  his  claimed
         age or his date of birth.  He claimed that he is 13  years  old  in
         the age assessment interview.  But [W] could not provide  his  date
         of birth.  The Home Office  has  given  him  a  date  of  birth  of
         01/01/1996 which makes him 14 years.  [W] was not  sure  about  his
         accurate age while he was  interviewed  by  the  Home  Office.   He
         claimed he was approximately 13-14 years old at that interview.

         [W] claimed that his mother told him his age before he started  his
         journey.  However she could not give him his DOB.  [W] claimed that
         his mother is illiterate and she did not know his DOB.

         [W's]  physical  appearance   suggests   that   his   developmental
         functioning  and  physical  developmental  features  appear  to  be
         someone who is older than 13 years old ... he appeared to  be  tall
         for his claimed age.

         It appears he has recently developed facial hair which has not been
         shaven.  His demeanour suggests that he could  be  older  than  his
         claimed age.

         Assessors have been guided by  experience  of  working  with  other
         young  persons  from  same  or  similar  ethnic  backgrounds.   The
         assessors were of the view that [W's] overall  physical  appearance
         suggests that he is older than his claimed age of 13.

         [W] claimed that he started attending mosque when he was about  7/8
         years and attended mosque 4/5 years.  His father  disappeared  more
         than a year ago and that was the last time he attended the mosques.

         Assessors have considered all  other  factors  in  respect  of  the
         assessment and also given  careful  and  balanced  thought  to  the
         weight of the benefit of the doubt  as  indicated   throughout  the
         assessment.  The assessors are therefore of  the  view  that  W  is
         assessed to be a child aged 14 years and with a given date of birth
         01/01/1996.

 6. The content of the  document  communicating  the  outcome  of  the  age
    assessment was interpreted in full by a face-to-face interpreter.   The
    claimant signed a declaration to this effect, confirming  he  had  been
    advised of the outcome of his age assessment.    He understood that the
    signing of the document did not suggest he  agreed  with  the  decision
    made about his age but it did show that, if he wished to challenge  the
    decision, he had three months from the date of decision  to  bring  his
    claim.  He had further been advised that if he decided to challenge his
    assessed age, he could seek independent legal advice either through the
    Refugee Council, a law centre, the Citizen's Advice Bureau or a firm of
    solicitors of his choice.

 7. It is apparent from other documents in the Home Office bundle that  the
    claimant  was  at  all  material  times  represented  by  Duncan  Lewis
    Solicitors.

 8. The claimant did not challenge the outcome of the age  assessment,  and
    he did not seek to appeal the subsequent decision of the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to recognise  him  as  a  refugee,  but  to  grant  him
    discretionary leave to remain as an unaccompanied asylum seeking minor.
     This decision was made on 19th November 2010.

 9. In June 2013 the claimant applied for further leave to remain.  In  his
    application, he maintained that his date of birth was 1st January 1997.
     In the reasons for refusal letter of 7th August 2014 it was noted that
    he had not challenged the outcome of the age  assessment  conducted  by
    Croydon Social Services, whereby he was assessed as being 14 years  old
    at the date of birth of 1st January 1996.  So he was now considered  to
    be an Afghan national aged 18 years and 7 months, with a date of  birth
    of 1st January 1996; and his application for further  leave  was  being
    considered  on  that  basis.   Accordingly,  he  did  not  qualify  for
    recognition as a refugee on inter alia LQ grounds.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10. The claimant's appeal came before  Judge  Callender  Smith  sitting  at
    Taylor House in the First-tier Tribunal on  18th  September  2014.   Ms
    Radford of Counsel appeared on behalf of the claimant, and Mr  Sedgwick
    of Counsel appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

11. In his subsequent decision, the judge noted the  Secretary  of  State's
    case that as an adult aged 18 years and 7  months  the  claimant  could
    adapt to life in Afghanistan, even if it involved internal  relocation.
    He also noted the claimant's oral evidence that when he arrived in  the
    UK, his age was disputed but he still maintained that he  was  born  on
    1st January 1997.

12. The judge's findings of fact were set out in sub-paragraphs (a) to  (w)
    of paragraph [26].  In  sub-paragraph  (d)  the  judge  held  that  the
    claimant was under 13 years old when he lived in Afghanistan.  In  sub-
    paragraph (m) he found that the claimant was currently 17 years old and
    had no family to return to, putting him at risk of persecution  on  the
    basis of his age: LQ (Afghanistan).  In sub-paragraph (n) he said:

         The assessment of his age in 2010 was not Merton compliant  because
         it mis-stated his own evidence about his age.   He  knows  his  age
         from his  mother  and  I  find  that  the  evidence  he  has  given
         throughout the process  since  his  arrival  in  the  UK  has  been
         credible and consistent even if the  direct,  first  hand  evidence
         that he can give is limited.  I accept  his  asserted  age  on  the
         lower standard of proof.

13. In sub-paragraph (q) the judge held that.  given  his  finding  on  the
    claimant's age, and the fact that he would be an  unattended  child  if
    returned to Kabul, there would be insufficient  state  protection  from
    non-state agents, applying  AA  (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 0016 (IAC).  In sub-paragraph (u), he  found  that  if  the
    claimant was returned to Kabul this would not  be  safe  or  reasonable
    because - having regard to his earlier findings in relation to his  age
    - he was still a young, dependent unattended "adult".  In sub-paragraph
    (v), he held that the claimant was still a "child leaving care" and  he
    had never lived independently.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

14. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal.  Ground 1  was
    that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the
    claimant was  17  years  old.   The  judge  did  not  explain  how  the
    claimant's age was mis-stated within any age assessment,  or  how  this
    would affect the outcome of a holistic  assessment  of  the  claimant's
    disputed age by a local authority.  The  claimant  was  assessed  as  a
    minor in  2010  and  was  in  the  care  of  local  authorities  for  a
    significant period of time subsequent to this, and no  local  authority
    had sought to re-visit the assessment of the  claimant's  age  made  in
    2010.  On the facts of this case, it was arguably not open to the judge
    to re-visit the age assessment.

15. Ground 2 was that the judge had failed to apply country  guidance  case
    law, in particular PM and Others (Kabul, Hizb-i-Islami) Afghanistan  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 0080 which established sufficiency of protection in Kabul.
     The judge also fell into error in his reliance upon "expert  evidence"
    that was not before the court and which the Secretary of State was thus
    not in a position to comment upon.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

16. On 16th December 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge P  J  G  White  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         I am satisfied that in reaching his  decision  the  judge  arguably
         made an error of law for the following reasons:-

         (a)  It is argued that the judge has  given  adequate  reasons  for
             finding that the claimant is 17 years old and therefore  would
             be returned to Afghanistan as an unaccompanied minor.

         (b)  It is notable in this regard that the hearing  took  place  on
             18th September 2014 and that at paragraph 1 the  judge  states
             that the claimant was born on 1 January 1996 (on  which  basis
             the claimant was aged over 18 years old at  the  date  of  the
             hearing).

         (c)  He finds it is arguable in assessing the risk  on  return  the
             judge  has  failed  to  give  adequate  consideration  to  the
             appropriate country guidance cases concerning  the  return  of
             adults to Afghanistan.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

17. At the hearing before me, Ms Radford mounted a robust  defence  of  the
    judge's decision.  It was obvious to anybody who attended  the  hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal that what the judge was referring to in sub-
    paragraph (m) was the following statement in the  age  assessment:  "He
    claimed that he was approximately 13-14 years old at that interview."

18. As she had submitted before Judge Callender Smith, that  statement  was
    clearly wrong.  The claimant had consistently maintained  that  he  was
    aged 13.  This error meant that the  age  assessment  was  Merton  non-
    compliant.  She did not have with her the case of B v London Borough of
    Merton [2003] EWHC 1689 (Admin) and no copy of this decision was in  my
    file.  There was also no reference  to  the  decision  in  the  judge's
    manuscript Record of Proceedings, although there was a reference to the
    argument that the age assessment was Merton non-compliant.

19. Ms Radford observed that the nature of the error of law  challenge  was
    inadequacy of reasons, not procedural unfairness.  She agreed that  the
    issue of non-compliance had only been raised for the first time at  the
    hearing.  But the Secretary of State was legally  represented,  and  it
    would have been open to Counsel for the Secretary of State to  seek  an
    adjournment.  They had relied instead on  the  position  taken  by  the
    Secretary of State in the refusal letter, and it was open to the  judge
    to resolve the age dispute in the claimant's favour,  for  the  reasons
    which he gave.  His reasoning was not simply that  the  age  assessment
    was Merton non-compliant, but also that the claimant had been  credible
    and consistent throughout the asylum process.

Reasons for finding an Error of Law

20. In his substantive asylum interview  the  claimant  did  not  vacillate
    between asserting that he was 14 years of age as opposed to 13 years of
    age. His position was that he did not know his date of birth  but  that
    his mother had told him that he was 13 when he left Afghanistan, and so
    that is why he had said he was 13 when he arrived here (Q &  A,  32  to
    34).

21. But the social workers could not have been referring to the substantive
    asylum interview, as it had  not  yet  taken  place.   The  substantive
    asylum interview did not take place until 5th November 2010.  They  can
    only have been referring to the screening interview.

22. As I have highlighted earlier in this  decision,  there  is  a  blatant
    inconsistency between the information given in answer to  question  1.6
    and what is recorded as an answer to question 1.7.   Prima  facie,  the
    claimant asserted that his date of birth was 1st  January  1996,  which
    would make him 14 years of age, not 13 years of age as stated  in  1.6.
    In the light of what the claimant said subsequently, it  is  reasonable
    to question  whether  the  date  of  birth  recorded  at  1.7  is  that
    attributed by the Home Office and not, as it was supposed  to  be,  the
    date given by the claimant. But equally there  is  no  actual  evidence
    that 1.7 is a misattribution. It should  also  be  noted  that  in  the
    screening interview the claimant's chronology of  events  differs  from
    his later chronology.  In his subsequent statement of case  dated  20th
    October 2010, and also in his substantive  asylum  interview,  he  said
    that his brother and father disappeared, and he learnt  of  the  family
    feud, when he was aged 12; and that he had left Afghanistan just over a
    year later, when aged 13. But the implication of the  chronology  given
    in the screening interview is that the disappearance of his father  had
    taken place two to three years ago, which would make the  claimant  now
    14 or 15 years of age if he was aged 12 at the  time  of  his  father's
    disappearance.

23. So, giving anxious scrutiny to this aspect of the claim, it is  not  at
    all clear that the  social  workers  were  wrong  to  characterise  the
    claimant as being uncertain about his asserted age when interviewed  by
    the Home Office.  In any event,  it  was  incumbent  on  the  judge  to
    explain why he found that the assessment of the claimant's age in  2010
    mis-stated the claimant's own evidence about his age.

24. Furthermore, having identified the precise nature and scope of the mis-
    statement of  the  claimant's  own  evidence  about  his  age,  it  was
    incumbent on the judge to explain why the error rendered the entire age
    assessment  Merton  non-compliant  such  that  it  could   be   totally
    disregarded.

25. As is apparent from the summary of the decision, the age assessment was
    not solely based on the  answers  attributed  to  the  claimant  in  an
    interview conducted by the Home Office.  The social  workers  had  also
    questioned the claimant directly, and  their  assessment  was  in  part
    based on what he had told them.

26. The judge does not appear to have been directed to Merton compliant age
    assessment guidelines, or to the authority from which  such  guidelines
    originate. So Ms Radford's submission as to the effect of  the  alleged
    error was not supported by authority.

27. The judge also appears to have overlooked the point that  even  if  the
    claimant was 13 at the date of his departure from Afghanistan,  it  did
    not follow that he was still 13 when he arrived in the United  Kingdom.
    Nowhere in the decision is there an acknowledgement by the  judge  that
    the claimant's asserted date  of  birth  of  1st  January  1997  was  a
    complete guess as the claimant professed not to know his actual date of
    birth.

28. Moreover, the  judge  is  inconsistent  about  the  claimant's  age  in
    Afghanistan.  On the one hand, he accepts the claimant's evidence  that
    he was 13 when he left, because that is what his mother told  him,  but
    at sub-paragraph (d) of paragraph [27] he finds that the  claimant  was
    "under 13 years old".  The judge is also inconsistent on the claimant's
    current age, in that at paragraph [1]  he  says  he  was  born  on  1st
    January 1996 and in sub-paragraph (u) of  paragraph  [26]  he  says  he
    would be returning to  Kabul  as  a  young  adult,  as  opposed  to  an
    unattended child.

29. The judge's failure to give adequate reasons for (a) departing from the
    age assessment and  (b)  finding  in  consequence  that  the  appellant
    qualifies as a refugee on LQ grounds, constitutes a material  error  of
    law such that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside in its entirety, and re-made.  The judge's findings  on  risk  on
    return are predicated on the claimant continuing  to  be  a  vulnerable
    child rather than an adult who passed his 18th birthday some time  ago,
    and who in the normal course of events could reasonably be expected  to
    relocate internally to Kabul even if he did not have  relatives  living
    there. Accordingly, I do not find it necessary to consider  the  second
    ground of appeal.

30. As the resolution of the dispute over the claimant's age turns in  part
    on the claimant's credibility, a complete rehearing of  his  appeal  is
    necessary, and it is agreed that such a rehearing should take place  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law,  such
that it should be set aside and re-made.

Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a  de
novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge Callender Smith.

None of the findings  of  fact  made  by  the  previous  Tribunal  shall  be
preserved.

The time estimate for the fresh  hearing  is  three  hours,  and  an  Afghan
Pushtu interpreter will be required.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


