

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05204/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Date sent                    |
|On 5 June 2013                                |On 24 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                     AJM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. Toal, Counsel instructed by Sultan LLoyd,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and immigration history

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who  was  born  on  2  October
       1977. He is now 35 years old. He appeals against  the  determination
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta promulgated  on  27  June  2012
       dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State
       made on 26 January 2012 refusing to grant him  a  further  leave  to
       remain.


    2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  30  June  1999,  now
       some 14 years ago, and claimed asylum. He  was  granted  exceptional
       leave to remain until 19 June 2004. At that time he would have  been
       permitted to extend his leave to remain and, as a matter of  course,
       this would have been provided to him in the form of indefinite leave
       to remain. However,  he  failed  to  make  an  application  until  2
       February 2005 by which time his application was  out  of  time.  His
       application was refused by decision made on 26 January 2012, after a
       lapse of time of some seven years. The application was renewed on  8
       February 2008 and refused by a decision made on 26 January 2012  and
       another on 1 May 2012; removal directions were made on 3  May  2012.
       This had involved a further delay.  The appellant appealed on 17 May
       2012. It was this appeal that came before Judge Pirotta.

    3. As a result of the somewhat singular immigration history, there  are
       two refusal letters. In the letter of 26 January 2012 the  Secretary
       of State placed reliance upon the appellant's history of  offending.
       She noted that the appellant had five convictions for seven offences
       in the United Kingdom. The information in  the  letter  is  somewhat
       sparse  and  it  has  been  supplemented  by  a  print-out  of   the
       appellant's PNC record:
          a. On 13 June 2002 under the Public Order Act 1986  the  appellant
             was accused  of  using  disorderly  behaviour  or  threatening,
             abusive, insulting words  for  which  he  was  given  a  formal
             caution on 14 June 2002, now some 11 years ago.
          b. For an offence of destruction of property,  the  appellant  was
             convicted on 6 June 2007 for which he received a  fine  of  �50
             and a compensation order of �15.
          c. For an offence of assault occasioning actual  bodily  harm  the
             appellant was convicted on 13 July  2007  and  sentenced  to  4
             months imprisonment wholly suspended.  He  was  ordered  to  do
             unpaid work and made the subject of a supervision order  for  a
             period of 12 months and ordered to pay compensation of �250. He
             breached the suspended  sentence  by  not  complying  with  its
             conditions during a period of one week in  October  2007.   The
             effect was that 16 days of his prison  sentence  was  activated
             but the order was directed to continue.  There  was  a  further
             breach for which the appellant was  convicted  on  9  September
             2008 which resulted in the activation of a further three months
             of the sentence.
          d. The later activation of the  sentence  is  associated  with  an
             offence of battery which took place on  22  February  2008  for
             which he was sentenced to a further period of  imprisonment  of
             four months thus making a total sentence of seven  months.   It
             is to be noted that these offences took place some six and five
             years  ago  respectively.   Combined,  the  2007/2008  offences
             represent the most serious examples of the appellant's criminal
             offending.
          e. On 15 October 2009 for an offence of being drunk and disorderly
             and battery, his sentence was postponed and a  community  order
             was made.
          f. The appellant was cautioned for an affray on 15 February  2011;
             the disposal of the offence by way of a caution being the  most
             reliable guide to the seriousness of the offending rather  than
             the categorisation of the offence itself, that is, an affray.




The respondent's decision

    4. The Secretary of State took the view that the  appellant's  criminal
       record did not justify allowing him to remain in the United Kingdom.
        The offences may be summarised in this way: two matters  which  did
       not result in a formal prosecution or conviction but, in each  case,
       a caution; two offences of loutish drunken behaviour which  resulted
       in minor non-custodial  sentences  and  two  which  did.   Whilst  a
       pattern of sometimes quite trivial offending is properly assessed as
       disturbing and capable of creating a public interest in removal,  in
       the appellant's case the two matters which have a significant impact
       on removal  are the offences of ABH meriting 4  months  imprisonment
       and the subsequent  battery  (no  actual  bodily  harm)  meriting  a
       similar sentence almost certainly  not  because  it  was  escalating
       violence but because, at that time at least,  the  appellant  whilst
       under  sanction  to  be  of  good  behaviour,  seemed  incapable  of
       controlling himself (and probably his drinking).

The claim

    5. In his original application, the appellant claimed that he came from
       the Dir tribe, a minority clan with no home-land to which  he  could
       safely return. He said his mother was an Isaaq.  He gave an  account
       of the family's move to Burao and then to Baidhaba but the situation
       was both dangerous and hostile as a result of fighting in the  civil
       war between majority  tribesman.  He  claimed  that  he  escaped  to
       Mogadishu. (This account should not be taken as  accurate  since  he
       subsequently accepted that he  had  been  born  and  brought  up  in
       Mogadishu.)  He described himself as having  attended  school  until
       1990, when he would have been 13 years old  and  having  a  wife  in
       Somalia and five siblings. Subsequently, however,  he  modified  the
       claim to assert that he was a member of a minority clan.

    6. In the evidence that he submitted to the Judge, he  denied  that  he
       was responsible for the  late  submission  of  his  application  for
       indefinite leave to remain but admitted that his life had gone  into
       a downward spiral and that his offending was drink-related. Although
       he claimed that he had been sober ever since, there is  no  evidence
       from a clinician of his  having  undergone  any  treatment  for  his
       excessive drinking and there is the worrying fact that drink had led
       him to acts of violence and the latest offence of  an  affray  which
       took place on 15 February 2011 might well be a manifestation of  his
       old problem. A letter from a probation  officer  dated  15  February
       2012 recorded that the  appellant  had  been  sober  for  12  months
       indicating that the affray was the  last  example  of  drink-fuelled
       violence. There is no evidence of further offending or drink-related
       violence since February 2011, an encouraging gap of 2 years.

    7. He blamed the Secretary of State for  his  offending  but  I  attach
       little weight to that bare assertion. I  agree,  however,  that  the
       appellant has been in a state of limbo for many  years  and  that  a
       resolution of his application in his favour is likely to have been a
       positive, rather than a negative, influence in his life.


    8. It was a significant part of his claim that he had  had  no  contact
       with members of his family in Somalia since he left in 1999. He had,
       however, originally lived with his  sister  and  it  was  a  telling
       remark that, at the hearing before me on 5 June  2013,  he  told  me
       that he had spoken to his sister on  the  day  of  the  hearing.  He
       mentioned before the Judge on 25 June  2012  that  his  brother  and
       sister and her children were British  citizens.  He  then  described
       himself as being the black  sheep  of  the  family  because  of  his
       consumption of alcohol, frowned upon by his Muslim  family  members.
       He described that he had lived in his own flat but his brother lived
       nearby whom he saw daily and  with  whom  he  regularly  spoke.  His
       relationship with his sister, however,  who  lived  in  London,  was
       somewhat different. He had then claimed he had seen her last a month
       before and saw her only every six or seven months. He  claimed  that
       he  had  no  contact  with  any  of  his  family  in  Somalia   but,
       importantly, his sister knew where they all were  in  Mogadishu.  He
       claimed that he did not know how his family was  supported  but  his
       father was a teacher. Neither his brother nor his  sister  supported
       his  asylum  claim.  Neither  had  made  witness   statements.    He
       attributed this to his drinking and relied upon it as a  reason  why
       his family would offer him no support on return to Somalia.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings

    9. In her findings on credibility, Judge Pirotta did not accept that he
       came from a minority clan and had provided no direct  evidence  that
       he had ever experienced persecution was in Somalia. His father was a
       teacher and the family remained in Mogadishu. They had survived  the
       entire time the appellant had been in the United Kingdom.  There was
       no evidence any of  them  suffered  any  form  of  persecution.  She
       concluded that it was reasonable for the appellant to return to live
       in Mogadishu with his family.

   10.  The  Judge,  having  considered  the  record  of  the   appellant's
       offending, considered that the appellant had been less  than  candid
       about his history of drinking. She rejected his evidence that  there
       had been no contact with his family in Somalia since he left in 1999
       because of his evidence that his  sister  was  fully  aware  of  the
       family's presence in Somalia and had simply chosen  not  to  contact
       them. In addition, the Judge was not satisfied that he had  given  a
       truthful account of the presence of  other  family  members  in  the
       United Kingdom.

   11. When dealing with the issue of proportionality, however,  the  Judge
       referred to the fact that  his  application  for  further  leave  to
       remain had taken some seven years before it elicited a response from
       the Secretary of State. She said in terms that  the  respondent  had
       provided no explanation for the delay.  In  contrast,  although  the
       appellant had delayed making his application  for  an  extension  of
       shortly after his original exceptional leave to remain  had  expired
       in June 2004, the delay until February 2005 was not a delay  on  his
       part of any  consequence.  In  particular,  the  Judge  noted  that,
       although the appellant had been imprisoned for a few  months,  these
       periods could not justify any delay on the part of the Secretary  of
       State.

   12. The Judge concluded that the  appellant  had  not  demonstrated  the
       existence of any social, family  or  economic  ties  in  the  United
       Kingdom or that he had acted to his detriment during the  period  of
       delay brought about by the failure of the Secretary of State to deal
       with his application. She went on to  describe  the  delay  as  "not
       acceptable and cannot be excused" but rejected the  suggestion  that
       he had been disadvantaged by the  uncertainty  of  not  knowing  the
       result. The Judge made the understandable point that, as far as  the
       asylum  claim  was  concerned,  the  appellant  could  have  had  no
       illusions about the prospect of success because he had put forward a
       claim that was without merit. Whilst that comment holds good for the
       asylum claim, it does not assist the respondent in failing to handle
       the claim for further leave to  remain,  a  claim  which  Mr  Walker
       conceded would have resulted in the grant  of  indefinite  leave  to
       remain in 2005 had it been processed then.

   13.  On the  basis  of  these  findings  the  Judge  accepted  that  his
       misbehaviour  was  a  consequence  of  excessive  drinking  and,  in
       paragraph 49, appears to accept that he no longer drinks.  She  used
       this as a reason why he could re-establish himself in Somalia  where
       he would have the physical and  moral  support  of  his  family.  In
       particular, she identified Mogadishu  as  a  place  where  he  could
       reasonably expect to return.

   14. The  appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  of  Judge  Pirotta
       relying, in particular,  upon  the  intensity  of  the  violence  in
       Mogadishu which had been identified by the Court  in  Strasbourg  in
       Sufi and Elmi v United  Kingdom  (8319/07  and  11449/07).   In  its
       decision, the European Court of Human Rights spoke of everyone being
       at risk in Mogadishu save, possibly, those who  were  "exceptionally
       well connected to 'powerful actors'". Further, a  returnee  with  no
       recent experience of living in Somalia would  be  at  real  risk  of
       Article  3  ill-treatment  in  an  Al-Shabbab  controlled  area.  In
       addition, those returning to camps for the  displaced  would  be  at
       risk of serious harm on account of the dire humanitarian  conditions
       there.


   15. The appellant, according to the findings of fact of the Judge, would
       not be returning to an Al-Shabbab area and would not find himself in
       a camp for displaced persons.

Country Guidance

   16. In AMM and others (conflict; humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
       Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445  (IAC),  the  Tribunal  summarised  its
       assessment of risk in these terms, selectively  extracted  from  the
       italic words:


       9)  On the assumption that  Al-Shabbab's  likely  behaviour  towards
       those who transgress its rules is as found  in  this  determination,
       the position is as "extreme" as the factual basis in  RT  (Zimbabwe)
       [2010] EWCA Civ 1285. In the light of  RT,  a  person  from  an  Al-
       Shabbab area who can show  they  do  not  genuinely  adhere  to  Al-
       Shabbab's ethos  will  have  a  good  claim  to  Refugee  Convention
       protection, once outside Somalia (subject to internal relocation and
       exclusion clause issues), regardless of whether the person could and
       would "play the game", by adhering to Al-Shabbab's rules. As can  be
       seen from a comparison with Sufi  &  Elmi,  the  effect  of  RT  is,
       accordingly, to take the Refugee Convention  beyond  the  comparable
       ambit of Article 3 ECHR protection.


       15)  In assessing the effect of an appellant's lies (whether to  the
       Secretary of State or a judicial fact-finder), it is unnecessary  to
       construct a prescribed set  of  steps  from  the  judgments  of  the
       Supreme Court in MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, particularly  if  they
       might lead to a "mechanistic" rather than a holistic  approach.  The
       significance or "negative pull" of the lie will possibly depend  not
       only on the strength of the background evidence but on  whether  the
       lie - looked at in its own terms - is about an issue that is central
       to the disposition of the appeal. Where a person  tells  lies  about
       issues which that person thinks are important  to  their  claim  but
       which, because of the passage of time or otherwise, are not,  it  is
       open to the Tribunal, given  the  earlier  lies,  to  approach  with
       caution the person's evidence regarding matters that are central  to
       the current claim.


                                  Mogadishu


       1)  Despite  the  withdrawal  in  early  August  2011  of  Al-Shabbab
         conventional forces from at least most of Mogadishu, there  remains
         in general a real risk of Article 15(c) harm for  the  majority  of
         those returning to that city after a  significant  period  of  time
         abroad. Such a risk  does  not  arise  in  the  case  of  a  person
         connected with powerful actors or belonging to a category of middle
         class or  professional  persons,  who  can  live  to  a  reasonable
         standard in circumstances  where  the  Article  15(c)  risk,  which
         exists for the great majority of the population,  does  not  apply.
         The  significance  of  this  category  should  not,   however,   be
         overstated and, in particular, is not automatically to  be  assumed
         to exist, merely because a person has told lies.


      2)  The armed conflict in Mogadishu does not,  however,  pose  a  real
         risk of Article 3 harm in respect  of  any  person  in  that  city,
         regardless of circumstances. The humanitarian  crisis  in  southern
         and central Somalia has led to a declaration of famine in IDP camps
         in Mogadishu; but a returnee from the United Kingdom who is fit for
         work or has family connections may be able to avoid having to  live
         in such a camp. A returnee may, nevertheless, face a real  risk  of
         Article 3 harm, by reason of his or her vulnerability.


   17. Approaching the assessment in greater detail, the  Tribunal  in  AMM
       and others continued:


       346. In  fact,  the  latest  evidence  indicates  that  conventional
       fighting between Al-Shabbab and the TFG/AMISOM may not have entirely
       ceased in Mogadishu, in that there are reports of clashes, involving
       mortars, in certain northern districts of the city. Elsewhere, there
       are plainly significant  and  disturbing  reports  of  the  kind  of
       asymmetrical warfare which Al-Shabbab was using to an extent, behind
       the government forces' lines, even before  the  withdrawal,  and  to
       which there is good reason to fear they  may  make  greater  resort,
       following the withdrawal. We entirely  understand  the  respondent's
       criticisms of Dr Hammond's updated report, insofar as  it  might  be
       interpreted as being based on assertion instead  of  hard  evidence.
       But, given the recent history of Mogadishu and  the  starting  point
       provided by the conclusions in AM & AM, it would be wrong to rush to
       the conclusion that there is no real risk of Al-Shabbab adopting and
       being able to implement such a tactic.


       349. As well as the latest evidence of such behaviour on the part of
       Al-Shabbab, there is evidence of  a  far  smaller,  but  nonetheless
       material,  risk  from  rogue  elements  of  the  TFG,  operating  in
       Mogadishu, who may seek directly to harm ordinary people, such as by
       robbery, or else may pose an  indirect  risk,  by  fighting  amongst
       themselves or with official elements.


       350.  Putting all this together, we conclude that, as at the present
       time, an Article 15(c) risk exists, as a general matter, in  respect
       of the majority of those in Mogadishu and, as a general  matter,  as
       to those returning there from the United Kingdom.


         357.  Nevertheless, the evidence before us points to there being a
       category of middle class or professional persons  in  Mogadishu  who
       can live to  a  reasonable  standard,  in  circumstances  where  the
       Article 15(c) risk, which exists  for  the  great  majority  of  the
       population, does not apply.  A returnee from the United  Kingdom  to
       such a milieu would not, therefore, run an Article 15(c) risk,  even
       if forcibly returned. Into this  category  we  place  those  who  by
       reason of their connection  with  "powerful  actors",  such  as  the
       TFG/AMISOM,  will  be  able  to  avoid  the  generalised  risk.  The
       appellants argued that no such category exists; but we  reject  that
       submission. Indeed, the category that emerges from the  evidence  is
       wider than the "powerful actors" exception, and covers  those  whose
       socio-economic position provides them with the requisite protection,
       without running the risk of  assassination  faced  by  those  in  or
       associated with the TFG.


       358. The significance of the category we have identified should not,
       however, be overstated.  For most people in  Mogadishu  the  Article
       15(c) risk persists, at the present time.  In the case of a claimant
       for  international  protection,  a  fact-finder  would  need  to  be
       satisfied that there  were  cogent  grounds  for  finding  that  the
       claimant fell within such a category.


       471. Our conclusions on  this  issue  are,  accordingly,  with  some
       nuances very much like those  of  the  ECtHR  in  Sufi  &  Elmi:  in
       general, a returnee with no recent experience of living  in  Somalia
       would be at real risk of being subjected to treatment proscribed  by
       Article 3 in an Al-Shabbab controlled area.  We  consider  that  "no
       recent experience" in this context means that the  person  concerned
       left  Somalia  before  the  recent  rise  of  Al-Shabbab,  and   its
       territorial gains in the region, which occurred in 2008.  This  does
       not, however, mean that a person with such recent experience will be
       unable to make good a claim to international  protection.   Even  in
       such a case, the person concerned will, of course, be returning from
       the United Kingdom, with all that  that  may  entail.   However,  in
       general it will be less likely that such a person would  be  readily
       identifiable as a returnee.  Even if he or she  were,  the  evidence
       may point to him or her having struck up some form of  accommodation
       with Al-Shabbab, whilst previously living under their rule,


The continuing application of AMM and others as country guidance

   18. AMM and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
       Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) remains country  guidance.   When
       dealing with country guidance, the Court of Appeal in  SG  (Iraq)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ  940  (13
       July 2012) spoke of the  caution  with  which  one  should  approach
       departing from it.  Such cases are not legal precedents in the sense
       of establishing for all times a binding legal  principle.   Judicial
       findings of fact cannot bind another Tribunal unless in  the  strict
       confines of res judicata,  issue  estoppel  or  similar  principles.
       However, they  have  acquired  a  unique  place  in  the  Tribunal's
       attempts to secure a consistency in decision-making, as the Court of
       Appeal confirmed in paragraph 47 of its judgment:


        It  is  for  these  reasons,  as  well  as  the   desirability   of
        consistency, that decision makers and tribunal judges are  required
        to take Country Guidance determinations into account, and to follow
        them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,  are
        adduced justifying their not doing so.


   19. In what I take to be a pre-emptive strike, Mr Toal  has  invited  me
       not to depart from the existing country guidance and, in particular,
       that I should not be persuaded that current conditions (particularly
       the May 2012 expulsion of Al-Shabbab from Mogadishu) amount  to  the
       very strong grounds supported by  cogent  evidence  required  before
       departing from it.  I agree with that submission and do  not  intend
       to depart from AMM.  Having been given the opportunity of  reviewing
       the latest background material,  I  am  able  to  say  that  I  have
       considered it and am not persuaded that the decision in AMM requires
       modification.


   20. Mr Toal first drew to my attention the Update on security and  human
       rights issues in South-Central Somalia, including in Mogadishu Joint
       report from the  Danish  Immigration  Service's  and  the  Norwegian
       Landinfo's fact finding mission to  Nairobi,  Kenya  and  Mogadishu,
       Somalia 17 to 28 October 2012 (4 January 2013), ("the  January  2013
       report").  As the writers immediately concede,  the  report  had  to
       contain something of a health check  as  security  advice  from  the
       Norwegian and Danish embassies in Nairobi meant the delegation  only
       visited Mogadishu twice and only for one day at a time. All meetings
       in Mogadishu were held at  the  African  Union  Mission  in  Somalia
       (AMISOM) Conference Centre near the Aden Adde International  Airport
       in Mogadishu.  The security situation appeared sufficiently fluid to
       justify a further visit a few months later with the  result  that  a
       subsequent report was issued in May 2013: Security and protection in
       Mogadishu and South-Central Somalia - Joint report from  the  Danish
       Immigration Service's and  the  Norwegian  Landinfo's  fact  finding
       mission to Nairobi, Kenya and Mogadishu, Somalia 16 April to  7  May
       2013 (15 May 2013), ("the May 2013 report").  Once again there is  a
       reference to the physical limitations imposed on such  fact  finding
       missions  as,  due  to  security  concerns  for  persons  from   the
       international community in Mogadishu, the delegation was advised  by
       the Danish Embassy in Nairobi and the UNDSS to limit its stay in the
       city to three days only. The delegation was also advised not  to  be
       accommodated  at  any  hotel  in  Mogadishu.  The   delegation   was
       accommodated by the security company  SKA-Somalia  at  Aden  Abdulle
       International Airport, Mogadishu.   Clearly  forewarned  as  to  the
       content of the report and fearing the possible ramifications of  it,
       Amnesty  International  issued  a  statement  warning  against   the
       report's findings  being  treated  as  a  green  light  for  returns
       notwithstanding  the  humanitarian  situation  in  Somalia.   Hence,
       coinciding  with  the  second  Danish  report   came   the   Amnesty
       International Public  Statement  -  Returns  to  South  and  Central
       Somalia: A Violation of International Law (15 May 2013),  ("the  May
       2013 Amnesty statement").

   21. Mr Toal referred me to various passages in the January  2013  report
       which I have set out  in  Appendix  1  to  this  determination.  Not
       unexpectedly,  the  report  speaks  of  a  growing  optimism   about
       developments in South-Central Somalia, including  Mogadishu,  whilst
       at the same time referring to the  many  obstacles  and  challenges.
       Whilst it would not, in my judgment,  be  proper  to  summarise  the
       report's conclusions as stating that it is one step forward and  two
       steps backwards, nor would it be  right  to  describe  the  positive
       elements without  also  referring  to  the  setbacks.  Clearly,  the
       absence of a well-functioning military and police force is  a  major
       obstacle in achieving greater security. This is the almost universal
       assessment of a number of individuals whose views were sought in the
       preparation of the report. Inevitably, the civilian population is at
       a reduced risk as a result of the cessation of shelling in Mogadishu
       when compared with, say, July 2011 when two-thirds of Mogadishu  was
       under  Al-Shabbab  control  and  there   were   frequent   artillery
       bombardments. The point made by Mr Toal is  that  the  turning-point
       was to be found  in  August  2011  when  Al-Shabbab  made  its  most
       substantial withdrawal from Mogadishu. This event was considered  by
       the Tribunal in AMM and formed part of its  assessment.  Whilst  the
       absence of direct fighting between the  two  sides  since  May  2012
       takes the process a step further, it should not  be  regarded  as  a
       watershed  post-dating  AMM  and  requiring  its  assessment  to  be
       significantly re-modelled.


   22. The conflict, rather than ending completely, has taken  a  different
       course. In particular, the tactics of Al-Shabbab  have  become  more
       akin  to  guerrilla  warfare  in  which  assassinations,  improvised
       explosive devices and  hand-grenade  and  suicide  attacks  are  the
       favoured means of engendering terror. These are  most  prevalent  in
       certain identified areas of Mogadishu. Whilst the number of civilian
       casualties has decreased, such casualties remain a daily occurrence.
       The general population  of  Mogadishu,  however,  enjoy  freedom  of
       movement, save  in  one  or  two  specific  areas  where  Al-Shabbab
       continue to maintain influence. Whilst the government is  unable  to
       provide universal security, Al-Shabbab will continue its efforts  to
       destabilise the government, according to those questioned.

   23. The passages in the May 2013 report to which my attention was  drawn
       are set out in Appendix 2 to this determination.  Peter  Klansoe  in
       the May 2013 report, when  speaking  of  Mogadishu,  told  the  fact
       finding mission that, notwithstanding the completion of  its  combat
       withdrawal from Mogadishu in May 2012, Al-Shabbab continues to  have
       influence in the city. Members or sympathisers of Al-Shabbab  remain
       there. Nevertheless, compared with the time when the Mogadishu was a
       divided city straddling the front line,  there  is  now  freedom  of
       movement and there has been a return to the city of some of those in
       the Afgoye corridor. It may be that  once  Al-Shabbab  realise  that
       there has been a return to normality  (such  as  with  a  return  to
       people using the Lido Beach or the Bakara market), its  response  is
       to mount a terrorist  attack  in  order  to  affirm  its  continuing
       presence. UNDSS, Mogadishu, describes the usual kind of  attacks  by
       Al-Shabbab as hit-and-run,  as  well  as  hand-grenade  attacks  and
       targeted killings. There was, however, as recently as April 2013,  a
       mortar attack on the stadium occupied by AMISOM. With such  a  fluid
       security situation, it would  be  wrong  to  assume  the  number  of
       attacks is necessarily  decreasing.  There  will  be  rises  in  the
       numbers as well  as  decreases.  Inevitably,  casualties  are  often
       described as being in the wrong place at the wrong time.


   24. it is not, therefore, surprising that Amnesty International  in  its
       commentary on the current  security  situation,  raise  a  voice  of
       caution. The passages to which  I  was  referred  in  the  May  2013
       Amnesty statement are set out in Appendix 3 to this determination It
       concedes,  as  it  is  bound  to  do,  that  there  have  been  some
       improvements in  security  but  the  situation  cannot  properly  be
       classified  as  a  fundamental,  durable  and   stable   change   of
       circumstances. The situation remains volatile and,  like  the  fact-
       finding missions, Amnesty attributes much of the insecurity  to  the
       lack of authority, discipline and control of government  forces  and
       their allied militias. It refers to a targeted attack on 5 May  2013
       in which a delegation of Qatari government  officials  was  attacked
       resulting in civilian casualties. There were two large-scale attacks
       on 14 April 2013, in one of which Al-Shabbab  militia  attacked  the
       Benadir  High  Court  and  in  the  other,  a  convoy   of   Turkish
       humanitarian workers on the airport road.

   25. The risk faced by those in Al-Shabbab controlled  areas  in  Somalia
       continues as identified in AMM, as well as  the  humanitarian  risks
       faced by those in IDP settlements. In  South  and  Central  Somalia,
       including Mogadishu, Amnesty drew attention to the need to make  the
       risk assessment on a case-by-case basis, accepting that some  people
       may have protection through clan or  close  family  connections  but
       that many people are excluded from such protection and some, such as
       female-headed households, single females, children and families from
       minority clans, remain at heightened risk.


   26.  Overall,  it  is  of  course  greatly  to  be  welcomed  that  some
       improvements are discernible.  They are, in layman's terms and taken
       from a very different context, the green shoots of recovery.   There
       is  undoubtedly  a  much  needed  sense  of  optimism  but  also   a
       recognition that there is a long way still to go.  It is  for  these
       reasons that I am satisfied that  the  assessment  of  risk  in  AMM
       should continue to offer guidance to decision-makers.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal and the finding of an error of law

   27. The first stage in the course of this appeal occurred  on  11  March
       2013 when I found that the determination by the First-tier  Tribunal
       was materially flawed  by  its  failure  to  recognise  the  central
       importance of applying background material and country  guidance  in
       the assessment of risk on return to Somalia. I gave my reasons on 19
       April 2013 and these are found in Appendix 4 of this determination.

The appellant's evidence in the Upper Tribunal

   28. As appears from paragraph 8 of  the  finding  on  error  of  law,  I
       directed that the appellant  was  to  file  and  serve  any  witness
       statement upon which he intended to rely and which  would  stand  as
       his evidence-in-chief. The deadline of 24 May 2013 was not  met  and
       no further witness statements have ever been served. However, at the
       outset of the hearing, Mr Toal, on behalf of the  appellant,  sought
       leave to call his client to adduce  further  evidence.   There  were
       obvious difficulties in pursuing this  course  since  it  would  not
       provide the respondent with an opportunity to know the evidence that
       was to  be  provided  or  to  take  adequate  preparatory  steps  to
       challenge it. However, I permitted the  appellant  to  provide  oral
       evidence. In doing so, he confirmed that he was born in Mogadishu in
       October 1977 and had never lived elsewhere. He lived with his family
       which consisted of his mother and his father, brothers and  sisters.
       He stated that his father was a teacher, teaching Somali and English
       in one of the normal schools in Mogadishu.

   29.  He went on to describe that he had not  spoken  to  his  father  or
       mother since he had arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  1999.  He
       explained that he started drinking alcohol in 2004 and this  led  to
       his experiencing  problems  with  the  Home  Office.   His  drinking
       resulted in his losing contact with his family.

Findings of fact

   30. There are two specific areas in relation to his oral evidence  given
       to me which I am satisfied  were  untruthful.  First,  he  described
       conditions in which the family lived in Mogadishu.  He  stated  that
       the family lived in a tent made of wood and covering  and  this  was
       the only form of accommodation. He described it as a 'buul'.  I have
       no doubt he was not telling the truth. He has never suggested before
       that family conditions in Mogadishu resulted in the family living in
       abject poverty or destitution. Had this been the  case  I  am  quite
       satisfied he would have mentioned it as being a significant, perhaps
       overwhelmingly significant, factor in advancing his  claim  that  it
       would be impossible for him to  return  to  Mogadishu.  Furthermore,
       since he claims that he has had no contact  with  his  family  since
       1999 when he arrived,  he  must  be  referring  to  a  period  which
       predates his departure. Yet his father was a teacher living in  what
       one might infer was, according to Somali standards,  a  middle-class
       existence.  On any view there were funds sufficient to  finance  the
       appellant's journey to the United Kingdom.


   31. In addition, he has a sister and brother in the United Kingdom, both
       British citizens. It is simply inconceivable that  they  would  have
       permitted their parents to live in destitution without taking  steps
       to remedy the position or, indeed, to extract them from Somalia.


   32. The evidence provided by the appellant comes at a significant  stage
       in the proceedings. The appellant is  not  unintelligent  and  spoke
       good English. He has been in the United Kingdom for many  years.  He
       had access to the decision that I made in which I said in  paragraph
       3 that it was not disputed his father was a teacher and  his  family
       lived and continue to live in  Mogadishu.  I  had  referred  to  the
       passage in the country guidance which differentiated  between  those
       at risk and those not  at  risk.  The  passage  which  I  identified
       included the following -
         Such a risk does not arise in the case of a person  connected  with
         powerful actors or belonging  to  a  category  of  middle-class  or
         professional persons, who can live  to  a  reasonable  standard  in
         circumstances where the Article 15 (C) risk, which exists  for  the
         great majority of the population, does not apply.


   33. I am satisfied that the evidence provided for the first time in  his
       oral evidence was a direct response to the challenge  the  appellant
       knows will be made by the Secretary of State to his  claim  that  he
       cannot return to Mogadishu. It is untrue that the family  lived,  or
       live now, in a tent.


   34. Secondly, I reject his claim that he has had  no  contact  with  his
       parents since he arrived in the United Kingdom in 1999. It  was  put
       to him that his explanation for this was that he lost  contact  with
       members of his family as a result of his  excessive  drinking  which
       was not acceptable to them personally or as Muslims.  However,  this
       offers no explanation for the period prior to 2004  when  he  states
       his  drinking  problems  began  and  which  he  attributes  to   the
       respondent's failure to respond to his  request  for  further  leave
       which he made in February  2005.  When  pressed  about  this  by  Mr
       Walker, the appellant had a ready answer. He said it was because  of
       the civil war  and  that  he  was  not  able  to  contact  them.  He
       immediately conceded that this was contrary to his evidence that his
       sister had maintained contact with his parents.

   35. Further, the appellant told me that he had spoken to his sister that
       very morning. Notwithstanding this, he claimed that he did not  know
       where his parents were  living.  I  reject  this  evidence  because,
       notwithstanding  a  coolness  that  he  claims  to  exist   in   the
       relationship between them, I do not consider it  credible  that  his
       sister would refuse to provide him with social and domestic  details
       of his parents when she herself was in contact with them.  It  would
       be an act of extreme cruelty for her to refuse to speak to him about
       his parents and there would be no reason for it. The  fact  that  he
       maintains contact with his sister and is not entirely estranged from
       her provides no explanation why she would wish  to  deprive  him  of
       information that  his  parents  are  well  or,  indeed,  ailing  and
       destitute.


   36. The appellant's  failure  to  provide  a  truthful  account  of  his
       parents' circumstances in Mogadishu and asserts, untruthfully,  that
       he has no contact with them are all of a  piece  with  his  original
       discredited claim to have come from a minority clan  in  a  part  of
       Somalia where there is no adequate security. They  seek  to  obscure
       the suggestion that he is in a position to return to his parents and
       brothers and sisters and, perhaps, his wife. I am, of course, forced
       to ask why he would wish to do this. I am sure that his  reason  for
       doing so is that he knows that a truthful account of the  conditions
       in which they live  in  Mogadishu  and  a  truthful  account  of  an
       ordinary relationship  maintained  by  him  with  his  family  would
       fatally undermine his claim that  he  cannot  return  to  Mogadishu.
       There is no other credible explanation for it. Were he to fall  into
       the situation of the great majority of the population who are unable
       to live to a reasonable standard and so avoid  the  Article  15  (c)
       risk, he would have told us.  There  would  have  been  no  need  to
       dissemble. It is only because, as an intelligent man, he  knows  the
       true circumstances of his parents that  he  has  had  to  tell  such
       obvious untruths.  On balance of probabilities I am  satisfied  that
       his family have protection mechanisms in place in Mogadishu of which
       the appellant is only too aware. It is for this reason that  he  has
       consistently attempted to obscure them by a  series  of  discredited
       accounts: minority clan membership, no home-land to protect him, his
       parents living in abject poverty and out of contact with him,  other
       family members in Somalia who hardly appear  in  the  account.   The
       truth is only occasionally left to surface; his father a teacher,  a
       home in Mogadishu, funds to permit emigration, his sister in contact
       with the family, albeit clouded from view by a  persistent  lack  of
       candour.

The application of AMM and others to those findings and Article 15(c)

   37. I am well aware of the sensible guidance provided in  AMM  that  the
       category  of  those  who  are  able  to  avoid  the  risk  which  is
       commonplace for  the  majority  of  the  population  should  not  be
       overstated and that it should not be assumed to exist merely because
       a person has told lies. In reaching my  conclusion  I  hope  I  have
       avoided both the trap and the unfairness of making assumptions which
       are not supported by any evidence. I am, however, satisfied  that  I
       have been significantly misinformed about his true circumstances and
       the only credible explanation for this is that, were I to know them,
       the claim would fail. Neither the  appellant's  brother  nor  sister
       have given evidence or  made  a  witness  statement.  I  reject  the
       suggestion that they are  so  estranged  from  him  because  of  his
       conduct that they would not wish that justice be done. Indeed, I see
       every incentive  for  them  to  wish  that  no  injustice  would  be
       perpetrated.  Were  they  to  have  given   evidence,   they   would
       undoubtedly have been asked to explain what steps  they  would  have
       taken to alleviate their parents' suffering if  they  were,  indeed,
       without an adequate home and why they have not taken those steps.


   38. For this reason I am satisfied that  the  appellant's  family  falls
       into that category of persons who have  avoided  the  risk  that  is
       faced by the great majority of the population in  Mogadishu  because
       they are able to live to  a  reasonable  standard.  The  appellant's
       description of his father as a teacher is not inconsistent with  his
       falling within the broad category  of  the  middle  or  professional
       classes. The absence of any evidence of  past  persecution  supports
       that. Had there been any actual incidents of persecution  since  the
       appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom, I have no doubt that  the
       appellant would have told us.

   39. It is for these reasons that I reject the appellant's claim that  he
       is in need of humanitarian protection by the operation of Article 15
       (c).

The appellant's human rights claim

   40. I now turn to the appellant's human rights claim.

   41. I have already referred to the skeletal facts:

          a. He arrived on 30 June 1999, now some 14 years ago.
          b. exceptional leave to remainwas granted until 19 June  2004.  He
             failed to make an application until 2 February 2005.  The delay
             was not a delay on his part of any consequence.
          c. The respondent  conceded  an  in-time  application  would  have
             resulted in the grant of indefinite leave to remain in  2004/5,
             had it been processed then.
          d. The respondent made a decision on  26  January  2012,  after  a
             lapse of time of some seven years. The respondent  provided  no
             explanation for the delay,  described  by  the  Judge  as  "not
             acceptable and cannot be excused".
          e. The appellant had not been disadvantaged by the uncertainty  of
             not knowing the result.
          f. The appellant's life had gone into a downward spiral from  2004
             onwards and that his offending was drink-related.
          g. The appellant's offending has already been set out in detail.
          h. There is no evidence from a clinician of his  having  undergone
             any treatment for his excessive drinking which had led  him  to
             acts of violence.
          i. The latest offence of affray took place on  15  February  2011,
             albeit sufficiently minor to merit  the  appellant  only  being
             cautioned.
          j. A letter from  a  probation  officer  dated  15  February  2012
             recorded that the appellant had been sober for 12 months
          k. The appellant maintains contact with his family in Somalia.
          l. His sister is fully aware of the family's presence in Somalia.

The long residence provisions

   42. The benefit of the long  residence  provisions  of  the  Immigration
       Rules set out in paragraph 276A did not apply to the appellant as  a
       result of being sentenced to an immediate term of imprisonment.   In
       any event, the period between arrival on 30 June 1999  and  decision
       on 26 January 2012 or 1 May 2012 spanned a period  of  13,  not  14,
       years.  Since 9 July 2012, the period has increased to 20 years.

The delay

   43. There has been significant delay in this case brought about  by  the
       inexcusable inaction of the Secretary of  State.   The  delay  spans
       from 2005 to 2012.  In EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL  41  (25  June
       2008) Lord Bingham of Cornhill spoke of the effect of delay in these
       terms:


       1. It does not, however, follow that delay  in  the  decision-making
          process is  necessarily  irrelevant  to  the  decision.  It  may,
          depending on the facts, be relevant in any  one  of  three  ways.
          First, the applicant may during the period of any  delay  develop
          closer personal and social ties and establish deeper roots in the
          community than he could have shown earlier. The longer the period
          of the delay, the likelier this is to be true. To the extent that
          it  is  true,  the  applicant's  claim  under  article   8   will
          necessarily be strengthened. It is unnecessary to elaborate  this
          point since the respondent accepts it.
       1. Delay may  be  relevant  in  a  second,  less  obvious,  way.  An
          immigrant  without  leave  to  enter  or  remain  is  in  a  very
          precarious situation, liable to  be  removed  at  any  time.  Any
          relationship into which such an applicant enters is likely to be,
          initially, tentative, being entered  into  under  the  shadow  of
          severance by administrative order. This is the  more  true  where
          the other party to the relationship is aware of  the  applicant's
          precarious position. This has been treated  as  relevant  to  the
          quality of the relationship. Thus in  R  (Ajoh)  v  Secretary  of
          State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 655,  para  11,  it
          was noted that "It  was  reasonable  to  expect  that  both  [the
          applicant] and her husband  would  be  aware  of  her  precarious
          immigration status". This reflects the Strasbourg court's listing
          of  factors  relevant  to  the  proportionality  of  removing  an
          immigrant convicted of crime: "whether the spouse knew about  the
          offence at the  time  when  he  or  she  entered  into  a  family
          relationship" see Boultif v Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR  50,  para
          48; Mokrani v France (2003) 40 EHRR 123, para 30. A  relationship
          so entered into may well be imbued with a sense of  impermanence.
          But if months pass without a decision to remove being  made,  and
          months become years, and year succeeds year, it is to be expected
          that this sense of impermanence will  fade  and  the  expectation
          will grow that if the authorities  had  intended  to  remove  the
          applicant they would have taken  steps  to  do  so.  This  result
          depends on no legal doctrine but on an understanding of  how,  in
          some cases, minds may work and it may affect the  proportionality
          of removal.
       1. Delay may be relevant, thirdly, in reducing the weight  otherwise
          to be accorded to the requirements of firm and  fair  immigration
          control,  if  the  delay  is  shown  to  be  the  result   of   a
          dysfunctional system which yields unpredictable, inconsistent and
          unfair outcomes. In the present case the appellant's cousin,  who
          entered the country and applied for asylum at the same  time  and
          whose position is  not  said  to  be  materially  different,  was
          granted exceptional leave to remain, during the  two-year  period
          which it took the respondent to correct its erroneous decision to
          refuse the appellant's application on grounds of  non-compliance.
          In the case of JL (Sierra Leone), heard by the Court of Appeal at
          the same time as the present case, there was a  somewhat  similar
          pattern of facts. JL escaped from  Sierra  Leone  with  her  half
          brother in 1999, and  claimed  asylum.  In  2000  her  claim  was
          refused on grounds of non-compliance. As in the appellant's  case
          this  decision  was  erroneous,  as  the  respondent   recognised
          eighteen months later. In February  2006  the  half  brother  was
          granted  humanitarian  protection.  She  was  not.  A  system  so
          operating cannot be said to be "predictable, consistent and  fair
          as between one applicant and another" or as yielding "consistency
          of treatment between one aspiring immigrant and another". To  the
          extent that this is shown to be so, it may have a bearing on  the
          proportionality of removal, or of requiring an applicant to apply
          from out  of  country.  As  Carnwath  LJ  observed  in  Akaeke  v
          Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ  947,
          [2005] INLR 575, para 25:
          "Once it is accepted that unreasonable delay on the part  of  the
          Secretary of State is capable of being a  relevant  factor,  then
          the weight to be given to it in the particular case was a  matter
          for the tribunal"

   44. The appellant does not rely upon the effect of delay upon  him  from
       the first categorisation since there is no evidence of the appellant
       developing closer personal and social ties  or  establishing  deeper
       roots in the community than he could have shown earlier.   Nor  does
       the appellant seek to rely upon the second effect of delay since the
       appellant  does  not  rely  on  the  development   of   a   personal
       relationship made tentative by the shadow of  severance.   Mr  Toal,
       however, relied upon the effect of  delay  arising  from  the  third
       situation by reducing the weight otherwise to  be  accorded  to  the
       requirements of firm and fair immigration control, if the  delay  is
       shown to be the  result  of  a  dysfunctional  system  which  yields
       unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes.  In  February  2006
       the half brother  of  the  appellant  in  EB  (Kosovo)  was  granted
       humanitarian protection, EB was not thereby demonstrating  that  the
       system could not be said to be "predictable, consistent and fair  as
       between one applicant and another" or as  yielding  "consistency  of
       treatment between one aspiring immigrant and another".   It is  not,
       therefore, a situation on all fours with the  circumstances  of  the
       appeal before me.

Rashid/S prejudice, injustice or unfairness

   45. I have also considered the appellant's  position  in  terms  of  any
       general  principle  of  unfairness  and  have  concluded  that   the
       appellant's position is not such as  to  require  the  Secretary  of
       State to have granted leave to remain arising from broad  principles
       of the prejudice, injustice or unfairness  that  the  appellant  has
       suffered.


   46. In AA (Afghanistan), R (on the application of) v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA
       Civ 1643 (6 November 2012), the  Court  of  Appeal  dealt  with  the
       circumstances in which a decision-maker should fashion his  decision
       so as to recognise prejudice or injustice or conspicuous  unfairness
       arising from the fact that the decision is being taken at  the  time
       it is.  In doing so, the Court reviewed a number of authorities.  In
       Rashid [2005] INLR 550, [2005] EWCA Civ 744,  an  asylum  claim  was
       refused in breach of an  undisclosed  policy  of  the  Secretary  of
       State. When the  policy  came  to  light,  the  claimant's  advisors
       requested reconsideration. But by then, the policy had  lapsed.  The
       refusal of asylum was maintained in light of current  circumstances.
       The claimant obtained a judicial review, and  the  Court  of  Appeal
       dismissed the Secretary of State's appeal. Pill  LJ  held  that  the
       degree of unfairness to the claimant was so conspicuous as to amount
       to an abuse of power. In S [2007] IAR 781, [2007] EWCA Civ 546,  the
       Secretary of State had deliberately delayed dealing with  a  certain
       category of cases in order to meet targets that had been agreed with
       the Treasury. This was held to be legally objectionable. Carnwath LJ
       expressed some reservations about the manner in which  Pill  LJ  had
       deployed the concept of abuse of process in that case (see paragraph
       39 of the judgment in  S).  Carnwath  LJ  thought  that  the  Rashid
       decision had sought "to transform [abuse of process]  into  a  magic
       ingredient able to achieve remedial results  which  other  forms  of
       illegality cannot match". However he indicated (paragraph 46) that:


         "It was open to the court to  determine  that  a  legally  material
         factor in the exercise of the discretion [that is,  the  discretion
         to  grant  indefinite  leave  to  remain]  was  the  correction  of
         injustice."


       Approached in that way, Rashid:


         "...respected the principle that the Secretary of State's  decision
         should be made on  the  basis  of  present  circumstances,  but  it
         recognised that those circumstances might include the present  need
         to remedy injustice caused by past illegality."

   47. In S [2009] EWCA Civ 142, the three appellants'  asylum  claims  had
       been decided after a policy which would have favoured them had  been
       withdrawn. Goldring LJ considered there  could  be  no  question  of
       intervention by  the  court  on  the  basis  of  a  generalised  and
       unfocussed  idea  of  fairness;  or   by   consideration   of   what
       subsequently may have happened to the  individual  in  question  and
       categorised in broad terms such as prejudice,  loss  and  detriment.
       There could be no question of the court trying  to  dictate  to  the
       Secretary of State how she should administer the immigration system.
       Further, where the Secretary of State has sufficiently had regard to
       past illegality and any injustice, she  would  be  entitled  in  the
       exercise of her discretion to  refuse  ILR.  Intervention  would  be
       restricted to the extreme case,  where  fairness  dictated  that  no
       reasonable Secretary of State could have done other than grant  ILR.
       It follows the court will not intervene unless the decision  of  the
       Secretary of State was "conspicuously unfair."  Laws LJ concluded:


        1. Bearing in mind Carnwath LJ's strictures relating to the  Rashid
           decision, and Goldring LJ's summation in S [2009] of the correct
           approach to the question when should the Ravichandran  principle
           be departed from, I consider that  the  essence  of  the  matter
           amounts to this. Where it is said that past events would make it
           unfair for the case in hand to be decided  on  the  conventional
           Ravichandran approach, a reasonable Secretary of State may  have
           to consider whether she should take account of those events, and
           in light of them decide the case in  such  a  way  as  to  avoid
           conspicuous unfairness to the claimant.
        1. This is, in my judgment, a Wednesbury issue ([1948] 1  KB  223):
           would it be so unfair to proceed without regard to  the  factors
           relied on that no reasonable Secretary of State would take  such
           a course? This must be the nature of  the  question,  since  any
           more intrusive approach would involve the court to an extent  in
           the  direction  of  immigration  policy,  and  that   would   be
           illegitimate. I conceive this approach to be in line  in  Rashid
           as it was  understood  in  S  [2007],  and  with  Goldring  LJ's
           conclusions in S [2009].

The Enforcement Instructions and Guidance

   48. On 20 January 2012 the Home Office announced Statement of Changes HC
       1733 which came into effect  on  13  February  2012.  Amongst  other
       changes the amendment to the Rules removed paragraph 395C. Paragraph
       395C had required the Secretary of  State  to  have  regard  to  all
       relevant factors before a decision to remove under s. 10 was made as
       well as the eight specified factors set out in sub-paragraphs (i) to
       (viii). Chapter 53 of the Enforcement Guidance and Instructions had,
       however, provided additional policy guidance which included the role
       or impact of delay in decisions which pre-dated  the  February  2012
       changes. In particular, where an applicant, like the appellant,  was
       unable to show that he had a protected family life, a period of 3 to
       5 years delay but otherwise had a  good  immigration  history  ("for
       example an initial application or an in-time application for further
       leave") would normally be a sufficient contributory delay to warrant
       the grant of leave to remain.

   49. In the case, however, of a person who, like the appellant,  was  not
       able to rely upon a good immigration history, the periods  of  delay
       were  significantly  increased.  The  Enforcement  Instructions  and
       Guidance  then  offered  guidance  as  to  the   effect   of   delay
       contributing  to  a  significant  period  of  residence,  after   an
       assessment of the viability of removal and  where  there  are  other
       relevant factors.  In such a case, a delay of 4 to 6 years and  more
       usually 6 to 8 years would qualify to warrant the grant of leave  to
       remain. I have no reason to doubt his submission by Mr Toal that  at
       least at some stage in the decision-making process, the UKBA applied
       the following guidance:

         Any other [non-family] case where delay by UKBA has contributed  to
         a  significant  period  of  residence,  following   an   individual
         assessment of the prospect of enforcing removal,  and  where  other
         relevant factors apply, 4-6 years may  be  considered  significant,
         but a more usual example would be a  period  of  residence  of  6-8
         years.

   50. As importantly,  he  relied  in  the  Enforcement  Instructions  and
       Guidance upon the reference to an applicant's  personal  history  to
       which regard should be paid to his  character  and  conduct  as  (i)
       involving evidence of criminality that  met  the  Criminal  Casework
       Directorate threshold, that is, the threshold  for  deportation  and
       (ii) cases where an individual had been convicted of a  particularly
       serious crime (below the Criminal  Casework  Directorate  threshold)
       involving violence, sexual offence, offences against children  or  a
       serious  drug  offence  or  (iii)  cases  where  it  is   considered
       undesirable to permit the individual to remain in the United Kingdom
       in light of exceptional circumstances or in light of  his  character
       conduct or associations or the fact that he represents a  threat  to
       national  security.  In  other  words,   he   contended   that   the
       consideration of an individual's personal history  as  part  of  the
       paragraph 395C exercise, whilst taking  into  account  any  form  of
       criminal offending, was principally concerned with a higher level of
       offending them that represented by  the  appellant's  past  criminal
       misconduct.

   51.  Whilst none of these considerations have  a  direct  bearing  on  a
       decision made on 1  May  2012,  they  create  a  back-drop  for  the
       consideration of the proportionality of removal in  the  appellant's
       case as they inform the  respondent's  approach  to  delay  and  the
       effect this has upon the public interest in securing removal.

The resolution of the human rights claim

   52. The appellant, born 2 October 1977, was 21 years old when he arrived
       in the United Kingdom.  He has remained here for 14 years.   He  has
       never established that he was entitled to refugee status. He is  not
       now a refugee or entitled to humanitarian protection.   His  removal
       will not result in  a  violation  of  his  Article  3  rights.   The
       exceptional leave to remain that he was originally  granted  expired
       on 19 June 2004.  Since then his  only  right  to  remain  has  been
       whilst he has awaited the decision of his  application  for  further
       leave  to  remain.   Hence,  for  the  last  9  years  he  has  been
       irremovable without an underlying  right.   He  has  no  substantive
       right to remain under the  Immigration  Rules  as  a  family  member
       seeking to join a relative or spouse settled in the United  Kingdom;
       nor under the long residence provisions.  He did not comply with the
       requirements for leave to remain under  the  former  long  residence
       provisions because he had accumulated less than 14 years  continuous
       presence and because  of  his  offending.   He  does  not  presently
       qualify under the new Rules.


   53. He is not able to claim  that  the  relationship  he  has  with  his
       brother or sister or her family  has  those  developed  elements  of
       dependency that go beyond the normal emotional ties of  kinship  and
       friendship that protect relationships between adult  family  members
       from forced separation.

   54. He has not established a private life that has become so embedded in
       the fabric of British society that removal would  violate  his  core
       rights slowly developed over a long period of  residence.   We  know
       almost nothing about it. The Judge's comments in paragraph 46 of her
       determination to similar effect made good sense.


   55. In such circumstances, given the absence of a substantive foundation
       for remaining here, there is a public interest in removing him  just
       as there is a public interest in removing anyone who has no right to
       remain.  The fact that he fails to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules is a reflection of the fact that he falls  outside
       the  protection  and  benefits  offered  by   the   United   Kingdom
       authorities  to  certain  classes  of  persons  whose  members   are
       carefully defined as meriting a continued presence in  the  country.
       There is no room for extending those categories by application of  a
       principle of 'near-miss'.

   56. The public interest in removal is, however, brought  under  pressure
       by what I perceive to be three principal factors.

   57. First, having first been granted exceptional leave  to  remain,  the
       appellant was entitled in accordance with normal practice (if not  a
       written policy) to the grant of indefinite leave  to  remain.   This
       depended upon an application made within time  which  the  appellant
       did not make.  I am not satisfied the fault for  this  lies  at  the
       doorstep of anybody other than the appellant  himself.   That  said,
       the Judge found that the delay of six months was "not a delay of any
       consequence".  Reality might take a rather different view of this as
       it was a delay which,  as  it  happened,  may  well  have  had  very
       considerable consequences.  I am, however, satisfied that  what  the
       Judge meant by this expression was that,  in  the  circumstances  of
       this case, the delay provided little by way of a  principled  reason
       why  an  application  made  out-of-time  should  have  deprived  the
       appellant of the benefits of an in-time application.  If it is not a
       finding of fact on the part of Judge Pirotta, it is  a  reason  that
       operates in the appellant's favour  which  the  respondent  has  not
       sought to challenge or address.

   58. More importantly, it lies ill in the mouth of the respondent to rely
       upon the appellant's delay in making an application  for  indefinite
       leave to remain when the respondent is guilty of a 7-year  delay  in
       responding to it.  The consequences of the appellant's  delay  must,
       to some extent, be mitigated.  To adapt the words of Lord Bingham in
       EB (Kosovo) v SSHD, a system so operating that creates such a  sharp
       distinction between the fate of one who makes  an  application  made
       only one day within time and another in the same  circumstances  who
       applies  one  day  late  might  not  be  said  to  be  "predictable,
       consistent and fair as between one  applicant  and  another"  or  as
       yielding "consistency of treatment between  one  aspiring  immigrant
       and another".  Nevertheless, the appellant was not one day late.  He
       was six months late, and the respondent is entitled to favour  those
       who attempt to regularise further stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  by
       applying when they are lawfully present rather than  when  they  are
       overstayers with no right to remain.

   59. It is also important not to attempt to re-write history.  Whilst  it
       is true that, if the appellant had  applied  for  further  leave  to
       remain by application made prior to 19 June 2004, he would  normally
       have been granted indefinite leave to remain, the fact remains  that
       he did not do so.  Life is full  of  consequences  as  a  result  of
       actions or decisions taken which led to them.  The effects cannot be
       re-made by speculating on what might have happened  if  a  different
       action or decision had been taken: 'if only, I had...'.   For  these
       reasons, considerable caution  should  be  exercised  in  trying  to
       implement today what the consequences might have been if history had
       been different.

   60. Second, and perhaps of much greater importance  is  the  inexcusable
       delay before the Secretary of State made a decision in  the  appeal.
       Delay, as has been pointed out, may reduce the weight  otherwise  to
       be accorded  to  the  requirements  of  firm  and  fair  immigration
       control, if the delay is shown to be the result of  a  dysfunctional
       system which yields unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes.
       In EB (Kosovo) v SSHD Lord Bingham drew attention in paragraph 16 of
       his opinion to the differential impact caused by the  delay  to  two
       apparently similar applications by reference to the circumstances of
       JL. JL had escaped from Sierra Leone with her half brother in  1999,
       and claimed asylum. In 2000 her claim was refused on grounds of non-
       compliance.  That  decision  was  erroneous,   as   the   respondent
       recognised eighteen months later but the delay resulted in  the  two
       cases being decided separately and with quite different outcomes. In
       February 2006 the half brother was granted humanitarian  protection.
       She was not.   It  is  not  therefore  surprising  that  the  Courts
       intervened to prevent an inconsistent outcome.  These facts  do  not
       apply in the present appeal.

   61.  Judge Pirotta pointed out with some justification that  the  delay,
       whilst not acceptable, resulted in no disadvantage to the appellant.
        Had the appellant made good use of the 7-year delay, he could  have
       demonstrated that he had thoroughly integrated himself into  society
       thereby rendering removal disproportionate.  If the opportunity  was
       lost, it was lost by the appellant's actions.

   62. The third factor is simply that the appellant has been in the United
       Kingdom since 30 June 1999, almost 14 years.  This factor  maintains
       its own persuasive force regardless of whether the appellant, in the
       past, fell outside the long residence provisions  or  falls  outside
       them now.  Whilst the nature of the appellant's private  and  family
       life has the limitations I have observed above,  there  remains  the
       fact that the appellant has spent  about  14  years  in  the  United
       Kingdom.

   63. Into this balance must be placed the appellant's criminal past.   It
       is  important  not  to  place  undue  weight  upon  the  appellant's
       offending.  This is not a deportation appeal and the appellant  does
       not have the automatic public interest put in  the  balance  against
       him.  The principal offences stand  as  two  offences  of  violence,
       albeit no actual bodily harm was  caused  in  the  second  of  them.
       Imprisonment is reserved for serious offending but  16  days  and  7
       months reflect a level of offending  that  is,  in  relative  terms,
       minor.  They would not normally have merited removal if the offender
       had settled status.   I  am  satisfied  that  they  would  not  have
       lawfully permitted the appellant's removal if he had had a wife  and
       children settled in the United Kingdom.  Further, the offences  took
       place 5 or 6 years ago  and  the  Secretary  of  State  has  delayed
       responding to them,  a  delay,  as  I  have  said,  that  is  hardly
       consistent with an imperative public interest.  There is no evidence
       of his underlying drink problem since 2011, some 2 years ago.   With
       these considerations in mind, it is essential that the appellant  is
       not removed solely or principally  because  he  has  offended.   The
       entire pattern of offending has to be taken into account.  It  might
       be permissible, for example, for the offending to tip the balance in
       favour of removal but  it  should  not  be  the  driver  behind  the
       decision to remove.


   64. I also regard it as a material factor that  the  appellant  will  be
       removed to Somalia, a country in which its people  face  significant
       difficulties.  However, for the reasons I have given, the  appellant
       does not satisfy the requirements  for  the  grant  of  humanitarian
       protection.


   65. Striking the balance, I attach greatest weight to the fact that  the
       appellant is not able to establish a  substantive  right  to  remain
       under the Immigration Rules past or present.  I do  not  regard  the
       fact that the appellant has spent 14 years in the United Kingdom  as
       outweighing the balance struck in the Rules between length  of  time
       in the United Kingdom and the other  material  factors.   Nor  do  I
       consider that undue weight should  be  attached  to  the  fact  that
       things may have been different if history had  been  re-written  and
       the appellant had made an in-time application for  indefinite  leave
       to remain which had been granted timeously.  I accept that delay has
       the effect of blunting the Secretary of  State's  reliance  on  firm
       immigration control but there is  a  distance  that  separates  this
       principle from elevating delay into a factor that creates a positive
       right to remain absent a substantive right to remain under the  law.
       It is not to be treated as a consolation  prize  handed  down  to  a
       person who has been the  victim  of  a  delayed  decision  or  as  a
       punishment meted out to the Secretary of State for poor  performance
       in the exercise of  her  duty.   The  Enforcement  Instructions  and
       Guidelines clearly envisage shorter periods of delay as being highly
       material in relation to enforcement but they  do  not  stand  alone.
       Instead, they form part of the mosaic of factors  which  inform  the
       decision-maker on issues of proportionality where, at  one  extreme,
       delay has only benefitted, and not prejudiced, the applicant to  the
       other extreme, where delay  has  resulted  in  the  applicant  being
       deprived of a right that he would otherwise have been able to seize.
        I would not regard  the  appellant's  offending  as  a  significant
       reason to justify removal.  He  is  not  being  removed  because  he
       represents a threat to the community or out of a sense of  revulsion
       for serious wrong-doing.   I  would  rather  see  his  offending  as
       evidence of a failure on the appellant's part to demonstrate that he
       has used the time in the United Kingdom to integrate fully into  the
       country or to develop strong and binding ties with the community  in
       which he lives such  as  to  render  the  severance  of  those  ties
       disproportionate.


   66. Weighing together all of the material factors (and not simply  those
       to which I have paid particular regard in the preceding  paragraph),
       I consider that the appellant's removal is proportionate.

DECISION

         The Judge made an error on a  point  of  law  and  I  substitute  a
         determination dismissing the appeal on all the grounds advanced.







                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                11 June 2013

                                 Appendix 1

Update on  security  and  human  rights  issues  in  South-Central  Somalia,
including in Mogadishu Joint report from the  Danish  Immigration  Service's
and the Norwegian Landinfo's fact finding  mission  to  Nairobi,  Kenya  and
Mogadishu, Somalia 17 to 28 October 2012 (4 January 2013)

Due to security advice from the Norwegian and Danish  embassies  in  Nairobi
the delegation only visited Mogadishu twice and only for one day at a  time.
All meetings in Mogadishu  were  held  at   the  African  Union  Mission  in
Somalia (AMISOM) Conference Centre near the Aden Adde International  Airport
in Mogadishu.

Peter Klansoe, Regional Director, Danish Refugee  Council  (DRC)  considered
that the main challenge for  the  President  and  the  Premier  Minister  of
Somalia would be to address the internal problems in  S/C  Somalia.  At  the
moment  [mid  October  2012]  the  UN  Security  Council   is   awaiting   a
clarification of the security situation as well as the  political  situation
in S/C Somalia. When asked if he has a similar degree of  optimism  as  were
expressed in February 2012 to the DIS, Peter Klansoe, DRC stated that he  is
still optimistic  regarding  the  developments  in  S/C  Somalia,  including
Mogadishu. It was added that the election process of  the  President  was  a
positive sign. The next steps and processes  are  important  and  they  will
have to take  the  time  that  is  needed.  Everyone  participating  in  the
political processes should feel that they have been heard and that they  are
being  represented  properly.  However,  there  are   many   obstacles   and
challenges. One challenge  is  how  to  handle  the  negotiation  processes;
another is the position of Puntland. If  Puntland  does  not  accept  to  be
included in the political processes there will  be  a  completely  different
situation. In addition to these challenges the President  of  Somalia  lacks
well-functioning military and police forces.  There  are  many  examples  of
soldiers of the Somali National Armed Forces (SNAF)  undertaking  violations
of human rights.

Tony Burns, Director of Operations,  SAACID[1]  Australia  stated  that  the
[governmental] institutions you have in Mogadishu [and in the rest  of]  S/C
Somalia are on paper and it would  take  decades  to  establish  functioning
institutions and genuine government services, and billions of dollars    But
the al-Qaeda  linked  Islamist  group  al-Shabbab  still  controls  much  of
southern and central Somalia, and has staged  numerous  suicide  attacks  in
Mogadishu since it was driven out by a coalition  of  African  Union  troops
and pro-government forces  last  year.  And  only  last  week,  one  of  the
country's best-loved comedians and playwrights - Warsame Shire Awale  -  who
was a well-known critic of  al-Shabbab,  was  gunned  down  in  an  apparent
assassination  attempt.   Regarding  the  security  situation  in  Mogadishu
Kilian Kleinschmidt, OCHA, Mogadishu, stated  that  a  dramatic  improvement
has taken place since February 2012. Today there are  less  gunfire  and  no
artillery. These are simple indicators which demonstrate a process from  war
to tremendous  improvement  in  security.  However,  there  are  still  many
security challenges as there are incidents, including grenade attacks  every
night. There are daily attacks on AMISOM by al-Shabbab along the  road  from
Hoosh to Afgoye. In addition al-Shabbab  is  infiltrating  Mogadishu.  Since
the transition in August 2012 the security situation  has  become  a  little
tenser. During the period from January  to  June  2012  approximately  3.000
gunshot injuries have been recorded in Mogadishu.

Kilian Kleinschmidt,  OCHA  added  that  there  are  approximately  50  hand
grenade attacks on various security forces in Mogadishu  a  week.  Regarding
security in Mogadishu an international organization explained that there  is
a lack of government in some parts  of  Mogadishu  and  this  is  especially
prevalent in the outskirts of the city. It was added that the power  of  the
government and its security  forces  is  due  to  the  presence  of  AMISOM.


Regarding civilian casualties in Mogadishu,  an  international  organization
explained that it is very difficult, if not  impossible,  to  present  exact
figures as there is often no reporting. Many wounded never  attend  hospital
for treatment.  The  international  organization  also  estimated  that  the
problem of civilian casualties is one related to all armed  stakeholders  in
the city. However, the international organization believed that there  is  a
decrease in the number of civilian casualties in Mogadishu, relative to  the
last few years. This decrease is due to  front-line  fighting  having  moved
out of Mogadishu. There are now fewer mass-casualty  attacks  and  killings,
in particular due to the cessation of shelling in Mogadishu. Still  civilian
casualties remain a daily occurrence,  principally  due  to  assassinations,
improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and suicide attacks,  and  reactions  to
these attacks by armed forces. Recent grenade and suicide  bomb  attacks  on
theatres and cafes, such as the August 2012  attack  on  the  Jezira  Hotel,
cause numerous  civilian  casualties.  According  to  an  international  NGO
working in S/C Somalia (A) the number of civilian causalities  in  Mogadishu
has decreased considerably compared to  February  2012  and  today  civilian
casualties are at a minimum. In July 2011 two thirds of Mogadishu was  under
al-Shabbab control. Bombardment and shelling killed many,  but  this  is  no
longer taking place. Today you  have  targeted  attacks  and  sometimes  by-
passers get killed. It's a question of being  at  the  wrong  place  at  the
wrong time.

A local NGO in Mogadishu (B) explained that there  is  no  longer  sustained
artillery in Mogadishu and there have been no direct  fighting  between  the
two sides since May/June 2012 within Mogadishu areas. The fighting has  been
sporadic hit and run attacks lasting for a short time, often between  10  to
15 minutes and maximum for an  hour.  These  attacks  mostly  occur  in  the
districts of Karaan, Hurriwa, Daynile  and  parts  of  Medina.  Tony  Burns,
SAACID - Australia explained that al-Shabbab  still  operates  in  Mogadishu
through the clan structures. However it lacks funding, and the  decision  to
withdraw from the city in August 2011 was economical; and AMISOM's role  was
only to provide the element of attrition  to  a  process  that  was  already
forgone. Today the situation in Mogadishu is completely different from  [the
period] before August 2011 when al-Shabbab pulled out.

The former editor of a Somalia  news  agency  explained  that  the  security
situation in general is better for most people  since  you  don't  have  the
shelling and fighting which characterized the  situation  before  al-Shabbab
withdrew from Mogadishu.

Regarding main challenges  for  ordinary  people  in  Mogadishu  Ayaki  Ito,
Deputy Representative, United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees  -
Somalia (UNHCR - Somalia), Nairobi explained that things are changing  quite
rapidly at the moment. The situation is improving, but the UN  is  concerned
about the security vacuum. Security is an issue at the moment as  AMISOM  is
presently [mid October  2012]  out  of  Mogadishu  and  clan  militias  have
expanded their influence. Government soldiers as  well  as  politicians  are
committing violations. Recently there have  been  hand  grenade  attacks  in
Karan, Yaqshid, the livestock market (Hurriwa) and  even  Hodan.  Saferworld
explained that from previous experiences in Mogadishu fear is deeply  rooted
in people. In order for people to trust that improvements are  taking  place
and that they are real the government institutions should be  in  place  and
this is not the case yet. The government  is  only  a  government  by  name.
Saferworld  stated  that  people  in  Mogadishu  do  not  yet  trust   their
government and that it is  al-  Shabbab's  strategy  to  retain  fear  among
ordinary people. Al-Shabbab will continue to install fear  as  long  as  the
government is unable to provide security. In  order  to  remove  fear  among
people the government and the police have to be more visible  in  Mogadishu.
The former editor of a Somali news agency stated that there  are  two  major
problems  for   civilians   in   Mogadishu   today:   Soldiers   not   being
paid/regularly paid, thus making soldiers rob and kill  just  for  a  mobile
phone.

According to Peter Klansoe, DRC  the  security  situation  in  Mogadishu  is
presently more complex and unpredictable as compared to  the  period  during
which al-Shabbab was in control of parts of the  city  [i.e.  before  August
2011]. The areas of Mogadishu that were controlled by  al-Shabbab  had  some
kind of law and order as well as security, despite the serious human  rights
abuses committed by al-Shabbab. Today there is a security  vacuum  in  parts
of the city and this is due to the fact that it can be difficult for  people
to distinguish between militias, government  soldiers  and  criminal  gangs.


Elman Peace and Human Rights Centre, Mogadishu emphasized  that  people  now
have freedom of movement even though there are two districts,  i.e.  Helliwa
and Medina, which are still difficult to access. Helliwa  is  still  an  al-
Shabbab stronghold during night time with  many  al-Shabbab  supporters,  so
you need protection to move there. There is a lot of police in Helliwa,  but
al-Shabbab is also very much present  in  the  sense  of  having  a  lot  of
sympathizers but not necessarily  militants.  Since  the  area  is  recently
liberated there is also a lot of lawlessness, and both  government  soldiers
and police being responsible for looting and rapes.  Because  of  this  many
civilians feel that they were actually safer during  al-Shabbab  since  they
didn't have to worry about sexual  assaults,  rapes  and  so  on.  At  times
civilians felt safer under the al-Shabbab ruling as  indiscriminate  looting
and rapes and killings were not as widespread as they are in  the  liberated
areas during the initial deployment of  government  forces,  although  these
very protection concerns were still  very  much  taking  place  in  the  al-
Shabbab's controlled area. However, Elman Peace  and  Human  Rights  Centre,
Mogadishu stated that in general the security  situation  in  Mogadishu  has
improved a  lot.   Tony  Burns  stated  that  during  the  past  two  months
[September  and  October]  the  security  situation   [in   Mogadishu]   has
deteriorated, and  you  are  seeing  more-and-more  clans  remobilizing.  In
addition there is no command and control  within  the  SNAF  or  the  police
structures and the police  are  actually  controlled  by  individuals  along
particular sub clan lines. Tony Burns explained that people's greatest  fear
today is not al-Shabbab but the incapacity of  the  government  to  protect,
provide genuine security, and create meaningful  institutions  that  deliver
real services. An  international  organization  explained  that  people  are
awaiting an improvement of their lives and for some time to come  will  give
the new government, and its supporters, the benefit of the  doubt.  However,
it is assumed  that  al-Shabbab  will  continue  to  seek  out  and  exploit
weaknesses to  destabilize  the  government;  and  failure  to  deliver,  on
security and the economy in particular, will put support for the  government
at risk. Nonetheless, for the time being, there is a  significant  sense  of
optimism among the people of Mogadishu.

Ayaki Ito, UNHCR, explained  that  there  is  a  lot  of  underreporting  of
violations and incidents especially in al-Shabbab controlled areas.

Concerning civilian casualties in Mogadishu  Peter  Klansoe,  DRC  explained
that it  is  difficult  to  state  whether  or  not  these  casualties  have
increased or decreased since  February  2012.  However,  today  it  is  more
common that persons who are involved in various kinds of disputes  are  more
at risk of being targeted than other people. According to  Elman  Peace  and
Human Rights Centre,  Mogadishu  the  number  of  civilian  causalities  has
decreased considerably [in Mogadishu] if you compare with 2010  when  people
were caught in a lot of crossfire, today  there  is  not  a  lot  of  actual
conflict in the city, but you do have targeted killings,  as  well  as  many
guerrilla tactic  assassinations  and  homicides  that  go  un-investigated.
Still, security has improved as civilian  casualties  have  decreased  since
February 2012. In  general  security  incidents  have  decreased  especially
during the last six months, i.e. since February 2012,

A former editor of a Somalia news agency stated that the number of  civilian
casualties in Mogadishu has decreased since February 2012. This  is  due  to
the fact that arbitrary shelling and large scale  fighting  does  not  occur
any longer. On the other, hand the former  editor  explained  that  targeted
attacks are increasing. Tony Burns, SAACID - Australia, explained  that  the
wave of return from the diaspora during September  and  October  [2012]  has
begun to plateau.  Mogadishu  has  rightly  never  been  safer  than  today,
although there are still more than 500 gunshot victims  in  the  city  every
month. However, this is a  significant  improvement  on  the  AMISOM/Shabbab
urban combat that occurred in the period before this  current  period,  i.e.
since August 2011.

According to an international NGO working  in  S/C  Somalia  (D)  there  are
areas of Mogadishu which are more or  less  controlled  by  al-Shabbab,  but
only during night-time. Al-Shabbab  is  not  visible  at  daytime.  This  is
especially the case in Deynile district. Some people still believe that  al-
Shabbab is more or less in control of  Deynile  and  the  livestock  market.
These two areas are almost empty of people and most  people  are  afraid  of
staying in those areas as  there  are  reportedly  killings  by  al-Shabbab.
However, people in general find that other  areas  of  Mogadishu  are  safer
than ever since the civil war began in 1991.
                                 Appendix 2

Security and protection in  Mogadishu  and  South-Central  Somalia  -  Joint
report from the Danish Immigration Service's and  the  Norwegian  Landinfo's
fact finding mission to Nairobi, Kenya and Mogadishu, Somalia 16 April to  7
May 2013  (15 May 2013)

Due to security concerns for persons from  the  international  community  in
Mogadishu the delegation was advised by the Danish Embassy  in  Nairobi  and
the UNDSS to limit its stay in the city to three days only.  The  delegation
was also advised not to be accommodated  at  any  hotel  in  Mogadishu.  The
delegation was accommodated by the  security  company  SKA-Somalia  at  Aden
Abdulle International Airport, Mogadishu.

Regarding armed  conflict  UNDSS,  Mogadishu,  explained  that  despite  al-
Shabbab's partial combat withdrawal  from  Mogadishu  in  August  2011  this
withdrawal was only completed by the end of May 2012. Since then there  have
been no more al-Shabbab troops holding fixed combat positions in  Mogadishu,
but there continue to be underground al-Shabbab  cells  and  terrorism.  The
district of Daynile was the last district of Mogadishu to be liberated  from
al-Shabbab. Since then, i.e. end of May 2012, there were  approximately  six
weeks of calmness and no fighting  in  Mogadishu.  However,  following  this
period there have been armed attacks again, against targets  in  the  city's
outlying districts such as security forces' patrols and police stations. Al-
Shabbab  undertakes  these  hit  and  run  attacks  with  small   arms   and
occasionally  slightly  heavier  weapons  like   rocket-propelled   grenades
(RPGs). Al-Shabbab is not trying to retake Mogadishu, not even the  outlying
districts of the city, but  it  instead  uses  the  attacks  as  a  form  of
harassment and as a reminder  of  its  presence.        Regarding  Mogadishu
Peter Klansoe, DRC, explained that al-Shabbab still  has  influence  in  the
city. People  are  still  worried  about  al-Shabbab  and  there  are  still
individuals who support or work for al-Shabbab. This is  also  occurring  in
refugee camps in Kenya  and  al-Shabbab  has  attacked  police  stations  in
Kenya. Similar developments  are  also  occurring  in  Ethiopia.  Concerning
security for the people of Mogadishu, an international NGO  (B),  Mogadishu,
explained that there has been an improvement since al-Shabbab left the  city
[in August 2011]. Looking back, the city was divided  into  two  parts  with
one part  controlled  by  al-Shabbab  and  one  controlled  by  the  Somalia
government and the international forces. During this time,  people  suffered
a lot of hardship, it was difficult for people to move around and  they  had
to adapt to different sets of rules when  they  moved  from  one  sector  to
another. Fighting along the frontline caused  many  casualties.  These  days
there are no armed struggle and no  frontline  [in  Mogadishu],  people  can
move freely around in the city and people have moved back  from  the  Afgoye
corridor and from elsewhere. However, according  to  the  international  NGO
(B), Mogadishu, there are still threats  in  the  city.  Different  kind  of
improvised explosives, hand grenade attacks and assassinations  create  fear
among people, and al-Shabbab  still  has  influence  that  affects  people's
lives. Checkpoints have been removed, but when  people  are  moving  around,
they must constantly be careful. For example, since people started to go  to
Lido beach there have been two attacks there, one car bomb and  one  suicide
bomber. On the other hand,  there  are  clear  improvements.  For  instance,
before October last year, people did not dare to go to Bakara market,  today
they are going. Al-Shabbab can hit anywhere in Mogadishu,  according  to  an
international NGO (B), Mogadishu. However,  its  influence  is  stronger  in
some parts of the city  than  in  others.  Al-Shabbab's  influence  is  most
noticeable in  Suqahoiaha  (Hurriwa  district),  in  the  northern  part  of
Daynile, the Industrial Road area and at the  Bakara  market.  This  is  the
reason why people think twice before they go to these  areas.  Nevertheless,
al-Shabbab members can be found everywhere, and you cannot identify  an  al-
Shabbab by the way he is  looking.         Al-Shabbab  has  infiltrated  the
police,  the  intelligence  and  the  military,  where   they   have   their
informants.

The present security situation in Mogadishu will  most  likely  continue  if
the international community does  not  seize  the  time,  i.e.  enhance  its
efforts to support the SNG with institution building and services. There  is
presently an enormous need for international assistance.  It  is  imperative
that the SNG can show people that the government is functioning and that  it
provides services. According to UNDSS, Mogadishu, it is not uncommon for al-
Shabbab fighters to wear the uniforms of the Somali  National  Armed  Forces
(SNAF) in order to infiltrate the city. Regarding  the  number  of  civilian
casualties UNDSS stated that it does not record or report systematically  on
such casualties, as this is not within UNDSS's remit [mandate].

UNDSS, Mogadishu, explained that as of today the usual kind  of  attacks  by
al-Shabbab is hit and run attacks  as  well  as  hand  grenade  attacks  and
targeted killings. Some hand grenade attacks might be undertaken  on  behalf
of al-Shabbab by paid youngsters (this is known  to  have  happened  in  the
past). From time to time there are  also  mortar  and  other  indirect  fire
attacks, and in early April 2013 there was a mortar attack on the  Mogadishu
stadium. This stadium is occupied by AMISOM.  However,  there  is  no  clear
evidence that this or previous indirect fire attacks were undertaken by  al-
Shabbab. In mid-2012 there were several pretty accurate  mortar  attacks  on
Villa Somalia as well. UNDSS added that every  few  months  there  are  such
attacks, almost invariably at night.

UNDSS,  Mogadishu,  emphasized  that  indirect  fire  attacks  may  also  be
undertaken by others than al-Shabbab. It could be clan related  disputes  or
other issues, but very often no one  knows  who  is  behind  those  attacks.
UNDSS made it clear that because of the above mentioned kind of attacks  the
security is still under threat.

UNDSS, Mogadishu, explained that  al-Shabbab  undertakes  attacks  with  all
types of improvised explosive devices (IEDs). There was  a  decline  in  the
numbers of actual and attempted IEDs across 2012. However, during the  first
quarter of 2013 IED attacks have been going  up  compared  with  numbers  of
attacks in the last quarter of 2012.

Regarding IED attacks UNDSS, Mogadishu,  explained  that  remote  controlled
IED attacks or roadside bombs tend to target AMISOM, SNAF  and  convoys  and
such attacks sometimes result in the killing of civilians, i.e.,  collateral
damage.

Concerning hand grenade attacks UNDSS, Mogadishu, explained that numbers  of
such attacks are high, since having risen during  2012.  These  attacks  are
directed against SNAF  soldiers,  government  affiliates,  police  officers,
hotels  and  teashops  frequented  by  politicians   plus   any   government
institution. Such attacks are most often undertaken in the  evening.  Around
three-quarters of all hand grenade attacks in Mogadishu are likely to be  by
al-Shabbab, but UNDSS made it clear that not all such attacks are  not  only
committed by al-Shabbab.

UNDSS,  Mogadishu,  further  explained  that  civilians   with   any   known
government affiliation could be at risk of  a  targeted  al-Shabbab  attack,
but there is also the problem of being at  the  wrong  place  at  the  wrong
time.
                                 Appendix 3

Amnesty International Public  Statement  -  Returns  to  South  and  Central
Somalia: A Violation of International Law (15 May 2013)

Changes in security situation do not amount to a  fundamental,  durable  and
stable change of circumstances in central and southern  Somalia  at  present
In August 2012, the eight-year 'transitional' period in Somalia  ended  with
the appointment of a new Somali administration, following over 20  years  of
conflict and state collapse after the fall  of  the  Siad  Barre  regime  in
1991. Since the new administration has been in place, there have  been  some
improvements in security; however at this point,  it  cannot  be  considered
that these are either substantial or durable.

Civilians persistently face insecurity as a result of the risk  of  becoming
victims of grave human rights abuses, including indiscriminate and  targeted
violence, rape, killings, as well as extortion. Though it is unclear who  is
responsible for the attacks in all  circumstances,  it  is  widely  believed
that all parties to the conflict, including the SNAF and allied militia,  as
well as al-Shabbab, carry out such attacks.

In light of the above, the organization  has  no  doubt  that  the  security
situation within south and central  Somalia,  including  Mogadishu,  remains
extremely volatile. Lack of authority, discipline and control of  government
forces and its allied militias means that government  forces  both  fail  to
provide protection or security  for  its  civilians  and  are  themselves  a
source of insecurity. Al- Shabbab's capacity to  regain  control  undermines
the notion that the already limited improvements in the  security  situation
will actually endure.

In Mogadishu there is  ongoing  violence  through  both  indiscriminate  and
targeted attacks.  Al-  Shabbab,  though  weakened,  retains  influence  and
despite their diminished capacity is still able to carry out  direct  attack
on civilians and indiscriminate attacks through  suicide  bombs,  improvised
explosive device (IED) and grenade attacks. On 5 May  2013,  an  IED  attack
targeted a delegation of Qatari government  officials  killing  at  least  8
civilians and wounding many others in central Mogadishu. On 14  April  2013,
al-Shabbab carried out two large-scale attacks in  Mogadishu.  One  targeted
Benadir High Court, where al-Shabbab militia stormed the  court.  This  soon
became the scene of a  devastating  suicide  attack,  live  fire-fights  and
explosions from an IED. Shortly after, a second IED attack hit a  convoy  of
a Turkish humanitarian organization on the airport road. At least 30  people
died in the two attacks, and many more were injured.  Among  the  dead  were
two lawyers that had represented a woman who was arrested and charged  after
she had reported she was raped by government forces, and the journalist  who
interviewed her, in a high profile case  which  drew  international  outcry.
These attacks serve  as  a  reminder  that  the  armed  conflict  continues,
including in Mogadishu, and that the security situation  is  neither  stable
nor durable. On 18  March  2013,  a  suicide  attack  took  place  near  the
President's Palace, killing at least eight people, including  a  journalist,
and wounding several others.

Conclusion
Though there have  been  improvements  in  the  security  conditions  within
Somalia, these remain extremely limited in scope and are both  volatile  and
fragile, with varying intensity between areas  and  at  different  times  of
day. The recent al-Shabbab take-over of Xudur and the devastating attack  in
Mogadishu on 14 April 2013 demonstrate that  improvements  in  security  are
neither fundamental, sustainable or durable. While the  government  controls
more of Mogadishu than a year ago when the TFG was in place, their  reliance
on AMISOM renders them incapable of  providing  security  or  protection  to
their civilians. South and  central  Somalia,  including  Mogadishu,  remain
areas of conflict.

The situation of generalized violence in Mogadishu and in south and  central
Somalia, both through targeted and indiscriminate attacks is a real risk  to
civilians. Though some people may  have  some  protection  through  clan  or
close family connections, many people, particularly specific  categories  of
people such as  female-headed  households,  single  females,  children,  and
families from minority clans, are at heightened risk, due to their  specific
situation. The recent killing of the journalist returning from exile  is  an
example  that  those  returning  face  a  real  risk  of  serious  violence,
including death. People in areas under al-Shabbab control are at  real  risk
of killings, torture or other ill-treatment. Conditions in  IDP  settlements
remain dire, with a lack of access to basic  services  and  high  levels  of
violence and sexual violence, often carried out by the very people  who  are
supposed to protect them.








                                 Appendix 4

                 PRELIMINARY FINDING - ERROR ON POINT OF LAW

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia. It is immediately apparent  from
    any consideration of the determination as a whole that the  Judge  made
    no reference to any background  material  save  passing  references  to
    being supplied with a bundle  of  country  reports.  More  importantly,
    there is no reference to  the  extensive  case  law  developed  by  the
    Tribunal over the preceding years. It is difficult to see how a  Somali
    appeal can properly be determined  without  express  reference  to  the
    latest country guidance. In this case, the guidance is found in AMM and
    others (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)  Somalia  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC). The guidance may be out of date or it may  not
    properly reflect the circumstances in the case before the Judge but, if
    so, it still needs to be engaged. I would regard this omission  on  the
    part of the Judge as sufficient in itself to render  the  determination
    fatally flawed.

 2. The guidance summarised  in  AMM  and  others  includes  the  following
    passages:


         9)  On the assumption that Al-Shabbab's  likely  behaviour  towards
         those who transgress its rules is as found in  this  determination,
         the position is as "extreme" as the factual basis in RT  (Zimbabwe)
         [2010] EWCA Civ 1285. In the light of RT,  a  person  from  an  Al-
         Shabbab area who can show they  do  not  genuinely  adhere  to  Al-
         Shabbab's ethos will  have  a  good  claim  to  Refugee  Convention
         protection, once outside Somalia (subject  to  internal  relocation
         and exclusion clause issues),  regardless  of  whether  the  person
         could and would "play the game", by adhering to Al-Shabbab's rules.
         As can be seen from a comparison with Sufi & Elmi, the effect of RT
         is,  accordingly,  to  take  the  Refugee  Convention  beyond   the
         comparable ambit of Article 3 ECHR protection.


         15)  In assessing the effect of an appellant's lies (whether to the
         Secretary of State or a judicial fact-finder), it is unnecessary to
         construct a prescribed set of  steps  from  the  judgments  of  the
         Supreme Court in MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, particularly if  they
         might lead to a "mechanistic" rather than a holistic approach.  The
         significance or "negative pull" of the lie will possibly depend not
         only on the strength of the background evidence but on whether  the
         lie - looked at in its own terms  -  is  about  an  issue  that  is
         central to the disposition of the appeal. Where a person tells lies
         about issues which that person thinks are important to their  claim
         but which, because of the passage of time or otherwise, are not, it
         is open to the Tribunal, given the earlier lies, to  approach  with
         caution the person's evidence regarding matters that are central to
         the current claim.


     In relation to Mogadishu


       (1)  Despite the withdrawal  in  early  August  2011  of  Al-Shabbab
          conventional forces  from  at  least  most  of  Mogadishu,  there
          remains in general a real risk of  Article  15(c)  harm  for  the
          majority of those returning to  that  city  after  a  significant
          period of time abroad. Such a risk does not arise in the case  of
          a person  connected  with  powerful  actors  or  belonging  to  a
          category of middle class or professional persons, who can live to
          a reasonable standard in circumstances where  the  Article  15(c)
          risk, which exists for the great majority of the population, does
          not apply. The significance of this category should not, however,
          be overstated and, in particular,  is  not  automatically  to  be
          assumed to exist, merely because a person has told lies.

 3. The appellant was not found to be credible in relation to a  number  of
    matters and those adverse  credibility  findings  are  sustainable  and
    stand unless there is material which persuades the Tribunal to adopt  a
    different view.  In addition, it was accepted that some of the  account
    was true.  Hence it was not accepted that he came from a minority  clan
    or that he experienced persecution in the past.   However,  it  is  not
    disputed his father was a teacher and the family lived and continue  to
    live in Mogadishu.

 4. Mr Ouseley relied on paragraph 357:


    357.  Nevertheless, the evidence before us  points  to  there  being  a
         category of middle class or professional persons in  Mogadishu  who
         can live to a  reasonable  standard,  in  circumstances  where  the
         Article 15(c) risk, which exists for  the  great  majority  of  the
         population, does not apply.  A returnee from the United Kingdom  to
         such a milieu would not, therefore, run an Article 15(c) risk, even
         if forcibly returned. Into this category  we  place  those  who  by
         reason of their connection with  "powerful  actors",  such  as  the
         TFG/AMISOM, will  be  able  to  avoid  the  generalised  risk.  The
         appellants argued that no such category exists; but we reject  that
         submission. Indeed, the category that emerges from the evidence  is
         wider than the "powerful actors" exception, and covers those  whose
         socio-economic  position   provides   them   with   the   requisite
         protection, without running the  risk  of  assassination  faced  by
         those in or associated with the TFG.

 5. Mr Nadeem relied on paragraphs 472 and 598


    472.  Although having family in the  Al-Shabbab  area  of  return  may,
         depending on the circumstances, alleviate the  risk,  the  rotating
         nature of Al-Shabbab leadership and the fact that  punishments  are
         meted out in apparent disregard of local sensibilities  mean  that,
         in general, it cannot be said that the presence of family is likely
         to mean the risk ceases to be a real one.

    598.  In general, a returnee with no recent  experience  of  living  in
         Somalia will be at  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  treatment
         proscribed by Article 3  in  an  Al-Shabbab  controlled  area.  "No
         recent experience" means that the  person  concerned  left  Somalia
         before the rise of Al-Shabbab in 2008. Even if a  person  has  such
         experience, however, he or she will still  be  returning  from  the
         United Kingdom, with all that is likely to entail, so  far  as  Al-
         Shabbab perceptions are concerned, but  he  or  she  will  be  less
         likely to be readily identifiable as a returnee. Even if he or  she
         were to be so identified, the evidence  may  point  to  the  person
         having struck up some form of accommodation with Al-Shabbab, whilst
         living under their rule. On the other hand, although having  family
         in the Al-Shabbab area  of  return  may  alleviate  the  risk,  the
         rotating  nature  of  Al-Shabbab  leadership  and  the  fact   that
         punishments  are  meted  out  in  apparent   disregard   of   local
         sensibilities mean that, in general, it cannot  be  said  that  the
         presence of family is likely to mean the risk ceases to be  a  real
         one.


 6. The issues raised in these passages have not been  properly  addressed.
    This is an error of law. However, it has to be said that  the  passages
    relied on by Mr Nadeem appear to relate to those parts of  the  country
    under the control of Al-Shabbab and, as I understand it, the  Secretary
    of State does not intend a return to those parts.

 7. The Judge's handling of Article 8 was very brief and  may  require  re-
    examination in greater detail.

 8. The decision will have to be re-made.  The appellant  is  to  file  and
    serve all documentary evidence upon which he intends to rely (which  is
    to include witness statements and their  contents  will  stand  as  the
    evidence-in-chief) by 24 May 2013.  No  interpreter  will  be  arranged
    unless the appellant's representative, no later than 14 days before the
    hearing, requests one and gives reasons for doing so.

-----------------------
[1] SAACID according to its web-site: (say-eed - Somali, meaning 'to  help')
is an indigenous Somali, not-for-profit, non-religious, non-political,  Non-
Governmental Organisation (NGO) founded and directed by Somali  women,  that
focuses  on  practical  measures  to  enhance  the  life-options  of  women,
children and the poor.

