
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05026/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 11th January 2016                     |              On 16th February 2016  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     NA
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Professor S Juss instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal against  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, whereby her appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse to vary her leave to enter or remain, and to  remove
    her from the United Kingdom, was dismissed.  This refusal was  made  on
    9th March 2015 following a refusal to grant  her  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and protection under the European Convention.  The appellant
    is a Pakistan national born on 30th November 1986.

 2. Briefly the appellant's history is that she  entered  the  UK  on  23rd
    April 2013 on a visit visa valid until 27th September 2014 when at  the
    time she was  engaged  to  her  first  cousin  to  whom  she  had  been
    betrothed.  The main purpose of her visit was to shop for  her  wedding
    and she claims that on the flight from  Pakistan  to  the  UK  she  met
    someone by the name of A M who tendered to her whilst she felt  unwell.
    They exchanged numbers and kept in touch.  Despite coming from  a  very
    protected background, a relationship was said to have developed between
    the appellant and Mr M and this culminated at the end of  the  week  of
    their first meeting, with her falling pregnant.   The  appellant  found
    out she was pregnant on 10th June 2013 and subsequently gave  birth  to
    her son on 18th January 2014 and no one was  identified  on  the  birth
    certificate as being the father.

 3. The appellant had been staying at her cousin's house but her cousin and
    his family went on holiday at the end of June leaving her  on  her  own
    but the cousin's wife noticed  the  appellant  was  pregnant  when  she
    returned from holiday.  She called her husband who was still abroad  at
    the time who spread the news about her pregnancy at home in Pakistan.

 4. At the appeal hearing evidence was given on behalf of the appellant  by
    Mr Q  I, a friend of the appellant's, who submitted that during a visit
    to Pakistan he had been approached by the appellant's brother who asked
    him about the appellant's whereabouts and suggested that he should find
    the appellant and have her sent back to Pakistan.

 5. The appellant also maintained that she was sent a threatening e-mail by
    her brother on 7th October 2013.

 6. The application for permission to appeal maintains that  the  judge  on
    the first ground failed to give clear and cogent  reasons  for  finding
    that the threatening e-mail sent to the appellant  was  not  a  genuine
    one.  Although Professor Juss attempted to  reinstate  this  ground,  I
    find that Judge  Cox,  who  granted  permission  to  appeal,   was  not
    persuaded that the judge gave inadequate reasons for an adverse finding
    regarding  the  e-mail  and  restricted  his  grant  refusing  to  give
    permission on this ground.  I was not persuaded  to  depart  from  that
    decision.

 7. Nonetheless ground 2 was given permission on  the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable in the light of the positive findings made at paragraph 46 and
    55 that the judge's assessment of risk on return and the  viability  of
    internal relocation were inadequate and flawed.

 8. At the hearing Professor Juss had stated that  the  background  country
    information  was  not  considered  adequately  by  the  judge  and  the
    assessment of risk was not looked at.  He specifically referred to  the
    country information guidance on Pakistan and identified that the  judge
    had essentially noted the appellant would be returning as a lone single
    woman who had transgressed social mores.  The judge had  been  referred
    to 2.4 of the Country of Information Guidance on  Pakistan  (CIG)  July
    2014, but had failed to take this into account and  had  failed  to  in
    fact follow the guidance of AW  (sufficiency  of  protection)  Pakistan
    [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC) which stated at the first bullet point in the head
    note that it would always  be  necessary  to  consider  the  particular
    circumstances of the individual case.  Professor  Juss  submitted  that
    the fact that there was no history of domestic violence was  irrelevant
    because hitherto there had been no cause to threaten the appellant with
    domestic violence and it was only subsequent to  her  falling  pregnant
    outside wedlock that the difficulties had arisen.  Professor Juss  also
    had identified that there were inconsistencies within the decision, for
    example the judge had accepted at paragraph 46  that  her  account  was
    found credible and that she became pregnant and gave birth to  her  son
    who like her was a citizen of Pakistan but, at paragraph 47  the  judge
    then stated

         "However taking into account all  of  the  factors  set  out  above
         relating to the evidence I do not accept that she has  established
         to the low standard of proof required much of her account and I  do
         not find that she has been a truthful witness as to parts  of  it".



 9. Professor Juss submitted that it was next to impossible  for  a  single
    woman to find rental accommodation, particularly as she was caring  for
    a 1 year old child.  This appellant was not professional, had  a  small
    child and had no family structure to whom she could return.  There  was
    no specific finding that Mr Q would support  her  financially  although
    this appeared to be the implication of paragraph 48.

10. The judge had not given adequate reasons or  findings  in  relation  to
    internal relocation as far as her security and renting were  concerned.
    The judge had merely stated at [57] that the appellant had not been the
    subject of any specific allegations and she would  not  be  facing  any
    past vendetta, which was irrelevant. It was the  present  circumstances
    which were relevant. That she had shown herself  able  to  adapt  to  a
    country other than her own should not have been a  factor  because  the
    United Kingdom was not the same milieu as in Pakistan. For the judge to
    find at paragraph 58 that she would be able to live safely and  have  a
    reasonable normal life by local standards and thus her return would not
    be unduly harsh was not taking into account all  the  circumstances  as
    the judge was required to do.

11. The e-mail was very relevant and the judge had not identified that  the
    Home Office had indeed accepted that this e-mail was  sent.   I  reject
    the fact that the e-mail should be considered to be  an  error  on  the
    part of the judge, as the judge gave adequate  reasons  for  dismissing
    this evidence, not least that the appellant  gave  a  different  e-mail
    address than that she gave in her application.

12. Ms Sreeraman stated that the judge had referred to AW  and  to  KA  and
    Others (domestic violence risk on return) Pakistan CJ [2010]  UKUT  216
    (IAC).  I note, however, that AW (sufficiency of  protection)  Pakistan
    [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC) is in relation to sufficiency  of  protection  for
    both men and women and in this particular instance  the  issue  is  the
    gender of the appellant.

13. Ms Sreeraman submitted that having set out in clear terms the judge did
    turn his mind to sufficiency of protection and noted paragraph  270  of
    KA.  In general risk is likely to be confined to tribal areas, such  as
    the North-West Frontier Province.

14. I identify however, that was not made specific was the availability  of
    the shelters or centres but also the situation women would  face  after
    they leave such centres.

15. The judge found that the appellant could on the facts relocate and  the
    reference at 2.5 of the CIG was not sufficient evidence to depart  from
    KA.

16. Although Professor Juss submitted  that  at  no  stage  the  judge  had
    referred to the fact of the appellant  being  a  single  woman  with  a
    child, I find that is not the case, but it is clear that the judge  had
    not made specific reference to the CIG and I agree that the judge does
    not factor into the decision material evidence which was  that  it  was
    virtually impossible for single women to live alone.  In addition there
    was no finding with regards to any shelter that  she  might  seek.    I
    also accept that KA was a more nuanced  determination  than  that  mere
    extraction at paragraph 270 would indicate.  In addition there  was  no
    clear finding as to what support she might find once  she  returned  to
    Pakistan, bearing in mind it was suggested that she may not be able  to
    return to her home area.  Nor was there  a  clear  finding  as  to  her
    working ability, indeed the evidence suggested that  she  in  fact  had
    worked for her family.  There was no clear  finding  that  Mr  Q  would
    afford financial support to the appellant.

17. Finally it was Professor Juss who stated that there was a contradiction
    in the credibility findings, such that the matter should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

18. I do find that the  submissions  of  Professor  Juss  have  some  force
    regarding the  credibility  findings,  in  particular  that  there  was
    contradiction in the  findings  between  paragraph  46  and  47  as  to
    credibility.  There certainly is tension in the  judge's  determination
    whereby he found her account credible to the low standard of proof that
    she came to the UK and then became pregnant and yet at paragraph 25 the
    judge stated "it was difficult to see how she could have been absent so
    often from the house for her to develop such a  relationship  in  which
    she described the intimacy taking place 'finally' in the space of  part
    only of a week from Tuesday to Friday".

19. In view of the inconsistency with the findings I therefore  find  there
    is an error of law and the matter should be returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for redetermination.

20. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 10th February 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

