
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05665/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23 October 2015                   |On 23 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                             MR Sideeq Tarakhail
                       (anonymity directionS not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Furner, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is an adult and is a national of Afghanistan. He appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 17 July  2014.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Callow dismissed the appellant's appeal.  Permission  to
    appeal was at first refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Saffer  on  5
    June 2015 and then granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Lindsley  who  gave
    the appellant permission to appeal on 10 August 2015.




    First-tier Tribunal's findings.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.  He
    accepted that the appellant's father worked for Zaman,  an  influential
    pro-government warlord in Afghanistan. The appellant claims that  there
    was an attempt by the Taliban to abduct him from school but they made a
    mistake and took another boy instead.

 3. In terms of risk on return to Afghanistan, the Judge took into  account
    the AK (article 15 (c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UK UT00163 (IAC)  country
    guidance case, and found that the  appellant  can  safely  relocate  to
    Kabul. He stated that the appellant has not demonstrated that it  would
    not  be  reasonable  to  expect  him  to  relocate  internally   within
    Afghanistan.

 4. The Judge found that there was insufficient evidence  to  suggest  that
    the Taliban had the motivation  or  the  ability  to  pursue  low-level
    collaborators in Kabul or  other  areas  outside  its  control  as  the
    Taliban devotes its limited assets to cities to  high-profile  targets,
    from serving government officials upwards.

 5. The Judge stated that the appellant's claim is not materially different
    from those considered by the upper Tribunal and  the  ECHR.  He  stated
    that contrary to the opinion of  Dr  Guitozzi,  the  appellant  has  no
    political profile. Any potential interest of the Taliban had in him can
    now be discounted by the lapse of time. The risk of being recruited  by
    the Taliban has not been established. The impact of return to Kabul for
    the appellant will be  lessened  by  the  availability  of  return  and
    reintegration packages.  The  appellant  can  call  on  the  assistance
    available from Refugee Action through its voluntary assisted Return and
    Reintegration Programme.

 6. By contrast, the appellant has never been to Kabul, and he had been the
    victim of serious past persecution  on  repeated  occasions.  Not  only
    that, even after he fled his home area, those threats  continued  (with
    the roadside bomb attack on his father). He produced an  expert  report
    which explained in detail how he would be identified  in  Kabul,  which
    the Judge did not (here, or at [22] below) consider or reject. He is in
    an entirely different position  from  either  H&  B  [2013]  ECHR  298,
    neither of whom had an accepted history of past persecution. Indeed  it
    is far from clear that the Taliban even knew  of  H&B's  pro-government
    activities, such as they were.

 7. Finally, the judge addresses the expert  report  at  paragraph  22  and
    makes a number of legal errors. He disputes Dr  Giustozzi's  conclusion
    that any potential interest "can now be  discounted  by  the  lapse  of
    time". But that was never part of the respondent's case. Had  it  been,
    the appellant would have produced evidence on it. Certainly  there  was
    no  evidence  adduced  to  found  the   judges   contrary   conclusion.
    Additionally  the  cogency  of  the  judge's  reasoning  is   seriously
    undermined by the guidance of the tribunal  in  FB  (lone  women,  PSG,
    internal relocation, AA (Uganda) considered) Sierra Leone [2008]  UKAIT
    00090 which at paragraph 61 noted  that  "it  is  axiomatic  where  the
    appellant has been believed as to account of the past  risk,  that  the
    Tribunal will be slow to find that the risk has ceased to exist in  the
    absence of fresh material indicating a change in circumstances that  is
    normally more than the passage of time alone."

 8. The reference to "the risk of being recruited by  the  Taliban"  is  at
    best entirely irrelevant; at worst taken together with the comments  in
    AK at paragraph 20, it may suggest that the Judge had in mind the wrong
    appellant. The references  to  return  and  reintegration  packages  to
    which, as the appellant noted in oral argument,  there  was  simply  no
    evidence whatsoever. The judge was  in  no  position  to  undermine  Dr
    Guistozzi's evidence about  likely  conditions  in  Kabul  without  any
    evidence as to what those packages comprised and whether the  appellant
    would  qualify  for  them.  In  any  event,  the  unreasonableness   of
    conditions in Kabul was a moot point if the appellant succeeded in  his
    primary claim that he would be unsafe there.

 9. The Judge has erred in  his  findings  on  risking  relocation  by  his
    failure to make any obvious findings as to the risk in the  appellant's
    home area. Taking into account irrelevant considerations  such  as  the
    conclusions of the Tribunal in  AK and giving no adequate  reasons  for
    his conclusions and failing to address an  applied  the  principle  now
    enshrined in Rule 339K of the Immigration Rules, that past  persecution
    is probative of future risk absent some good reason  (other  than  mere
    passage of time) to  find  otherwise  and  taking  points  against  the
    appellant which had never been raised in argument, and without inviting
    submissions on those points.

10. The second ground is that the decision is not in  accordance  with  the
    law. This is due to the respondent's prolonged failure to seek to trace
    his family. At the hearing it was  accepted  that  this  ground  is  no
    longer tenable in light of the Court of Appeal's recent decision.

11. The third ground of appeal is that the Judge made errors in his Article
    8 assessment. At paragraph 25 the Judge recognised  that  the  critical
    question under the relevant Immigration Rules was  whether  there  were
    "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the  appellant's   integration   in
    Afghanistan. In his conclusion at paragraph 28 finding that there  were
    no such obstacles, the Judge failed to have regard to his own  findings
    on credibility. It was obviously relevant to  that  question  that  the
    appellant had suffered serious past persecution in Afghanistan, and had
    effectively lost his entire biological family at the age of 14. It  was
    obviously relevant that if returned now, he would be losing his  second
    family in the United Kingdom in the space of five years, and  would  be
    returned to a country where he had no surviving relatives. None of this
    was considered by the Judge.

12. Moreover, the reasoning that the appellant had demonstrated himself  to
    be resourceful is with respect a clich� unsupported by evidence. A  14-
    year-old child does  not  demonstrate  himself  to  be  resourceful  by
    enduring a difficult journey facilitated entirely by others.  Certainly
    he  does  not,  in  enduring  that,  demonstrate  that  there  are   no
    significant barriers  to  his  integration.  The  Judge's  findings  on
    paragraph 276 ADE are unsustainable for these reasons.  The  Judge  has
    omitted relevant considerations and given inadequate  reasons  for  his
    findings.

13. In respect of Article 8 analysis outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
    Judge addresses the determinative question of  proportionality  and  in
    doing so, he entirely fails to factor in either the significance of the
    respondent's failure to trace, and the respondent's long delay of  some
    two years in determining the  appellant's  further  leave  application.
    Both were relevant and both were subject to argument and yet the  Judge
    refers to neither of them.

14. Even more concerning at paragraph 43 the Judge places  weight  on  "the
    appellant's adverse criminal history". The appellant  had  no  criminal
    history  whatsoever.  The  evidence  before  the  Judge  was  that  the
    appellant was of good  character.  Either  the  Judge  had  taken  into
    account irrelevant considerations or he  had  confused  this  appellant
    with another yet again. In either event, his  treatment  of  Article  8
    cannot stand.

    The hearing

15. At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in the determination. Mr  Furner  adopted  his
    grounds of appeal which are extensive  and  stated  the  following,  in
    summary. The Judge has failed to assess the  appellant's  risk  to  his
    home area and that is not in accordance with the law. The Judge did not
    consider the appellant's personal circumstances in assessing whether it
    would be unduly harsh for him to relocate to Afghanistan. Even if there
    are returned packages there still has to be an enquiry as to what  they
    provide and whether they are  genuinely  helpful.  The  Judge  did  not
    address the Taliban's geographical capacity in  his  determination.  He
    went against Prof Guistozi's report and said that  the  appellant  does
    not have a political profile. Just referring to the passage of time  is
    not enough in respect of paragraph 339K of the Immigration  Rules.  The
    Judge did not give the appellant an opportunity to address the case  of
    H&B which the Judge took into account. This is  post  hearing  research
    and is akin to evidential research because the Judge relied on  it  for
    assessment of facts. The situation in H&B was different.

16. Mr Furner accepted that in respect of the ground  of  appeal  regarding
    tracing He is on shaky  ground  given  the  Court  of  Appeal's  recent
    judgement.  He  advanced  that  if  the  respondent  had   traced   the
    appellant's parents, this may have made a difference to the outcome and
    it would have been different and the appellant would have been  granted
    refugee status earlier.

17. In respect of Article 8, the lack of tracing  would  be  relevant.  The
    appellant has been in this country for five years as  a  minor  and  is
    close to his foster mother and yet the Judge made no mention of that in
    his determination. The respondent's legal duty is to trace and  failure
    to do so should be taken into account in assessing  the  weight  to  be
    given to Immigration Control.  The  Judge  also  failed  to  take  into
    account the appellant's relationship with his foster parents  and  that
    he has no connections left in Afghanistan. The  Judge  also  failed  to
    take into account the two-year delay in dealing with this  application.
    The delay is relevant when the appellant is a minor.  At  paragraph  43
    the Judge said that the appellant had an adverse criminal  history  and
    fell into legal error.

18. Miss Fujiwala on behalf of the respondent submitted that there  was  no
    material error of law in the determination. She said that it  is  clear
    from the determination that the Judge found that there would be risk in
    the  appellant's  home  area  which  is  why  he  considered   internal
    relocation was suitable for the appellant. The  Judge  was  correct  in
    accepting PM to say that whether there would be  a  real  risk  at  the
    airport. The headnote of HK states that the appellant  has  to  show  a
    real risk and no evidence was provided to the Judge to show real  risk.
    In AK at paragraph 253, it was stated that a single male can return  to
    Afghanistan and share accommodation and take the benefit of the  return
    package. The Judge was correct to say that the appellant had no profile
    and his findings that lapse of time lowers risk to  the  appellant  and
    these findings were open to him on the evidence. The Judge was entitled
    to take into account the case of H&B which was promulgated in 2013  and
    is in the public domain. Dr Giustozzi has been  criticised  in  PM  and
    other determinations. The Judge did take into account the principles in
    paragraph 339 of the Immigration Rules even if he did not  mention  the
    rule specifically in his determination. The judge has not  fallen  into
    error to say that the appellant can relocate to Kabul.  In  respect  of
    tracing the Judge said that the Supreme Court has  now  determined  the
    issue. The fact that the appellant might have been a  refugee  in  2010
    does not impact on his status at the present time.

19. In respect of Article 8 she submitted that at paragraph 27,  the  Judge
    considers the appellant's individual circumstances and the fact that he
    has no ties to Kabul. At paragraph 253 of AK  states  that  the  single
    young male can live in Kabul. At paragraph 43 the Judge put  weight  on
    adverse criminal history and it is stated in the  respondent's  refusal
    letter that the appellant entered the country illegally. In  any  event
    this was not  the  central  focus  of  his  decision.  Therefore  under
    paragraph 117 (B) little weight should  be  given  to  someone  with  a
    precarious immigration history.

20. In reply Mr Furner stated that that the case of AK talks  about  forced
    recruitment. Dr Guistozzi's report states that the  appellant  will  be
    targeted in Kabul. The Judge does not say why the  appellant  does  not
    have a profile. The Judge give no reason why risk to the appellant  has
    abated over time. The appellant was found to be a reliable witness.

    Findings as to whether there is an error of law in the determination

21. I have considered the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  appeal  very
    carefully. It was argued on behalf of the appellant that the Judge  has
    got the facts and has applied the law erroneously  to  the  appellant's
    circumstances. It was submitted that the appellant has never said  that
    he was at risk of forced recruitment by the Taliban and AK has  nothing
    to say about those perceived as pro-government within accepted  history
    of past persecution.

22. The appellant's case has been that  he  was  targeted  by  the  Taliban
    because of his father's pro-government activities.  The  appellant  was
    only 14 years old at the date he left  Afghanistan.  His  evidence  was
    that the Taliban went to his school to kidnap him but instead took  the
    wrong child. The appellant's  evidence  is  that  soon  after  he  left
    Afghanistan as a minor.

23. The Judge was entitled, on the evidence, to  find  that  the  Taliban's
    interest in his father does not in itself give the appellant,  a  minor
    at the time, a political profile. The Judge was also entitled  to  find
    that the appellant does not have an individual profile and that it  was
    his father's political involvement which gave the appellant's father  a
    political profile. The appellant has never been targeted  for  his  own
    activities in Afghanistan and given he was only 14 of the time, he  was
    not involved in any political activities. Therefore the Judge,  on  the
    evidence before him was entitled to find that  the  appellant  did  not
    have a political profile. Therefore  the  Judge  was  entitled  not  to
    accept Dr Guistozzi's conclusion that the appellant was at risk because
    he had a political profile. He did not.

24. The evidence was that the Taliban went to abduct the appellant  at  his
    school as revenge to the appellant's father  and  they  picked  up  the
    wrong child because obviously they did  not  know  what  the  appellant
    looked like. This demonstrated to the Judge that the  Taliban  did  not
    recognise the appellant when he was 14  years  of  age  and  they  will
    hardly recognise him now that he is an adult.

25. The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant would not be at  risk
    in Kabul from the Taliban in any manner whatsoever,  as  he  reasonably
    found the Taliban would use their resources for  high-level  government
    officials. The appellant's father is dead and  therefore  any  interest
    they had in the appellant's father will not be transferred to  his  son
    who was minor at the  time.  This  is  a  sustainable  finding  on  the
    evidence, the country guidance case and background evidence  which  the
    Judge took into account.

26. It was also argued that the Judge did not find whether there was a risk
    to the appellant in his home area. The very fact that  the  Judge  said
    that the appellant could relocate to Kabul as an alternative. I find no
    error of law in the Judge's reasoning about assessing the risk  to  the
    appellant in Kabul and not his home area.

27. I accept the submissions that more than the mere  passage  of  time  is
    required to show that the appellant is no longer at risk.  However  the
    Judge found that in the appellant's case and circumstances, the passage
    of time the risk to the appellant has ceased to exist. The Judge  noted
    that the appellant would be returning to Afghanistan as an adult. These
    are sustainable findings by the Judge  on  the  evidence.  I  find  the
    findings are not perverse or irrational.

28. I do not accept Mr Furner's submissions that the Judge was not entitled
    to take into account case law which was  not  cited  to  him  and  this
    constituted "further research". I do not accept this  argument  because
    judges are entitled to take into account relevant case law in  reaching
    their decisions. The Judge was entitled to take into account the  legal
    principles  in  case  law  as  guidance  which  was  relevant  to   the
    appellant's appeal. There is no error of law.

29. As to the respondent's failure to trace the appellant's family, it  was
    accepted that this ground is no longer  sustainable  in  light  of  the
    Court of Appeal's decision. I will therefore say no more  about  it.  I
    also find there has been no procedural irregularity or consideration of
    irrelevant matters.

30. It is argued that there are errors in the Judge's Article 8 assessment.
    It was argued that the Judge has failed  to  have  regard  to  his  own
    findings  that  there  would  be  no  obstacles  on  his  returning  to
    Afghanistan and had ignored that the appellant  suffered  serious  past
    persecution  in  Afghanistan  and  has  effectively  lost  his   entire
    biological family at the age of 14.  The  Judge  failed  to  take  into
    account that the appellant would be losing his  second  family  in  the
    space of five years and would return to  a  country  where  he  had  no
    surviving relatives.

31. Reading the determination, it is  evident  that  the  Judge  took  into
    account all the circumstances of the appellant which included that  the
    appellant was not targeted in his individual capacity and would not  be
    at risk. The Judge sustainably found on the evidence that the appellant
    could relocate to Kabul and that it would not be unduly harsh  for  him
    to do so. The Judge's findings are not perverse or  irrational  and  he
    has made proper and reasoned findings on core issues.  The  grounds  of
    appeal are no more than a quarrel with the Judges findings. In light of
    the country guidance case of objective evidence, no  other  differently
    constituted Tribunal would come to a different conclusion.

32. In respect of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  it
    is argued on behalf of the appellant that the Judge did not  take  into
    account the significance of  the  respondent's  failure  to  trace  the
    appellant's parents and the respondent's long delay of some  two  years
    in determining the appellant's further leave application. This is not a
    material error of law because a delay of two years cannot be  set  that
    immigration control has broken down. The appellant had leave to  remain
    in this country until 18 in any event and therefore  no  prejudice  was
    disclosed. The Judge took into account that the respondent  had  failed
    to trace but this in itself does not show a material error of law  such
    as the decision should be set aside. The Judge took  into  account  all
    the relevant factors and found that the respondent's decision  did  not
    breach the appellant's Article 8 rights  and  this  was  a  sustainable
    finding.

33. On a careful and detailed examination  of  the  determination  and  the
    evidence, I find that the judge has not made a material  error  of  law
    and his determination stands.

    Appeal dismissed


    Signed by
    Deputy Judge of the upper Tribunal
    Mrs S Chana  23rd day of November 2015
