
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05077/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 8 January 2016                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SILMAT SILMAT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G P McGowan, Quinn Martin & Langan, Solicitors,
Glasgow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on  22  March  1986.   The
    respondent refused her asylum application on 8 July 2014.  Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal J C Grant-Hutchison allowed her appeal by  decision
    promulgated on 25 September 2015.

 3. The SSHD sought leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the  following
    grounds:
         "The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal has made a material error  of
         law by failing to adequately  consider  the  determination  of  the
         appeal of the appellant's husband ...
         The FTTJ, at paragraph 13, concludes  that  [she]  can  come  to  a
         different conclusion to the findings in Mr Khan's (the  appellant's
         husband's appeal which was based on exactly the same factors as the
         appellant's appeal), as the judge in that appeal  would  have  been
         assisted by the appellant in this present appeal giving evidence.
         ... the FTTJ does not provide any  reasons  why  the  FTTJ  in  the
         appeal of the appellant's spouse would have been  assisted  by  the
         appellant.  The factors that led  the  appeal  of  the  appellant's
         spouse to be dismissed were exactly the same  as  in  this  appeal.
         The FTTJ in the appeal of Mr Khan, as recorded in paragraph  12  of
         the determination, dismissed the appeal,  inter  alia  on  internal
         inconsistencies in Mr Khan's evidence.  ... it was not open to  the
         FTTJ to find that an internal inconsistency  in  an  account  could
         have been  assisted  by  the  evidence  of  another  witness.   The
         respondent relies on TK  (Consideration  of  Prior  Determinations)
         Georgia [2004] UKIAT00149, paragraph 19:
             "In these circumstances the Tribunal considers that  not  only
             was   the   Adjudicator   entitled   to   read   [the   first]
             determination, notwithstanding the arguments to  the  contrary
             which have been considered and dealt with above, but was  also
             entitled to conclude that it would be wrong  to  revisit  [the
             first] decision  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  husband's
             evidence.  Were the adjudicator note  entitled  to  take  this
             course, the following extraordinary circumstance would  arise.
             The head of a family, call him X, claims asylum on  the  basis
             of his own account and loses on the grounds that  his  account
             is disbelieved.  There  follows  thereafter  a  succession  of
             separate members of X's family  who  each  makes  his/her  own
             asylum application and each expressly accepts that  the  risks
             which they fear are based on the risks to X as head of family.
              If Miss Record's submissions were correct, then  there  could
             be  a  succession  of   hearings   where   a   succession   of
             Adjudicators, each  deprived  of  all  previous  adjudicator's
             determinations, could be asked to  reappraise  over  and  over
             again the same basic account from X, being an account on which
             all the successive family members were relying as showing that
             they were at risk because X was at  risk.   Unless  some  very
             good  reason  was  advanced  to  the  contrary,  for  example,
             compelling new evidence  to  show  that  X's  evidence  (which
             originally had been disbelieved) was mistakenly  appraised  by
             the original adjudicator, a  future  adjudicator  is,  in  the
             Tribunal's view, not merely entitled to read the determination
             in X's case but also to treat it as determinative  as  to  X's
             account."
         ... contrary to the guidance above there was  no  "compelling"  new
         evidence that could lead to the FTTJ in the appellant's case coming
         to a different conclusion.
         ... the FTTJ at  paragraph  19  of  the  determination,  has  given
         inadequate reasons for rejecting the  Home  Office  submissions  in
         respect of evidence regarding the father of the appellant's spouse.
          The FTTJ finds that the appellant in this  appeal  could  have  no
         influence on how Mr Khan conducted his appeal,  however  this  does
         not adequately address the submissions made, which were on a  lower
         standard of proof, that it is not credible that Mr Khan, if his own
         father had been  killed  by  those  allegedly  seeking  retribution
         against the  appellant's,  would  have  made  no  mention  of  this
         material  change  in  his  own  appeal  when  he  made  a   further
         submissions application.
         The respondent respectfully submits that the findings of  the  FTTJ
         in respect of internal relocation and sufficiency of protection are
         therefore clearly tainted in light of the above material errors."

 4. On 13 October 2015 a First-tier Tribunal Judge granted  permission,  on
    the view that it was arguable that the judge failed  to  give  adequate
    weight to the findings on the husband's appeal and adequate reasons for
    reaching a different conclusion, which might have affected her findings
    on relocation and protection.

 5. The appellant filed a Rule 24 response to the grant of  permission,  in
    these terms:
         "...
         The Respondent in the current part of the process,  Silmat  Silmat,
         provided a Skeleton Argument and  written  submissions  which  were
         fully taken into account by Judge Grant-Hutchison.
         In essence Judge Grant-Hutchison agreed  that  had  the  judge  who
         considered her husband's case head evidence from Silmat Silmat then
         the findings in fact may well not have been the same as they  were.
         She came to this conclusion because she found the appellant to be a
         credible  witness.   Judge  Grant-Hutchison  had  to   assess   the
         appellant's evidence because she had made a fresh  claim  based  on
         the fact that she was now a victim of domestic  violence  and  that
         were she to be returned to Pakistan it would be as a single  female
         who, for the reasons given in the submissions, would not be ale  to
         internally relocate or seek protection.  The judge  fully  reasoned
         her decision.
         The decision raises issues as to the nature  of  the  new  evidence
         which  enabled  the  second  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  reach
         conclusions differing from those of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         who heard the relatives' evidence.  It is  particularly  cogent  in
         circumstances where the Second Appellant is the wife of  the  First
         Appellant  who hails from a patriarchal  society  where  women  are
         very much second class  citizens  and  may  not  be  aware  of  the
         husband's actions.
         Judge Grant-Hutchison clearly had Devaseelan and TK Georgia in mind
         in paragraph 14 and the flexile approach required by  judges  where
         there is a material overlap of evidence.  The need to secure a just
         outcome in  the  second  appeal  required  an  assessment  of  what
         evidence she might have given in the  first  appeal  had  she  been
         called.  At paragraph 15 she makes her conclusions.
         Judge Grant-Hutchison's findings are clear in relation to  why  she
         concluded Silmat  Silmat  had  no  likelihood  of  succeeding  with
         internal relocation or seeking protection.
         In relation to the  alleged  tainting  of  Judge  Grant-Hutchison's
         assessment of the evidence quoad  relocation  and  protection,  the
         Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department's  grounds  ...  are
         factually inaccurate.  Mr Khan did attempt to bring in the issue of
         his father's murder by the Taliban (Silmat's father) in  the  Upper
         Tribunal application.  Paragraph 27 of the Upper Tribunal  decision
         refers to the newspaper article of 12 July 2011 in  which  this  is
         reported.  Accordingly at the date of the Upper Tribunal hearing on
         30 April 2012 not only the Tribunal but also the Secretary of State
         for the Home Department was aware of this issue.
         It is quite clear that the judge gave consideration to  the  issues
         surrounding the death of Mr Khan's  father  (paragraph  19  of  her
         determination).  She properly assessed Silmat Silmat's evidence  in
         relation  to  domestic  violence  at  paragraph  20,  that  of  her
         witnesses at paragraphs 21 to 24, and the behaviour of her  husband
         at paragraph 25.
         Whilst the appellant does not agree  with  Judge  Grant-Hutchison's
         conclusions in relation to the inability of anyone wanting to  find
         her in Pakistan because of the computerised nature of the  National
         Identity Cards, it  is  clear  that  the  judge  gave  considerable
         reasoned  consideration  to  the  questions   of   relocation   and
         protection over 4 pages of the  determination.    It  is  submitted
         that she has given adequate reasons for rejecting the  respondent's
         submissions and reaching a different  conclusion  to  that  of  the
         judge in the husband's appeal.
         Esto, errors have been made  by  Judge  Grant-Hutchison,  which  is
         denied.  They are not material to the outcome of her case based  on
         the risk on return to Pakistan effectively as a single female."

 6. Mr Matthews submitted further to the grounds as follows.   He  referred
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination  of  the  appeal  of   the
    appellant's husband (Annex E of the SSHD's  bundle  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, pages 15-16, paragraphs 47 and 49).  He said that there  were
    significant problems with his account on  crucial  matters  which  were
    common to both appellants.  While it was open to another judge to reach
    different conclusions in an appeal by another family member, that judge
    had to take account of such significant previous adverse findings.  The
    determination  now  appealed  against  at  paragraph  13  disclosed  an
    inappropriate approach.  The appellant had not given  evidence  in  her
    husband's appeal, although she might have done.   The  person  who  did
    give evidence had been disbelieved  for  a  variety  of  good  reasons.
    There was no justification for departing from them.  At paragraph 19 of
    her decision Judge Grant-Hutchison accepted that the appellant  had  no
    input into further submissions made by  her  husband  in  August  2012.
    That might be a good point if this was the first time that such matters
    could have been raised, but there was no reason  for  the  husband  not
    putting these matters forward in further submissions,  which  he  would
    surely have done if they had any basis in fact.  His failure to  do  so
    was material.  The case required a fresh hearing.  It was accepted that
    the grounds did not seek to overturn the  determination  on  the  basis
    only of internal relocation and/or sufficiency of protection, and  that
    these issues were to be revisited only if  the  favourable  credibility
    findings were found to be legally flawed.

 7. Mr McGowan relied upon the Rule 24 response and  submitted  further  as
    follows.  Document G in the SSHD's bundle on the First-tier Tribunal is
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal, finding no  error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal  determination  dismissing  the  husband's  appeal.
    Paragraph 27 of that decision showed that the appellant's  husband  did
    then seek to tender new evidence, a newspaper report and a copy leaflet
    purportedly from the Taliban.  The Upper Tribunal judge did  not  admit
    that evidence but this did show that the appellant's husband had sought
    to rely on new matters.  If so, the SSHD's point that he  would  surely
    have mentioned that his father had  been  killed  [by  the  appellant's
    father]  fell  away.   Judge  Grant-Hutchison  had  accepted  from  the
    appellant that she had not been asked  to  give  any  evidence  in  her
    husband's case.  The judge was entitled to look  at  the  circumstances
    under which the evidence was absent from the earlier proceedings.   The
    appellant was entitled to consideration of her case separately  and  to
    have her account preferred over evidence given by her husband  who  had
    subsequently been shown to be the perpetrator of domestic  abuse.   The
    judge was permitted but  not  bound  to  follow  the  findings  in  the
    previous determination.  The appellant's account itself was  compelling
    new evidence.  There was no error which required the  determination  to
    be set aside.

 8. In response, Mr Matthews referred to Item H in the SSHD's bundle in the
    First-tier Tribunal, which  comprises  the  fresh  claim  made  by  the
    appellant's husband and its rejection by the respondent.   He  observed
    that it did not appear to include the materials mentioned in the  Upper
    Tribunal, that it had not been found to  disclose  anything  fresh  and
    that after that decision both  he  and  the  appellant  had  absconded.
    Nothing further was known about him, although the appellant appears  to
    have been detained in November 2013 and then made a claim  in  her  own
    right.

 9. I reserved my determination.

10. It is not clear from  the  materials  available  that  the  appellant's
    husband did ever put forward the allegation that his  father  had  been
    killed by the appellant's.  It is certainly a matter which  might  have
    been expected to emerge.  However, on the limited information available
    and without knowing exactly what was sought to be relied  upon  in  the
    Upper  Tribunal  previously,  I  do  not  think  this  point   can   be
    disentangled any further.

11. There is a clear and sensible doctrine  against  family  members  being
    permitted to re-run a claim without account being taken of its previous
    failure.   However,  I  do  not  think  that  the  SSHD's  grounds  and
    submissions  show  that  the  present  determination  falls  into  that
    category.  Reading paragraph 13 in  context  of  the  rest  of  a  very
    thorough determination, the judge was entitled to find that a different
    decision might have been reached with the assistance of the appellant's
    evidence and in the light of she and her husband having entered into "a
    love marriage without  the  consent  or  knowledge  of  the  respective
    families who were at opposite poles with the appellant's father being a
    local Taliban commander and Mr  Khan's  father  being  a  local  police
    officer."  This is not the case such as feared in TK, where  successive
    family members simply seek to run a  claim  if  it  had  not  been  run
    unsuccessfully by the head of the family.  The judge  was  entitled  to
    find that there  was  compelling  new  evidence,  namely  that  of  the
    appellant.  The appellant explained why  that  evidence  had  not  been
    forthcoming in the first place, and was  believed  on  the  significant
    change of circumstances between her and  her  husband  leading  to  the
    emergence of  her  evidence.   The  determination  sets  out  that  the
    appellant's evidence was thoroughly tested  in  cross-examination,  and
    the judge makes it very clear why she found it to pass that test.

12. Contrary to the SSHD's grounds, it was open to the judge to  find  that
    internal inconsistencies in the account  previously  given  might  have
    been and in fact were now resolved by the evidence of another  witness.
    There is nothing in TK which shows that it was an error of  law  so  to
    find.  The judge's conclusions were open to her for the reasons  given.
    The determination shall stand.

13. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           7 January 2016
