

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal number:
AA/05975/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                |        Decision & Reasons       |
|                                   |Promulgated                      |
|On February 23, 2016               |        On March 2, 2016         |
|                                   |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                            S S A AD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Howerd (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Libyan national. The appellant had been studying  in
    the United Kingdom and he re-entered the United Kingdom  on  August  8,
    2014 as a Tier 4 student. On October 8, 2010 he claimed asylum. He  was
    interviewed on January 16, 2015  but  his  claim  was  refused  on  all
    grounds on March 18, 2015 and a decision was taken to remove  him  from
    the United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraph 10A of schedule
    2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The appellant appealed on April 2, 2015  against  that  decision  under
    section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The  matter  was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Birk
    (hereinafter referred to as "the Judge") on July  20,  2015  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on July 28, 2015 she refused  his  application  on
    all grounds.

 4. The appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal  on  August  7,  2015
    submitting the Judge had erred. Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Saffer on August 19, 2015.  Permission
    to appeal was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and on September  18,  2015
    Upper Tribunal Judge Finch granted permission to appeal. She  found  no
    merit in grounds one, three or four of the grounds of appeal but  found
    it arguable the decision was not adequately reasoned (ground two).

 5. The matter came before me on the above date  and  I  heard  submissions
    from both representatives. At the conclusion  of  those  submissions  I
    reserved my decision.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  direction  and  pursuant  to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I  extend
    that order.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Howerd submitted the Judge had erred and referred to paragraph  [18]
    of the decision. The adverse findings did not go to  the  core  of  his
    claim and were unfairly held against him especially as the Judge  found
    at paragraph [39] he was a vulnerable witness. The Judge made  findings
    between paragraphs  [21]  and  [28]  that  were  inadequately  reasoned
    especially in paragraphs [21] and [24]. Even if  the  Judge  found  his
    account to lack credibility she was  still  required  to  carry  out  a
    specific assessment of his claim in considering whether he fell into  a
    risk category. He submitted that the Judge failed to do this  and  this
    amounted to an error in law.


 8. Mr Richardson relied on the Rule 24 response dated October 8, 2015. The
    Judge made it clear that  her  findings  in  paragraph  [18]  were  not
    central to her decision but were factors she took into account  as  she
    concluded the appellant's approach to his evidence was  unsatisfactory.
    This decision was fully reasoned and it was clear the Judge  considered
    all of the evidence  and  reached  a  decision  based  on  all  of  the
    evidence. The Judge then considered his position having regard  to  the
    country  guidance  decision  of  AT  and  others  (Article  15c;   risk
    categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 00318 and found there was no cogent or
    compelling to depart from it. There was no error in law.

 9. I reserved my decision.






    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS


10. In considering whether there has been an error I have had regard to  my
    record of proceedings, the grounds of appeal the rule 24  response  and
    submissions.


11. The appellant came here as a student initially  in  December  2013.  He
    returned to Libya on June 28, 2014 before returning back on  August  8,
    2014.  The  Judge  carefully  set  out  the  appellant's  case  between
    paragraphs [4] and [10] of her decision and then summarised the refusal
    letter. Her assessment of the evidence commenced at paragraph [18]  and
    continued through to paragraph [28].

12. Mr Howerd  has  argued  that  the  Judge  erred  by  giving  inadequate
    reasoning whereas Mr Richardson asserts the decision was fair and  does
    not contain a material error.

13. Paragraph [18] was brought to my attention by  Mr  Howerd  but  on  any
    reading of that paragraph it cannot be argued that  the  Judge  decided
    the appellant's claim. The Judge made it clear in two places  that  the
    findings in that paragraph did not go to the core  of  the  appellant's
    claim but were factors the Judge felt could be taken  into  account  in
    assessing his overall claim. I see nothing wrong with that approach  as
    the Judge's role was to assess credibility. Within that  paragraph  the
    Judge explained what concerned her and why and in those circumstances I
    find no merit in Mr Howerd's first submission.

14. The second challenge related to the Judge's reasons or lack of  reasons
    for her findings in paragraphs [19] to  [28].  At  paragraph  [19]  the
    Judge accepted he carried out work for a charity group but just not for
    any specific group. She also accepted at paragraph [20]  that  when  he
    visited in June 2014 he felt people had changed both their approach and
    attitude and that some of them  were  members  of  Ansar  Al-Sharia,  a
    Salafist Islamist militia group. At paragraph [21] she  considered  his
    actions and rejected his claim to have openly distributed leaflets  and
    she explained why she rejected this claim. She considered at paragraphs
    [22] and [23] his claim that he had received a threatening  letter  and
    then gave her reasons why this part  of  his  claim  was  rejected.  At
    paragraph [24]  she  considered  his  evidence  about  others  who  had
    received a similar letter but having considered the claim she then gave
    reasons  for  rejecting  his  claim.  The  Judge  then  considered  the
    remaining aspects of his claim and gave her reasons for  rejecting  the
    same.

15. In Dasgupta (error of law - proportionality - correct approach)  [2016]
    UKUT 00028 (IAC) the Tribunal reminded us that in order to be an  error
    the Court would have to find ".....  the facts found are such  that  no
    person acting judicially and properly instructed as to the relevant law
    could come to the determination under appeal."
16. I am satisfied that the numerous findings made were not only  open  the
    Judge but were also properly reasoned.


17. The final challenge lay in  the  Judge's  approach  to  AT.  The  Judge
    approached this aspect of the appeal in paragraph [28]. She could  only
    consider whether the appellant fell into a risk category after she  had
    made her findings. The Judge carried out a specific examination of  his
    claim and having made those findings followed the guidance given in  AT
    and concluded he did not fall into a risk category. She then considered
    whether the new evidence would enable her to depart from that  decision
    and at paragraph [33] concluded it did not.

18. This was a well written decision that carefully considered all  aspects
    of the appellant's appeal. The Judge rejected substantial parts of  his
    claim and reached a conclusion that was clearly open to her.

    DECISION


19. There was no error in law. I uphold Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Birk's decision and I dismiss the appeal.

Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

