
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA052762015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 June 2016                                |On 15 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN



                                   Between

                                     ST
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Head,  Counsel, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh, born on  [
    ] 1971, against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rowlands
    following a hearing at Harmondsworth on 15 January 2016 and promulgated
    on 17 February 2016, who dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent dated 24 March 2015 to refuse to  grant  him
    asylum under paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as amended)  and  to  remove  him
    from the United Kingdom by way of directions under Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2.   The brief immigration history of the Appellant is that on  11  November
    2007 he applied for a  Family  Visit  Visa  which  was  refused  on  20
    November 2007.   A  subsequent  appeal  against  that  decision  on  21
    December  2008  was  successful.   The  visa  remained  valid  until  1
    September 2009.

3.   On 26 February 2015 the Appellant was encountered at  a  restaurant  in
    Castle Douglas where he was found to be working illegally. He attempted
    to evade detection by hiding in the cellar. He was then issued with  an
    IS.151A as an Illegal  Entrant:  Verbal  Deception.  He  was  taken  to
    Dumfries Police Station where his Screening  Interview  was  conducted.
    He was then detained.

4.   On 3 March 2015 the Appellant  was  accepted  into  the  Detained  Fast
    Track  Process  and  on  13  March  2015  following  his   arrival   at
    Harmondsworth IRC he was inducted into the Fast Track Process.   On  20
    March 2015 a substantive asylum interview was conducted.

5.   It was noted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker in  granting  permission  to
    appeal on limited grounds, that in determining  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the two  elements  of
    the  Appellant's  claim,  namely:  risk  because  of  his  journalistic
    activities and political activities  in  Bangladesh  and;  his  claimed
    conversion to Christianity.

6.    Whilst  the  Appellant  in  his  grounds  asserted  that  it  was  not
    sustainable that the Judge should place no weight upon the  Appellant's
    journalistic  past;  and  that  the  Judge  failed   to   give   proper
    consideration  to  the  Appellant's  evidence   as  to  his   term   of
    employment, it was the view of Upper Tribunal Judge Coker that as there
    was no specific reference to the Appellant's evidence as to  the  terms
    of his employment, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  given  adequate
    reasons for discounting the genuineness of the Press Pass.   The  Judge
    had referred in detail to the evidence produced by  the  Appellant  and
    the lack of what could have been available to  support  his  contention
    that he was a journalist, and he was involved in journalist activities.

7.    However  as  regards  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  converted  to
    Christianity it was considered arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had failed to give adequate weight or  provide  adequate  reasons
    for placing little or no weight on the evidence of witnesses  that  the
    Appellant was a genuine convert.

8.   Upper Tribunal Judge Coker continued that it was "arguable  (that)  the
    picking of answers to some questions and failing  to  give  credit  for
    other  answers  tainted  the  approach  to  the  assessment   of   (the
    Appellant's) claimed conversion".

9.   She thus concluded that it was arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had erred in law in his findings that the  Appellant  was  not  a
    convert to Christianity and it is on that  limited  ground  alone  that
    permission was granted.

10.  In that regard it was the Appellant's  claim  that  whilst  in  the  UK
    towards the end of 2012 he converted from Islam to Christianity  in  St
    Peter's Church in Dumfries and that after converting, he  continued  to
    attend church and went to the library to read the Bible.  He thereafter
    lived openly as a Christian.   Additionally,  he  distributed  leaflets
    relating to conversion.  On 8 June  2015  he  was  baptised  whilst  in
    detention as a Christian by the Reverend Patrick Wright.

11.  It would be as well to set out Ground  A  in  this  regard  upon  which
    limited leave was granted as follows:

         "At paragraph 32 in relation  to  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have
         prophesied with Jehovah's Witnesses; the judge asserts 'he actually
         claimed to have gone outdoor to door with Jehovah's Witnesses, even
         describing them as follow believers. This is palpable nonsense'.

         It is submitted in reaching this adverse  credibility  finding  the
         judge has failed to  show impartiality and he instead infected  his
         decision with a prejudicial viewpoint. It  is  submitted  that  the
         judge's  description  of  the  Appellant's  belief  that  Jehovah's
         Witnesses  are  fellow  believers  as  being  "palpable   nonsense"
         clearly  impacted  upon  his  attitude  towards   the   Appellant's
         conversion to Christianity and in turn his finding on  this  point;
         it  is  therefore  submitted  that   the   findings   reached   are
         unsustainable.

         At paragraph 14 the judge asserts: 'He clearly has no loyalties  to
         any denomination. He goes on to state  'I  accept  that  these  two
         letters are genuine and that the writer has no doubt a genuine held
         belief'. However the judge concludes: 'I am not  satisfied  of  his
         conversion'.  It is submitted that in reaching this conclusion  the
         judge has failed to give sustainable reasons why, if the  Appellant
         was not a convert as claimed, two church leaders had confirmed that
         he  was.  It  is  submitted  that  in  assessing  the   Appellant's
         conversion  the  judge  has  clearly  failed  to  give   valid   or
         sustainable  reasons  for  rejecting  the   independent   impartial
         evidence  of  two  church  leaders  confirming  the  Appellant  has
         converted.  The learned judge's attention is drawn  to  the  letter
         submitted by Reverend Wright who baptised the Appellant; he in fact
         asserts that both he and Chaplain Paul  Harland  believe  that  the
         Appellant is a sincere convert and Paul  attended  the  hearing  to
         support the Appellant. It is submitted that the judge  has  further
         failed  to  give  due  consideration  to  the  submission  on   the
         Appellant's behalf that knowledge has little to do with  a  genuine
         conversion and experience.  The judge has ignored  the  Appellant's
         expression about why he converted and his spiritual  awareness  and
         instead has taken a limited view about the  Appellant's  knowledge.
         It is submitted that when  considering  questions  of  a  spiritual
         conversion  it  was  incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  consider  the
         Appellant's spiritual testimony and not just the factual knowledge;
         in any event the judge has failed at all to consider  the   correct
         answers  the  Appellant  gave  to  questions  put  to   him   about
         Christianity at the  hearing  and  has  focused  entirely  on  some
         responses at interview; it is submitted  that  the  judge  was  not
         entitled to  pick  and  choose   which  parts  of  the  Appellant's
         evidence he wished to rely upon to  reach  an  adverse  credibility
         finding;  it  is  submitted  that  the  judge's  approach  to   the
         Appellant's conversion is insufficient and unsuitable."

12.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge in summarising the  Appellant's  evidence
    before him had inter alia this to say so  far  as  it  related  to  the
    Appellant's claimed conversion to Christianity.

         "15. He was asked then about his religion whether he had  converted
             to the Catholicism. He  said  that  Catholicism  was  part  of
             Christianity.


         16.  He was asked about the rallies and meetings that  he  attended
             and he said that he had contacted them  and went to  meetings.
             He last went the Wednesday before the hearing. It was  put  to
             him in his asylum interview that he had  said  that  the  last
             time he had been was in 2010 and he said that he  had  started
             again in August 2015. He had told them that he needed a letter
             of support of them.


         17.  He was asked why he had said he was a Muslim in his  screening
             interview and he said that they  asked  me  what  was  in  his
             passport, he had lost  his passport at the time.  He said that
             he was vague because he was learning about the religion and he
             did not have a good guide to help him.  He was  asked  whether
             he was just simply claiming to be  a  Christian  to  help  his
             claim. He said he did not even think about that. He said there
             were twelve apostles.  Judas had betrayed Jesus. It was put to
             him that he had claimed to be handing out Jehovah's Witnesses'
             leaflets at one point and why would he do that,  and  he  said
             that they had taken him with  them.  He  said  that  Jehovah's
             Witnesses believers .... he went to the church.   He  said  he
             had made a few mistakes but he knew it now."

13.  In summarising the submissions of the  party's  representatives  before
    him, the Judge's summary of the closing submissions of the  Appellant's
    representative  suggests  that  scant  reference  was   made   by   the
    representative to the Appellant's claimed  conversion  to  Christianity
    save that at paragraph 29  the  Judge  recorded  that  the  Appellant's
    representative  in  stating  that  there  were  three  aspects  to  the
    Appellant's claim maintained  that  "each  aspect  was  dealt  with  by
    independent evidence".

14.  In summarising the Respondent's representative's submissions the  Judge
    noted the following submission:

         "27.  As  to  his  religious  conversion,  although  the  documents
             provided were accepted as genuine, it was  not  accepted  that
             his claimed conversion was. In his screening interview he said
             that he was Muslim, it was not accepted that he was asked what
             was in his passport."

15.  The Judge at paragraph 30 of his  decision  pointed  out  that  he  had
    considered

         "All of the evidence in this case including that to  which  I  have
         not specifically referred and reached the following conclusions.  I
         am  satisfied  the  Appellant  has  told  the   truth   about   his
         identification and nationality but I am afraid to say that that  is
         where his credibility ends.  He has told so many untruths  that  he
         has clearly lost sight of where his lies end and the truth begins".

16.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge proceeded to  comprehensively  reason  as
    to why he had reached that  conclusion  and  made  adverse  credibility
    findings as to the Appellant's claimed past experiences in  Bangladesh,
    that are not the subject of the appeal before me,

17.  At paragraph 39 of his decision the Judge continued:-

         ".. that simply leaves then the last element of his claim which  is
         his conversion to Christianity."

18.  It would be as well to set out below the judge's  adverse  findings  in
    that regard as follows:

         "40. The Appellant says that he was converted in a Catholic  Church
             in  Scotland.  He  has  not  provided  any  evidence  of   his
             connection to St Peter's Church. In interview he said that  he
             had been  delivering  leaflets  for  Jehovah's  Witnesses  and
             confirmed this was before me.  He actually called them  fellow
             believers. I am not sure how accurate a statement  that  would
             be.  He clearly has no loyalty to any denomination. In support
             of his claimed conversion he has provided a  letter  from  the
             Reverend Peter Wright of the Evangelical Church who  performed
             his christening while in detention, clearly not Catholic.   He
             also provided a supporting letter from a Pastor in  a  Baptist
             Church. I accept that these two letters are genuine  and  that
             the writers have no doubt a genuinely held belief. I note that
             Mr Richards actually makes no comment as to the genuineness of
             the  Appellant's   conversion,   simply   referring   to   the
             practicalities of him requiring a Bible in  Bengali.   It  was
             clear during the interview that, despite him claiming to  have
             converted since 2012, the there years since then did little to
             add to his knowledge of his  faith.   He  had  no  ideas  what
             Easter was about.   Although  he  knew  that  there  were  two
             testaments  he  clearly  had  only  a   scant   knowledge   of
             Christianity.  I am sad to say it seems to me that this  is  a
             cynical attempt by him to create a claim where none exists.  I
             am not satisfied of his conversion  or  of  his  intention  to
             continue to  worship  if  returned  and  I  am  therefore  not
             satisfied that he would be at risk of persecution on return to
             Bangladesh because of his religious beliefs.

         41.  As I have already stated, the Appellant has shown  himself  to
             be someone who is prepared to lie and produce false  documents
             both to the authorities and even to Courts  in  order  to  get
             what he wants.  He  cannot   be  trusted  to  be  telling  the
             truth."

19.   The  Judge  repeated  that  having  considered  the  evidence  in  its
    totality, both oral and documentary that the Appellant  had  failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof upon him to  the  requisite  standard  to
    establish that he had a well-founded fear that he would  be  persecuted
    for a Convention reason if he was now to be returned to Bangladesh.

20.  The appeal before me is concerned only with  the  question  of  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error of law of a nature such  as
    to require his decision to be set aside.   It is only if that  question
    returns a positive answer that it is open to the  Tribunal  to  disturb
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

21.  In that regard I have also taken account of the  Rule  24  response  of
    the Respondent in her letter dated 27 April 2016  where  the  following
    was stated:

         "The Respondent opposes the Appellant's  appeal.  In  summary,  the
         Respondent will submit inter alia that the Judge of the  First-tier
         Tribunal directed himself appropriately."


         Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker  granted  limited  permission  in  this
         matter finding that it is arguable that the judge  failed  to  give
         adequate weight or provide adequate reasons for placing  little  or
         no weight on the evidence of the witnesses that the Appellant was a
         genuine convert. It is arguable that picking  answers  tainted  the
         approach to the assessment of his claimed conversion.  Judge  Coker
         finds it arguable that the First-tier erred in law in the  findings
         that this Appellant was not a convert to Christianity.


         It would be submitted that the judge considered fully the issues of
         Christianity, noting at paragraphs 15 and 27 the answers given   by
         the Appellant in interview. At paragraph 32  the  judge  finds  the
         Appellant 'consistently tried  to  disassociate  himself  with  the
         answers he gave in interview. The truth is he told them  he  was  a
         Muslim and  never  mentioned  his  Christianity  in  his  screening
         interview.  This wholly undermines his claimed conversion.  At  the
         hearing he actually claimed to have gone  out  door  to  door  with
         Jehovah's Witnesses even describing them as fellow believers.  This
         is palpable nonsense'.


         The  judge  goes  on  to  consider  the  claimed  conversion   from
         paragraphs 39 - 40 of the determination. At paragraph 40 the  judge
         (having considered the RFRL in paragraphs 35-40) finding that  'the
         Appellant has clearly no loyalty to any  denomination  ...  It  was
         clear during interview despite him claiming to  have  converted  in
         2012 the three years since then did little to add to his  knowledge
         of his faith. He had no idea what Easter was about and although  he
         knew that there were two  testaments  he  clearly  only  had  scant
         knowledge of Christianity.

         The judge finds this is a cynical attempt by him to create a  claim
         where none exists.  The judge finds that he is not satisfied of his
         conversion or his intention to continue to worship if returned  and
         therefore not satisfied that he would be at risk of persecution due
         to his religious beliefs.


         It is submitted the judge has dealt with the issue of  Christianity
         including the evidence of Reverend Peter Wright of the  Evangelical
         Church who baptised him whilst  detained  and  the  letter  from  a
         Pastor in a Baptist Church.


         It will be respectfully submitted that looked at on  the  facts  of
         this Appellant's lack of knowledge  of  Christianity  and  lack  of
         'loyalty' to any denomination, ... Catholicism, Jehovah's  Witness,
         Evangelical and Baptist, it is difficult to see  how  any  rational
         Tribunal could reach an alternative conclusion that this  Appellant
         is making a 'cynical attempt to create a claim where none exists."

22.  I have considered the bundle of documents supplied by  the  Appellant's
    solicitors before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  the  supplementary
    bundle before the Judge and those placed before me today.

23.  Insofar as they relate  to  the  Appellant's  claimed  conversion,  the
    Appellant over paragraphs 10-14 of his statement dated 5  January  2016
    had this to say:

         "10. In response to paragraph 36 of the refusal letter  I  wish  to
             clarify that I provided my baptism certificate to  corroborate
             my conversion to Christianity.  In relation to my knowledge of
             Christianity I believe I have to  explain  why  I  decided  to
             conversion in the first place.  Back in Bangladesh, I  believe
             I was a very good person but  have  already  received  bad  in
             return. I tried to fight for the freedom of my country and for
             the  people  and  in  return  I  was  beaten,   tortured   and
             persecuted. When I got to this country I was helpless.  I  had
             no guidance.  Then I found some amazing people in Scotland who
             helped me out of Christian charity. I  started  asking  myself
             why all these people were so nice to me and realised they were
             all Christians.  I started  believing  being  Christian  meant
             being good and I felt I was like that so I  started  following
             them.  I started going to church with them  and  listening  to
             mass.  I never had any  sort  of  official  teaching  and  the
             language barrier was also an issue.  All I  knew  I  basically
             taught myself by trying to read the Bible and going to church.



         11.   It  was  not  until  I  reached  the  detention   centre   at
             Harmondsworth  that  I  was  given  a   proper   teaching   on
             Christianity.  I would meet daily with Paul who was a preacher
             at the detention centre and speaks  Bengali  or  Patrick,  the
             reverend  of  the  centre  and  we  would  discuss  the  Bible
             passages.  He basically went through  the  whole  of  the  New
             Testament over a period of approximately two or three  months.
             I had the opportunity to have a much deeper  Knowles  of  this
             religion and I followed  all  the  steps  to  be  able  to  be
             baptised as a Christian.  I was,  in  fact,  baptised  by  the
             reverend of the detention centre on 1 June 2015.  Even  before
             having a certificate I felt I was a Christian because I  am  a
             Christian in my heart and in my  brain.   The  certificate  is
             just a confirmation of this, a piece of paper.

         12.  Since I was released from detention in July 2015 I  have  been
             practising my religion by going to church and also in  a  more
             intimate way by praying on my own when I cannot go to  church.
             When I go to church I normally attend the  Evangelical  Church
             in Chesham."

24.  At paragraph 14 of his  statement,  the  Appellant  stated  that  as  a
    Christian convert he would be targeted in  Bangladesh  because  he  was
    born into a Muslim family and that he would not be free to practice his
    religion anywhere in the country and that he would be seen as a traitor
    to Islam and would be persecuted for it.

25.  I have reminded myself that at paragraph 30 of his decision, the  Judge
    stated that he had considered all the evidence in the  case  "including
    that which is not specifically referred to ..."  Further,  that  whilst
    the Judge was required to explain why he reached  his  conclusions,  he
    was  not  required  to  assemble  and  set  out  in  the  determination
    everything that was capable of supporting a contrary  view.   The  fact
    remains however that there is no reference to what the Appellant had to
    say as regards his claimed conversion in the above statement.

26.  Nonetheless as  the  judge  reminded  himself,  the  onus  was  on  the
    Appellant to prove his claim to the  requisite  standard  and  although
    this is not mentioned by the Judge in his decision, it is perhaps  from
    the Appellant's point of view regrettable that the Reverend Wright  was
    not present at the hearing to give oral  evidence  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf.  I do not know whether indeed the Appellant made any attempt to
    secure his attendance for that purpose. It is not for me  to  speculate
    and it may be that there were logistical reasons as to why the Reverend
    could not attend.

27.  The grounds upon which permission to appeal  was  granted  stated  that
    Chaplain Paul Harland Haralnd  attended  the  hearing  to  support  the
    Appellant although I am told that he did not give oral evidence.

28.  It  is  clear  that  the  Judge  having  reached  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant's claimed conversion and motivation and his account  of  past
    events in Bangladesh were not credible, that in consequence, he did not
    proceed to consider whether even taking the Appellant's claim  in  that
    regard at its highest, there was satisfactory background  material/case
    law guidance to support  the  Appellant's  claim  as  set  out  in  his
    Counsel's skeleton  argument  before  him  at  paragraph  22  that  the
    Appellant feared persecution on  return  from  the  Awami  League,  the
    current ruling government and from society, government  and  vigilantes
    due to his conversion to Christianity.

29.  Miss Head on behalf of the Appellant submitted to me  that  she  relied
    on the grounds and maintained that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    given insufficient reasons for dismissing the evidence in  the  letters
    from the Reverend and the Pastor, he having accepted that  the  authors
    of those letters were genuine religious  leaders  and  Christians.  She
    maintained that insufficient weight was placed on what they said  about
    the Appellant's conversion. It was incumbent on the  Judge  to  explain
    why he did not accept the testimony of these two  church  leaders  that
    the Appellant was a genuine convert and having accepted their  evidence
    to be genuinely  reliable  and  that  they  were  individuals  of  some
    standing, the Judge was required to give some reasons as to why he  did
    not,  in  such  circumstances,  accept  that  their  knowledge  of  the
    Appellant had led to a genuine conversion.

30.  Whilst Miss Head accepted  that  neither  gave  oral  evidence  at  the
    hearing in support of the Appellant's  appeal,  the  content  of  their
    letters was not challenged.  Miss Head took issue with the last line of
    paragraph 32 of  the  Judge's  decision,  namely  "At  the  hearing  he
    actually  claimed  to  have  gone  out  door  to  door  with  Jehovah's
    Witnesses, even describing them as fellow believers. This  is  palpable
    nonsense".

31.  Miss Head continued that it was  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  they
    were fellow believers and that for the Judge to say "palpable nonsense"
    adversely impacted on his other reasoning.

32.  Miss Head submitted that whilst at paragraph 40 of  his  decision,  the
    Judge had dealt with the conversion he had failed to  take  account  of
    the Appellant's answers at interview or the direct answers he had given
    in oral evidence at the hearing.

33.  Whilst she accepted it was "an  interesting  point"  that  one  had  to
    consider the Judge's reasoning as a whole and not just in isolation  in
    terms of the Appellant's claimed conversion, the fact remained that the
    Appellant's claimed conversion to Christianity was "a separate point of
    his case and required a separate assessment".

34.   When I asked Miss Head if that was not the  approach  that  the  Judge
    had taken, she responded that it  "was  a  flawed  assessment  for  the
    reasons I have given in that the judge has been selective in  terms  of
    the negative aspects".  Miss Head submitted that the judge  had  chosen
    to rely purely on the negative rather than add sufficient weight to the
    evidence of the two ministers as to the genuineness of the  Appellant's
    conversion.

35.  I then heard the submissions of Mr Duffy for the  Respondent  to  which
    in response, Miss Head in further reference  to  paragraph  40  of  the
    decision, repeated that the Judge had been  selective.

36.  I reserved my decision which I  now give.

Assessment

37.  I have considered with care both the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, his  decision  and  the  submissions  of  the  parties'
    representatives before me.

38.  I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  materially
    err in law within his decision.  I am satisfied that upon a reading  of
    the Judge's decision as a  whole,  it  is  apparent  that  he  directed
    himself appropriately and gave cogent reasons as to why  the  Appellant
    was not credible and in those circumstances he was  entitled  to  allow
    those adverse credibility findings to inform his view as to whether the
    Appellant's  conversion  (described  by  Mr  Duffy   in   his   closing
    submissions to me as ("an eleventh hour  conversion")  was  genuine  or
    not.

39.  I find that contrary to the assertion in the  grounds,  the  Judge  did
    give adequate and appropriate reasons  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    claimed conversion.

40.  Such is readily apparent upon a consideration and reading of  paragraph
    40 of the decision as a whole that I  have  set  out  above.   In  that
    paragraph, the Judge clearly acknowledged the evidence of the  Reverend
    and the Pastor and accepted that their letters were  genuine  and  that
    the views that they expressed as to the genuineness of the  Appellant's
    conversion were sincerely  held,  but  he  proceeded  to  identify  the
    reasons as to why on his consideration of  the  evidence,  he  did  not
    agree.

41.  Indeed, at paragraph 41, the Judge continued that  as  he  had  earlier
    stated, the Appellant had shown himself "to be someone who is  prepared
    to lie and produce false documents both to the authorities and even  to
    courts in order to get what he  wants.  He  cannot  be  trusted  to  be
    telling the truth."

42.  The Judge continued at paragraph 42 to stress that he  had  had  regard
    to the totality of the evidence both oral and documentary in  reasoning
    his conclusion that he must dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

43.  The Judge was entitled to find upon his consideration of the  evidence,
    that the Appellant's lack of knowledge  of  Christianity  and  lack  of
    clarity as to whether he followed Catholicism or Jehovah's Witnesses or
    the Evangelical and Baptist Church, (and bearing in mind all his  other
    sustainable reasons for finding the Appellant was not credible) that so
    far as this particular aspect of the Appellant's claim was concerned it
    was no more than a "cynical attempt by him to create a claim where none
    exists".

44.  One has to bear in mind, that as found and  noted  by  the  Judge,  the
    Appellant initially claimed that he belonged to and was baptised by the
    Roman Catholic Church. However it then became apparent that he had been
    baptised when in  immigration  detention  by  the  Church  of  England.
    Jehovah's Witnesses are a sect that are completely different  from  the
    Roman Catholic Church.  There is reference to a Baptist Church but that
    is a Protestant Church. Then there is a  reference  to  an  Evangelical
    Church.

45.  It is apparent the  Judge  took  all  these  factors  into  account  in
    concluding that he did not believe the genuineness of  the  Appellant's
    claimed conversion despite the letters from the Reverend Wright and the
    Pastor.

46.  I find that that the Judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  to  be  an
    apparent member/ follower of four distinct elements  of  the  Christian
    faith was inconsistent with membership of a Christian Church and it was
    therefore open to  the  Judge  for  that  reason  and  others  that  he
    identified in his decision, to reach the conclusion that he did.

47.  In considering the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision,  I  have  been
    mindful of the case law guidance in Shizad (Sufficiency of reasons; set
    aside) [2013] UKUT 00085  (IAC)  the  head  note  of  which  states  as
    follows:

         "(1)     Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation
             of the conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal  is
             determined,  those  reasons  need  not  be  extensive  if  the
             decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to the material
             accepted by the judge.


         (2)  Although a decision may contain an  error  of  law  where  the
             requirements to give adequate reasons are not met,  the  Upper
             Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the First-
             tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection of law, the
             fact-finding process cannot be  criticised  and  the  relevant
             country guidance  has  been  taken  into  account  unless  the
             conclusion the judge draws from  the  primary  data  were  not
             reasonably open to him or her."

48.  In Shizad it was made clear  that  reasons  for  conclusions  in  these
    central issues of appeal need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a
    whole makes sense. In the present case and upon my consideration of the
    Judge's decision, I find that comprehensive reasons  were  provided  by
    the Judge for  his  conclusions.   This  is   not  a  case  where  such
    reasoning could in  any  sense  be  described  as  inadequate.   It  is
    apparent that the Judge's decision  reveals  no  misdirection  of  law.
    Further, the Judge's fact finding process cannot be criticised.

49.  Mindful also of the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R (Iran)  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 982 I find that it cannot be said that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge findings were irrational and/or Wednesbury unreasonable  such  as
    to amount to perversity.  It cannot be said that they were  inadequate.
    This is not a case where the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  reasoning  as
    to the appellant's claimed is such that  the  Tribunal  was  unable  to
    understand the thought processes  that  he  employed  in  reaching  his
    decisions.

50.  I find the Judge  properly  identified  and  recorded  the  matters  he
    considered to be critical to his  decision  on  the  issue  as  to  the
    genuiness of the Appellant's claimed conversion to Christianity  raised
    before him in this appeal.  The findings he made in  this  regard  were
    clearly open to him on the evidence and thus sustainable in law.

Decision

51.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law and I order that it shall stand.

52.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an anonymity  direction.  There  was
    no application before me to remove  it  and  it  therefore  remains  in
    place.


Signed                                  Date 3 June 2016

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge

