
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05720/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th September 2016                    |On 27th September 2016            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                               MR SAMATAR [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown (instructed by Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Appellant in relation to a Decision and  Reasons  of  Judge  J  S  Law
      promulgated on the  27th  January  2016  by  which  he  dismissed  the
      Appellant's asylum and humanitarian protection claim.

   2. The Appellant claims to be a member of the Midgan clan from Afgoye  in
      Somalia and to fear Al-Shabab.

   3. This was not the Appellant's first appeal.  He  had  earlier  had  his
      appeal dismissed by Judge Hall and that decision upheld by a  decision
      of Designated Immigration Judge Lewis promulgated  in  2010.   He  was
      found to be without credibility.  He was found to  be  from  Djibouti,
      not Somalia and thus not at risk.

   4. There was then,  in  2013,  an  appeal  in  relation  to  his  brother
      (confirmed by DNA evidence) where  his  brother  succeeded  under  the
      Refugee reunion provisions and then entered the UK to join his wife.

   5. Judge Law heard from both the Appellant and his brother and  dismissed
      the appeal.

   6. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was  granted  assert  that
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge misapplied Devaseelan [2003] Imm  AR  1,
      ignored the findings of Judge Owens  in  2013  who  had  accepted  his
      brother's identity as a  Somali  national  born  in  Afgoye  and  gave
      inadequate reasons for rejecting the  brother's  nationality,  finding
      that the passport could not be relied upon as it had expired.

   7. It is clear from the Decision and  Reasons  that  Judge  Law  did  not
      address his mind to the significance of the findings  in  relation  to
      the brother's identity and his  rejection  of  the  passport  evidence
      because it had expired bordered on the perverse.

   8. On the basis of his rejection of the brother's nationality he followed
      the earlier determination and found this Appellant not to be Somali.

   9. The determination cannot stand as the brother's accepted  identity  is
      clearly directly relevant evidence.

  10. The Judge cannot be said to have applied anxious scrutiny to the  case
      and as a result of his findings  gave  no  consideration  to  risk  on
      return to Somalia.

  11. I find the First-tier Tribunal made material  errors  of  law  in  the
      Decision and Reasons and set it aside in its entirety.

  12. As the Appellant has not had his claim to fear persecution in  Somalia
      properly considered in the First-tier Tribunal it is appropriate  that
      the appeal be remitted to that Tribunal for a full rehearing.




   Decision

      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that  it  is
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.

      There having been no application for an anonymity order I do not  make
      one.


Signed   Date 20th September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
