

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/05235/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                   |Promulgated                          |
|On 4 February 2016                 |              On 22 February 2016    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                           KANAGARATNAM THIVAKARAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr P Nathan (counsel) instructed by Kanaga,
solicitors.
For the Respondent:      Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2, This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Abebrese promulgated on 1st  October  2015,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 22 November 1992  and  is  a  national  of  Sri
Lanka.


4. On  12  March  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for asylum.

The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Abebrese ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 26 November  2015  Designated  Judge
Garratt gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "The grounds are arguable on the basis that the appellant's  responses
      in asylum interview, particularly to questions 146 and 185, claim that
      the hooded man was present on only one occasion at the point of arrest
      of the appellant. Paragraph 33 of the decision suggests that the Judge
      has misunderstood the evidence in this respect. It  is  also  arguable
      that the Judge's erroneous conclusion is material to other findings."

The Hearing

7. (a) Mr Nathan, for the appellant, told me that the  Judge  had  taken  an
incorrect approach to the assessment of credibility. He told me that  it  is
trite law that credibility should be assessed in the round,  but  the  Judge
had based his findings on  credibility  entirely  on  the  asylum  interview
record which, he told me, was flawed. He reminded me that  the  respondent's
bundle contains a psychiatric report confirming that  the  appellant  has  a
diagnosis of PTSD, and that there is an  expert  report.  He  told  me  that
there were corroborating witnesses, but that at [42]  the  Judge  failed  to
make any reference to the corroborating account of membership  of  a  family
with LTTE connections,  and  to  corroborated  evidence  of  attending  LTTE
demonstrations in the UK.

(b) Mr Nathan told me that the Judge had disregarded  the  evidence  of  the
appellants corroborating witnesses, and rejected  the  expert  evidence  and
the psychiatric report solely because the Judge found that  the  appellant's
performance at asylum interview undermined his overall credibility.

(c) He told me that the decision was tainted by a  material  error  of  fact
because the Judge confused the evidence about the presence of a  threatening
hooded  man  at  the  Joseph  internment  camp.  He  urged  me  to  set  the
determination aside and to remit this case to the  first-tier  to  determine
of new.

8. Mr Tarlow for the respondent told me that if there is an  error  in  this
decision in relation to the account of intervention by the  hooded  man,  it
is not a material error of law. He told me that the  tribunal  made  adverse
credibility findings on the evidence of the appellant  and  referred  me  to
[35] to [43] of the decision, telling me that there the  Judge  sets  out  a
careful analysis of the evidence before making findings of fact  which  were
open to the Judge, and then taking country guidance in the case  of  GJ  and
Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  Mr
Tarlow told me that in light of the case of GJ, the Judge's conclusion  that
the appellant will not be at risk on return to Sri Lanka was  a  finding  of
fact which was available for the Judge to make. He asked me to  dismiss  the
appeal and to allow the decision to stand.

 Analysis

9. Between [20] and [27] the Judge rehearses the evidence; he commences  his
credibility findings at  [28].  The  Judge's  starting  point  is  that  the
account the appellant gives of arrest and detention is  inconsistent  &  not
credible. Between [29] & [34] the Judge tries to resolve  conflicts  in  the
evidence almost entirely by reference to the record of asylum interview.

10. Only after rejecting the appellant's evidence as lacking in  credibility
does the Judge move on to consider the  report  prepared  by  Andres  Martin
([36] of the decision). Mr Martin offers the opinion that the appellant  has
injuries consistent with torture and caused by a narrow hot instrument;  but
the Judge summarily dismisses Mr Martin's conclusions and  finds  "...  that
the evidence in relation to the scarring is rejected by the tribunal as  not
being credible."

11. In M(DRC) 2003 UKIAT 00054 the Tribunal said that it was wrong  to  make
adverse  findings  of  credibility  first  and  then  dismiss  the   report.
Similarly, in  Ex parte Virjon B [2002] EWHC 1469, Forbes J  found  that  an
Adjudicator had been wrong to use adverse credibility findings  as  a  basis
for  rejecting  medical  evidence  without  first  considering  the  medical
evidence itself.  In HE (2004) UKIAT 00321  the Tribunal  said  that  "where
the report is specifically relied on as a factor  relevant  to  credibility,
the adjudicator should deal with it as an integral part of the  findings  on
credibility, rather than just as an add on, which  does  not  undermine  the
conclusions to which he would otherwise come".  However, the  Tribunal  also
said that where the report simply recounts a history which  the  Adjudicator
is minded to reject and contains  nothing  which  does  not  depend  on  the
truthfulness of the appellant, the part which it can play in the  assessment
of credibility is negligible.

12. In Mazrae (2004) EWCA Civ  1235  the  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  the
Adjudicator's approach to credibility was flawed in  that  she  appeared  to
have  reached  an  adverse  finding  on  credibility  based  solely  on  the
appellant's own account, a finding which she went on to say was  not  shaken
by the background material and an  expert  report,  having  considered  them
separately. Although the application was refused for  various  reasons  Lord
Justice Sedley admitted to  having  grave  doubts  about  the  Adjudicator's
reasoning in  this  respect  and  said  that  the  Adjudicator  should  have
considered and  evaluated  all  the  evidence  together  -  the  appellant's
account, the medical report and expert report, rather than  dismissing  each
in isolation from each other.

13. At [38] the Judge finds that the appellant's diagnosis of PTSD  has  got
nothing to do with his account of events in Sri Lanka. In the last  sentence
of [38], the Judge specifically states ".... The tribunal does not  find  it
credible that the appellant was indeed arrested  and  subsequently  detained
and tortured as claimed."

14. Although the Judge correctly takes  guidance  in  the  case  of  GJ  and
others at [43], he does  so  after  taking  an  incorrect  approach  to  the
psychiatric and expert evidence.  The  Judge  should  have  considered  each
strand of evidence before reaching conclusions as to credibility. The  Judge
does not adequately explain why he rejects both the psychiatric  report  and
the expert evidence. I find that that is not just an error of law, it  is  a
material error of law. If the evidence in this case had been  considered  in
the  round,  a  different  conclusion  may  have   been   reached.   It   is
realistically  possible  that  if  the  evidence  of  Dr  Martin   and   the
psychiatric report has been considered correctly,  then  the  appellant  may
have been found to be a credible and reliable witness.

15. I must find that the decision is tainted by a material error of  law.  I
therefore set the decision aside

16. The Judge's  decision  cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
entirety. All matters must be determined of new.

REMITTAL TO FT

17. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:


    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. I find that this case should be  remitted  because  of  the  nature  and
extent of the judicial fact finding which will be necessary to make  a  just
decision in this case. In this case none of the  findings  of  fact  are  to
stand.

19. I remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
House, before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Abebrese.

CONCLUSION

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

21. I set aside the decision. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.

Signed                                                              Date 12
February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
