
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05800/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 24th July 2015                    |On 5th August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION given)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paul Draycott (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes, promulgated on 16th July 2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 29th April 2014.  In the determination, the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on 10th
    January 1997.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent  dated
    31st May 2013, refusing his application for asylum under paragraph 339C
    of HC 395, and his application for humanitarian protection, on  grounds
    that if he is returned to Afghanistan his paternal uncle would hand him
    over to the Taliban or possibly kill him.   The  Appellant's  claim  is
    that his family  members  are  unable  to  protect  him.   He  believes
    additionally that the authorities in Afghanistan  are  also  unable  to
    protect him and that he is unable to relocate elsewhere in Afghanistan.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that his father was in the  Taliban  and  away
    from home for lengthy periods of time returning only occasionally,  and
    at night before going away again.  The Appellant states that he did not
    see much of his father.  Nor, did he speak to him.   He  did  not  know
    what his father did and only notes what his mother has told  him.   His
    father died some years ago.  The body was not returned to  the  family.
    There was no funeral.  The Appellant has not  been  formally  educated.
    After his father died, his mother was  supported  by  her  brother  who
    lived nearby and was quite wealthy but the Appellant did not know  what
    he did.  His mother married his father's brother.  The brother was also
    in the Taliban.  He also rarely came home.  When he did arrive, he left
    as his father used  to  leave.   An  intention  was  expressed  by  the
    Appellant's stepfather of getting the Appellant to  join  the  Taliban.
    When this happened, the Appellant's mother and brother arranged for  an
    agent to bring the Appellant to the UK leaving his mother  and  younger
    brother in Afghanistan.

 4. The Respondent rejected these claims.  It was  noted  that  there  were
    differences in  what  the  Appellant  had  said  about  the  events  in
    Afghanistan and in respect of his journey to  the  UK.   The  Appellant
    suggesting that his father earned money by fighting for the Taliban was
    inconsistent with the evidence set out in paragraph 23.  The  Secretary
    of State took the view that the Appellant had been  inconsistent  about
    whether his paternal uncle had told the Appellant and his brother about
    his plans or whether the Appellant had been told by his mother and  her
    brother after they had been told.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant
    exhibited "the vagueness of his  account  and  the  unexplained  issues
    relating to his family's situation in Afghanistan" (paragraph 19).   He
    did not claim asylum upon arrival and nor upon being fingerprinted.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the determination is inadequately
    reasoned and does not engage with the evidence at various points.

 7. On 5th August 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

 8. On 13th August 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that the  determination  was  entirely
    sustainable.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 24th July 2015, Mr Draycott,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, drew my attention to the fact that  there  had
    been an earlier First-tier Tribunal Determination by Judge  Telford  in
    September 2013, which had been successfully appealed by  the  Appellant
    to  the  Upper  Tribunal  when  Judge  McCarthy,  in  a   determination
    promulgated  on  1st  May  2014,  had  expressed  concerns   with   the
    determination below as to whether the Appellant had provided sufficient
    evidence, bearing in mind his young  age  and  the  lower  standard  of
    proof, to establish that his  father  and  uncle  were  linked  to  the
    Taliban as claimed and it could not be said that the  judge  below  had
    been able to show that such evidence did not exist.

10. First, Judge Parkes erred in stating that,

         "The Appellant's account of his father's lengthy absences and being
         told he was fighting for the  Taliban  does  not  explain  how  his
         father supported the family.  The evidence cited by the Home Office
         indicates that there may be one off  payments  but  not  continuous
         wages or payments ..." (see paragraph 12).

    Mr Draycott submitted that this was patently not the case  because  the
    refusal letter does not  conclusively  rule  out  regular  payments  to
    insurgent fighters (see paragraph 23(a)).   There  was  evidence  that,
    "money is an important recruitment driver.  In a country  (where)  many
    young men are unemployed and poverty is  widespread,  the  offer  of  a
    payment is attractive.  A Taliban fighter can get hundreds  of  dollars
    in a month or even if a week ...".  The expert report from Dr Giustozzi
    confirmed this.

11. Second, the judge materially erred  in  drawing  an  adverse  inference
    against the Appellant by reason that his younger brother  was  left  in
    Afghanistan on the grounds that, "I do not believe that the Appellant's
    departure would have been arranged in circumstances  which  would  have
    left his remaining family member in danger from the man he  claimed  to
    fear  ..."  (paragraph  14).   This  was  unsustainable,  submitted  Mr
    Draycott, because it irrationally failed to have  regard  to  the  fact
    that, when the Appellant arrived in the UK in autumn 2011, his  younger
    brother was only 10 years of age.  The expert report  of  Dr  Giustozzi
    makes it clear that young children as opposed to adolescents,  are  not
    told about or involved in insurgent activities  for  security  reasons.
    Furthermore, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  McCarthy's  determination  of
    1st May 2014 had made it clear that not all children are in  danger  of
    being recruited by the insurgents, but only  those  "men  and  boys  of
    fighting age".

12. Third, in the light of this, it was an error of law for  the  judge  to
    say  that  the  Appellant's  appeal  could  not  succeed,  despite  his
    continuing minority, due to "the basic fact of  the  vagueness  of  his
    account and the unexplained issues relating to his  family's  situation
    in Afghanistan" since Dr Giustozzi had made it clear that the  evidence
    was entirely consistent with the workings of Afghani  society,  whereby
    the Appellant at his age would know very little about  the  affairs  of
    his father and his uncles.

13. Fourth,  the  judge  had  held  (at  paragraph  13)  that  the  claimed
    circumstances in which the Appellant had left Afghanistan would  "given
    the patriarchal nature of Afghan society ... suggest  that  his  mother
    would be in danger from her husband, if her brother would  not  protect
    the Appellant within Afghanistan, why would he be able to  protect  the
    Appellant's mother there", because this was contrary to the  fact  that
    there was no evidence whatsoever before the judge that the  Appellant's
    paternal uncle knew that the Appellant was in the UK or that his mother
    and maternal uncle had arranged his departure.

14. Fifth, the judge erred in concluding that,

         "... given the level of expenditure that  sending  him  to  the  UK
         would represent against the level of wages in Afghanistan I do  not
         believe that the Appellant when he claims that he has not  had  any
         contact with his relatives there.  I do not believe that they would
         have paid the entire costs upfront and would want to know  that  he
         had arrived before paying off the agent" (paragraph 15).

    This is because the refusal letter itself makes it clear  that,  "there
    are no adequate reception arrangements in (Afghanistan) to  which  (the
    Appellant) would be returned if leave to remain was not granted".

15. In his submissions before me, Mr Mills submitted that if one had regard
    to the rule in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT  341,  it
    was plain that, it is generally unnecessary and  unhelpful  for  First-
    tier Tribunal judgments to rehearse every  detail  raised  in  a  case.
    "This leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is not a
    proportionate approach to deciding cases ..."  In this case, the  judge
    has made it quite clear why the Appellant cannot succeed  at  paragraph
    13 of the determination, where he  makes  it  clear  that,  "given  the
    patriarchal nature of Afghan society that would suggest that his mother
    would be in danger from her husband, if her brother could  not  protect
    the Appellant within Afghanistan why would he be able  to  protect  the
    Appellant's mother there?"

16. Second, the Appellant cannot have it both ways.  He maintains  that  he
    is at risk because he is of an age where he is  expected  to  join  the
    insurgency, but his younger brother is not at risk because  he  is  too
    young.  At the same time, the Appellant maintains that he does not know
    anything  about  fighting  in  the  insurgency  and  following  in  the
    footsteps of his father and uncle.  It has to  be  either  one  or  the
    other.  The fact that the Appellant is ambivalent shows that he has not
    been able to make out his claim even on the lower standard.

17. In reply, Mr Draycott  submitted  that  it  was  significant  that  the
    Appellant's father had died and that his mother had remarried and  that
    the stepfather did not have the kind of relationship with the Appellant
    that the Appellant had with his father, so that if it was deemed to  be
    his duty to join the insurgency and to go out and fight, the stepfather
    would put him under pressure to do so.

Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making  of  the  decision  by  the  judge  does
    involve the making of an error on a point of law such that I should set
    aside the decision (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).

19. First, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy had earlier made  it  clear
    in his determination of  1st  May  2014,  that  the  UNHCR  eligibility
    guidelines for assessing the international protection needs  of  asylum
    seekers from Afghanistan, confirms that not all children are in  danger
    of being recruited by the insurgents, but only those "men and  boys  of
    fighting age".  In the circumstances, the judge erred in concluding (at
    paragraph 14) that the Appellant was not credible because  his  younger
    brother was left behind in Afghanistan and that, "I do not believe that
    the Appellant's departure would have  been  arranged  in  circumstances
    which would have left his remaining family member in  danger  from  the
    man he claimed to fear".  However, the  younger  brother  was  only  10
    years of age.  He was not  a  boy  of  fighting  age.   Such  boys  are
    generally over the age of 13 and around 15.

20. Second,  the  judge  erred  in  holding  (at  paragraph  12)  that  the
    Appellant's account of his father's lengthy absences and being told  he
    was fighting for the Taliban does not explain how his father  supported
    the family because "the evidence cited by  the  Home  Office  indicates
    that there may be one off payments but not continuous wages or payments
    and the Appellant has not suggested an alternative occupation or source
    of income ..."  However this is incorrect in the light of  the  refusal
    letter itself which makes it clear (at paragraph  23(a))  that  regular
    payments are made to insurgent fighters and that this is  confirmed  by
    "the European Asylum Support  Office  Report,  'Afghanistan  -  Taliban
    strategies - recruitment'" published in July 2012, which makes it clear
    that  "money  is  an  important  recruitment  driver."   Moreover,   Dr
    Giustozzi makes it clear in his report of 5th September 2013 that, "The
    Taliban and Hezbi Islami ... offer financial incentives to recruits".

21. If this is correct, then the evidence is actually quite plausible given
    that it is internally consistent  as  between  the  way  in  which  the
    Appellant's father behaved and his stepfather  behaved,  both  of  them
    coming home rarely and then leaving at night in a  similar  way.   What
    this suggests,  accordingly,  is  that  the  judge  has  erred  in  his
    concluding paragraphs in stating that  the  Appellant's  appeal  fails,
    notwithstanding his continuing minority, due to "the basic fact of  the
    vagueness of his account and the unexplained  issues  relating  to  his
    family's situation in Afghanistan" (see paragraph 19).

22. Finally, the determination, especially in  circumstances  whereby  DUTJ
    McCarthy has given a very ample and fulsome account of  the  nature  of
    the Appellant's claim following the earlier impugned decision of  Judge
    Telford, is rather short at  just  under  four  pages,  which  is  most
    unusual for an asylum claim, thus suggesting that matters may not  have
    been as well-looked at as they ought to have been.




    Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal at Sheldon Court in Birmingham
    to be determined by a judge other than Judges Parkes and Telford  on  a
    de novo basis because the effect of the error has  been  to  deprive  a
    party before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  and  to  enable
    the party's case to be put and considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    It is important that next time around findings are made on all  of  the
    issues that are put before the Tribunal so as to obviate the  need  for
    this matter to return back to the Upper Tribunal again.

Anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    1st August 2015

