
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/06588/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and reasons promulgated      |
|On the 17th May 2016                 |On the 23rd May 2016                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                       PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                     and
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                                    [K S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:  In person
Respondent: Mr P Deller (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                                  DECISION

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the "FtT) promulgated on 26 October 2015.

 2. The appeal was initially heard by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Drabu  on
    29 January 2016, at which time the  Appellant  was  represented  by  Mr
    Collins (of counsel) and the Respondent was represented by Mr Staunton,
    Senior Office Presenting Officer.

 3. On that day, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Drabu heard full  submissions,
    which are recorded within his record of proceedings and which  we  have
    taken fully into account in reaching our decision. At the conclusion of
    the hearing, the Judge stated that the decision of FtT was  set  aside,
    on the basis that it contained a material error of law.

 4. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Drabu retired on 08 March 2016,  without  a
    written decision having been  promulgated.  The  matter  was  therefore
    listed before us today, for mention.

 5. At today's hearing the events described were confirmed as uncontentious
    by Mr Deller on behalf of the Respondent. Thus the only  issue  for  us
    was whether the appeal should be retained within the Upper Tribunal  or
    remitted to the FtT for rehearing. He also agreed, Judge  Drabu  having
    retired, that the case should be  transferred  to  us  to  prepare  the
    written decision and any consequential order.

 6. Having fully considered all the documentation in  the  case,  including
    the original decision of the FtT, the grounds of appeal, the record  of
    proceedings before Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Drabu,  and  all  the
    documentation contained within the respective bundles, it is  clear  to
    us beyond peradventure that the decision of FtT does  contain  material
    errors of law.

 7. The Appellant is a national of Albania, whose date  of  birth  is  [  ]
    1998. At the date of the first instance hearing, 06 October  2015,  the
    Appellant was a minor. His case is  that  he  had  previously  suffered
    physical abuse and violence at the hands  of  his  father,  who  was  a
    middle ranking police officer in Albania, he  feared  further  violence
    from his father and his father had threatened to kill him.

 8. It is clear, having closely examined the  decision  of  the  FtT,  that
    there was no adequate consideration of the evidence of  the  Appellant,
    particularly in respect of the domestic  violence  he  claims  to  have
    suffered in the past from his father and his  fears  in  the  event  of
    enforced return. Nor  was  there  any  adequate  consideration  of  the
    evidence of the Appellant's mother.

 9. Although the FtT did expressly consider the evidence of the Appellant's
    uncle, who on his own account never  actually  witnessed  any  acts  of
    violence towards the Appellant, and the evidence  of  two  friends  who
    tried to intercede on part of the Appellant with his father, there is a
    clear failure to properly consider the evidence of  the  Appellant  and
    that of his mother. The bald and unparticularised conclusion at [10] "I
    do  not  find  the  witnesses  reliable  or  credible"  is   manifestly
    insufficient.

10. As was stated by the President in the case of MK (duty to give reasons)
    Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC) -

         "A bare statement that  a  witness  was  not  believed  or  that  a
         document  was  afforded  no  weight  is  unlikely  to  satisfy  the
         requirement to give reasons."

11. In this case, the lack of any meaningful consideration of the  evidence
    of the Appellant or that of his mother manifestly fails to  conform  to
    the legal standard in play.

12. Further, the FtT has clearly material erred in law in failing  to  even
    mention, yet alone adequately deal with, the expert report by Dr  James
    Korovilas, which  addresses  the  issues  of  risk  to  the  Appellant,
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.

13. Finally, we conclude that the finding of the FtT at  [14]  relating  to
    the father's conduct on a specific occasion is demonstrably  irrational
    and inadequately reasoned.

14. We consider that there is a substantial amount of further  fact-finding
    required in this case. Remittal is, therefore, appropriate.

    Notice of Decision

      1. The decision of the FtT is set aside, with no preserved findings of
         fact;

      2. The case is remitted back to a newly constituted FtT.


Signed      Dated 17th May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
