
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06154/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast Laganside                    |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms M. O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr M. Brennan, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant in  these  proceedings  is  the  Secretary  of  State.
       However, for convenience I refer to the parties as they were  before
       the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born  on  22  December
       1979. She arrived in the UK on 21  May  2012.  Her  application  for
       asylum was refused and a decision made on 13 June 2012 to remove her
       to Zimbabwe. Her appeal against that decision was allowed by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly after a hearing on 7 August 2013.

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal

    3. In detailing the findings made by the First-tier judge, the basis of
       the appellant's claim is apparent. Judge Farrelly found at [15] that
       the appellant grew up in a village (which at [8] was said to  be  in
       Nyaki district,  North  Matabeleland),  and  that  she  has  limited
       education. She had not claimed any political  views  but  the  judge
       accepted that she had voted for the MDC in the last election.

    4. It was accepted to the lower standard that she lived with her  uncle
       and his wife and that her uncle was employed as a driver for Zanu-PF
       politicians and that he was away for long periods of time working in
       Harare. Again, at [16] he accepted that the appellant was visited by
       three men from the CIO enquiring about her uncle, although  she  did
       not know why they were looking  for  him.  They  assaulted  her  and
       threatened to come back. Her uncle's wife was out at the time of the
       visit when the appellant was assaulted, but having been told of what
       happened decided that they should move  because  the  men  may  come
       back. It seemed "likely" that because the uncle worked for  Zanu-PF,
       the party would have his contact details.

    5. At [20] he stated that it was harder to accept  that  this  incident
       was of such significance that it prompted the appellant's  departure
       from Zimbabwe. She had  never  had  problems  with  the  authorities
       before and the authorities had indicated no interest in her,  rather
       that they were interested in her uncle. He rejected the  account  of
       having had no further contact with her  uncle's  wife,  having  been
       helped by a stranger to  go  South  Africa,  arrange  documentation,
       travelling with her to Belfast and then abandoning her.

    6. At [21] he quoted from [48] of the refusal letter. He stated that he
       found merit in what was  said  in  that  paragraph.  In  essence  it
       suggested that the  warning  and  intimidation  by  the  CIO  simply
       reflect their  tactics  and  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the
       appellant would face consequences. That  paragraph  of  the  refusal
       letter goes on to state that if the CIO were interested in her uncle
       for a reason unknown to her it is not  reasonably  likely  that  she
       would face mistreatment amounting to  persecution   because  of  his
       activities or because she would be  unable  to  provide  information
       about him.

    7. At [22], summarising his findings  he  concluded  further  that  the
       appellant fled and remained in hiding  but that it was not  credible
       that she remained in hiding for two months in an area not  far  from
       her home village (two hours walking distance). It was  not  credible
       that the incident would have led her to leave "in genuine fear".  He
       found that the incident did not cause her to leave Zimbabwe.

    8. After reviewing the authorities on Zimbabwe the  judge  went  on  in
       [32] to decide that the appellant would be safe in her home area, an
       area populated by the Ndebele where  the  MDC  are  strong  and  the
       activities of Zanu-PF restricted. She would be able to  relocate  in
       any event, to Bulawayo, Harare or the areas  where  she  has  family
       connections. The appellant is not educated  but  has  been  able  to
       sustain herself in the past and could do so on return.

    9. In relation to risk, he found at [33] that there is a real risk that
       the appellant would be questioned by  the  CIO  at  the  airport  on
       return. This is because she would be returning from the UK  and  the
       CIO can identify those returned against their  wishes  and  who  are
       potentially failed asylum seekers. Further, the appellant comes from
       an area of MDC support. There are road blocks at  which  the  person
       may be expected to know the latest Zanu-PF party songs.

   10. Lastly, at [34] it  was  concluded  that  on  return  the  CIO  will
       question the appellant  about  her  history.  "Given  that  the  CIO
       operates on intelligence it may be that they have  some  information
       connecting the appellant to uncle. Consequently, in this  situation;
       and indeed even without the link to her uncle; it seemed likely  she
       will be called upon to display her loyalty to the regime." The  only
       way  she  could  display  loyalty   would   be   by   making   false
       representations. He  went  on  to  refer  to  the  decision  in   RT
       (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.

Submissions

   11. The argument for the Secretary of State is  straightforward.  It  is
       that the judge's conclusions about risk on return  are  inconsistent
       with the decision in  HS  (returning  asylum  seekers)  Zimbabwe  CG
       [2007] UKAIT 00094. Mere arrival from the UK would not mean that the
       appellant would be of interest. The credibility  findings  are  such
       that the appellant would not be of interest in the  intelligence-led
       process at the airport.

   12. Mr Brennan also relied on the decision in HS which, he submitted, is
       still good country guidance albeit on a limited  basis.  There  were
       some positive credibility findings made by the First-tier judge, and
       to which I was referred. Although the judge found that the appellant
       was assaulted by the CIO he did not refer to  the  details  of  that
       assault as set out in the appellant's witness statement.

   13. Mr Brennan referred to various parts of the decision in HS. The  CIO
       clearly had an interest in the appellant's uncle and there would  be
       a risk to her by association. It is not asserted that there would be
       adverse interest just  because  she  is  a  returnee.  The  CIO  are
       completely in control of security at the airport.

My conclusions

   14. At the time of hearing before Judge Farrelly,  the  appeals  against
       the decision in EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98
       (IAC) had been allowed and the cases remitted to the Upper Tribunal.
       Thus, before Judge Farrelly the applicable country guidance decision
       was RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083. Subsequently, in
       CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT  00059
       (IAC), the decision in EM was affirmed.  Thus,  by  this  meandering
       route, it is established that before Judge Farrelly, EM did in  fact
       represent the appropriate country guidance.

   15. Neither party before me  suggested  that  anything  turned  on  this
       assessment of the country guidance cases. In the final  analysis,  a
       phrase I use advisedly in this context, I agree. Neither  party  has
       sought to argue an error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal in terms of the incorrect application of country  guidance.
       However, in my assessment of any error of law and  the  consequences
       of such being found, it is necessary to record that the  appropriate
       country guidance was EM.

   16. The issue before me is a relatively narrow one. Did  the  First-tier
       judge err in law in his conclusion that there would be a  real  risk
       of persecution either at the airport or en route to her  home  area?
       If so, what should follow.

   17. The judge's conclusions as to risk on return are to be found at [33]
       and [34]. The risk was found to arise because  the  appellant  comes
       from an area of MDC support and there are road blocks at  which  the
       person may be expected to know the latest Zanu-PF party  songs.  The
       judge also appears to have  concluded  at  [34]  that  the  need  to
       demonstrate loyalty would also arise at the airport  and  she  could
       not be expected to lie.

   18. The Secretary of State's grounds at [5]  contest  the  finding  that
       there would be any requirement  for  the  appellant  to  demonstrate
       loyalty at the airport.

   19. At [266] of EM it was said that the country guidance regarding  risk
       at the airport continues to be as set  out  in  HS,  read  with  the
       findings on that issue in SM and Others (MDC  -  internal  flight  -
       risk categories) Zimbabwe CG [2005] UKIAT 00100  and  AA  (Risk  for
       involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00061.

   20. In RN at [262] the Tribunal stated as follows:

           "It is the CIO, and not the undisciplined militias, that  remain
           responsible for monitoring returns to Harare airport. In respect
           of those returning to the airport there is no evidence that  the
           state authorities have  abandoned  any  attempt  to  distinguish
           between those  actively  involved  in  support  of  the  MDC  or
           otherwise of adverse interest and  those  who  simply  have  not
           demonstrated positive support for or loyalty to  Zanu-PF.  There
           is no reason to depart from the assessment made in HS  of  those
           who would be identified at the airport of  being  of  sufficient
           interest to merit further interrogation and so  to  be  at  real
           risk of harm such as to infringe either Convention."

   21. The country guidance in CM also, in essence,  affirmed  the  country
       guidance in relation to the situation at the point of return as  set
       out in HS, although in CM the Tribunal expressly stated that it  was
       not giving  country  guidance  on  that  issue.  In  any  event,  in
       assessing whether there is any error of law in the decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal in the appeal before me, CM would  more  clearly
       come into play should the decision of the First-tier Tribunal be set
       aside to be re-made.

   22. From RN, the country guidance decision  applied  by  the  First-tier
       judge, it is evident that it is the CIO and not  the  "undisciplined
       militias"  that  are  responsible  for  monitoring  returns  at  the
       airport. In so far as the First-tier judge concluded  at  [34]  that
       the appellant would be required to demonstrate her  loyalty  to  the
       regime at the airport, I consider that he was wrong to have come  to
       that conclusion.

   23. However, the guidance HS from  [264]  is  to  the  effect  that  the
       intelligence led process at the airport is to identify those who may
       be of interest to the regime. The mere fact of returning as a failed
       asylum seeker would not be a basis from which to  conclude  that  an
       individual would be at risk.

   24. Judge Farrelly stated at [34] that "Given that the CIO  operates  on
       intelligence it may be that they have  some  information  connecting
       the appellant to uncle (sic)". For the  Secretary  of  State  it  is
       submitted that this is speculation. What has to  be  borne  in  mind
       however, is that the appellant's account of the CIO having  come  to
       the appellant's home  in  search  of  her  uncle  was  found  to  be
       credible. It was also found to be credible that, as  she  stated  in
       her witness statement, the CIO said that they would come  back,  and
       threatened her as to the consequences  if  she  did  not  give  them
       information as to her uncle's whereabouts.

   25. It is not altogether surprising that the Secretary of  State  should
       characterise as speculation the judge's conclusion that the CIO  (at
       the airport) "may" have some information connecting the appellant to
       her uncle.  The  use  of  that  phrase  could  easily  lead  to  the
       conclusion that this is only speculation. However, on an  assessment
       of the determination as a whole, it  is  apparent  that  what  Judge
       Farrelly was saying was that it is "reasonably  likely"  that  there
       would be information linking the appellant to her uncle. That was  a
       conclusion he was justified in coming to on the basis  that  it  was
       the CIO that came looking for him and the CIO who monitor returns to
       the airport in an intelligence-led process.  The  appellant  is  his
       niece and she has been questioned about him already.

   26. I am satisfied that there was sufficient evidence before  the  judge
       for him to come to the view that it is reasonably likely that  there
       would be further interest in the appellant on return,  that  further
       interest in HS being identified as the point at which the real  risk
       of ill-treatment arises.

   27. On that basis, it is of little significance that the judge concluded
       that the visit by the CIO was not the cause of the appellant leaving
       Zimbabwe (see [20] of the  judge's  determination).  That  does  not
       affect the question of what interest  in  her  there  is  reasonably
       likely to be on return.

   28. Given the area of Zimbabwe that the appellant comes from, I consider
       that the judge was wrong to conclude, as he appears to have done  in
       the last sentence of [33], that she would be at  risk  in  terms  of
       having to show loyalty to the regime en route to her home area. That
       is not consistent with the decision in EM. However,  in  so  far  as
       that amounts to an error of law, it is not  an  error  of  law  that
       requires the decision to be set aside, in the light of  the  judge's
       satisfactory assessment of risk at the point of return.

   29. On the basis of the challenge made to the determination as expressed
       in the grounds and in submissions, I am not satisfied that there  is
       any error of law in the First-tier judge's  decision,  or  at  least
       none that requires the decision to be set aside.

Decision

   30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to allow the appeal on asylum grounds therefore stands.



Anonymity

I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008)   and   consequently,   this   determination
identifies the appellant by initials only. No report  of  these  proceedings
may identify the appellant.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 8/07/13
