
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06216/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14th July, 2017                    |On 16 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                   mrs KK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss  Sane of Counsel instructed by Ison Harrison
Ltd, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


1.   This is the appeal of KK, a national of Sri Lanka, who was born on [  ]
    1959, and who arrived in the United Kingdom illegally on 26th  February
    2011.  She appealed against the decision of  the  respondent  taken  on
    19th March 2015, to  refuse  her  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection and her human rights claim under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of  the
    European Convention.  Her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Chapman at Bradford on 27th February 2017.

2.   The appellant claimed asylum on 22nd March 2011, and her  son,  who  is
    now an adult was dependent on  her  claim.   Initially,  the  appellant
    appealed  the  respondent's  decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Phillips QC heard her appeal on 16th February,2012, and dismissed it on
    18th April 2012, finding,  inter  alia,  that  the  appellant  was  not
    credible and that  she  had  been  dishonest,  either  about  her  late
    husband's or her own, association with the LTTE.  The appellant  sought
    to appeal that decision, but permission to appeal was  refused  by  the
    Upper Tribunal on  7th  August  2012,  and  she  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 13th August 2012.  Subsequently, further submissions  have
    been raised, the most recent on 13th August 2013,  but  the  respondent
    again rejected the appellant's claims in a decision letter  dated  19th
    May, 2015.  The appellant appealed that decision  and  the  appeal  was
    then heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Batiste on 15th June 2015.

3.   The appellant, dissatisfied with that decision appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal found that there had been errors of law
    in the determination, such that  Judge  Batiste's  decision  could  not
    stand.  The matter was remitted for hearing de novo and  thus  it  came
    before Judge Chapman.

4.   The  appellant  has,  unfortunately,  suffered  mental  health  issues,
    initially  quite  seriously.   More  recently  her  mental  health  has
    improved  and  before  the  judge  there  was  a  report  updating  the
    appellant's medical condition from Professor Jenny Shaw,  a  Consultant
    Psychiatrist, who saw the appellant and her son on 28th September 2016,
    and prepared a report on each of them  dated  6th  October  2016.   The
    judge found the appellant not to be credible and dismissed  her  appeal
    on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights  grounds.   The
    appellant challenges that decision  asserting,  amongst  other  things,
    that the judge erred  by  refusing  to  apply  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 2 of 2010  relating  to  vulnerable  appellants,  when
    being asked to find that the appellant was a vulnerable  and  sensitive
    witness, such as to engage that guidance.

5.   At the hearing before me today both representatives agreed  that  there
    had been errors of law in the determination, such  that  it  could  not
    stand.  Miss Pettersen accepted that in the light of  the  contents  of
    the Professor's report, more was required by the judge before  refusing
    to accept that the appellant was  a  vulnerable  witness.   There  were
    allegations of other errors in the grounds, but it is not necessary for
    me to deal with them.

6.   I have concluded that this appeal must be remitted again to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I set aside the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chapman, but of course, on  a  rehearing  of  the  appeal  the  initial
    decision of Judge Phillips QC will be the starting  point  in  applying
    Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka
    [2002]* UKIAT 00702.  The appeal should be heard by a judge other  than
    Judge  Phillips  QC,  Judge  Batiste  and  Judge  Chapman.    A   Tamil
    interpreter will be required and three hours should be allowed for  the
    hearing of the appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

