
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06048/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th January 2016                          |On 1st April 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   mr KVN
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E King instructed by Hammersmith and Fulham
                    Community Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal,  that  is  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent and Mr KVN as the appellant.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed, with permission, against the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal of the appellant against
    the decision of the Secretary of State dated 20th March 2015 to  refuse
    to grant asylum  under  Immigration  Rules.   The  Secretary  of  State
    granted the appellant limited leave to remain for  a  period  exceeding
    one year  in  accordance  with  Home  Office  published  Asylum  Policy
    Instruction on discretionary leave as an unaccompanied  asylum  seeking
    child under Section 83 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

 3. The appellant is a national of Vietnam and his date of birth  is  given
    as [ ] 2000, making him 15 at the date of the hearing.  He  claimed  to
    have departed Vietnam by air in December 2013 and to have travelled  by
    various  means  and   through   various   countries   before   arriving
    clandestinely in the UK in  July  2014.   He  sought  assistance  at  a
    children's centre and was placed in the care  of  Social  Services  and
    claimed asylum on 24th September 2014.

 4. It was said that  he  lived  with  his  parents  in  Haiphong  and  was
    frequently left to his own devices by them.  One day towards the end of
    December 2013 he returned home to find his parents had disappeared  and
    the contents of the house removed to the street.  He was approached  by
    a person by the name of Dung who made arrangements to remove  him  from
    Vietnam to the UK.  He was given a mobile phone without a SIM card  and
    told that he would be given a SIM card on arrival at his destination.

 5. It was maintained that should the appellant return to Vietnam he  would
    be homeless, his parents having disappeared and his house  having  been
    seized by the police and he would be vulnerable to  exploitation  as  a
    child.

 6. The matter came before the First-tier Tribunal who allowed  the  appeal
    and a challenge was made to that decision by the Secretary of State who
    asserted that the judge had made conflicting findings in relation to  a
    material fact as follows

    "At [13] the judge finds  that  the  appellant's  parents  engaged  the
    services of Dung to have the appellant taken to a place of safety.

    At [20]  judge finds that

    'he is highly likely to have been sent from  his  own  country  at  the
    instigation of his parents ... he thus has parents in Vietnam  who  are
    concerned for his wellbeing and have taken steps to look to his  safety
    when they apparently became fugitives'.

    The judge at [21] finds that "means have been identified as a  possible
    useful manner of attempting to trace the appellant's parents ....

    Therefore it is respectfully submitted that the  judge  has  failed  to
    resolve a conflict in evidence in finding  at  22  that  the  appellant
    would be vulnerable to exploitation as one separated  from  his  family
    with no means of family protection.  It is submitted that it  is  clear
    from the previous findings that the appellant has a family  that  cares
    about him and means have been identified to attempt to trace them".

 7. Permission was granted on the basis that the fact the judge found  that
    the appellant had parents in Vietnam concerned for his welfare and  had
    means of contacting those parents had been identified "albeit  not  yet
    successfully utilised" and the fact that the appellant would be removed
    as a lone child was arguably inconsistent.

 8. A Rule 24 response was also served on behalf  of  the  appellant  which
    submitted that the grounds quoted only selectively from  the  findings.
    The judge had accepted that the appellant  had  given  a  credible  and
    coherent account of his  circumstances  in  Vietnam  and  there  was  a
    remaining concern on the part of Social Services about the ability  and
    the willingness of the appellant's parents to care for him should  they
    make an attempt to reclaim him (17).  In particular there had  been  no
    contact between the appellant and his parents since his arrival in  the
    UK and the promised SIM card had not been provided.

 9. The judge was bound to make the decision on the appeal on the basis  of
    the evidence before him at the hearing.   The  possibility  of  contact
    being made some time in the future was not a matter for the appeal  and
    the  findings  were  not  contradictory.   It  was  credible  that  the
    appellant's parents may have provided for his journey  to  the  UK  but
    then be unable or unwilling to resume contact thereafter.

10. Further the Secretary of State had an obligation under Regulation 6  of
    the Asylum Seekers (Reception Conditions) Regulations 2005 (SI  2005/7)
    to carry out tracing of KVN's family and that she had not complied with
    those obligations in this case and therefore could not complain of lack
    of certainty when she had an obligation to  resolve  any  such  alleged
    lacuna.  It was said to be in the best interests of the child to take a
    cautious approach.

    The Asylum Seekers (Reception Conditions) Regulations

    6.-  (1) So as to protect an unaccompanied minor's best interests,  the
             Secretary of State shall endeavour to trace the members of the
             minor's family as soon as possible after the minor  makes  his
             claim for asylum.

         (2)  In cases where there may be a threat to the life or  integrity
             of the minor or the minor's close  family,  the  Secretary  of
             State  shall  take  care  to  ensure  that   the   collection,
             processing and circulation of information concerning the minor
             or his close family is undertaken on a confidential  basis  so
             as not to jeopardise his or their safety.

         (3)  For the purposes of this regulation-

             (a)  an unaccompanied minor means a person below  the  age  of
                  eighteen who arrives in the United  Kingdom  unaccompanied
                  by an adult responsible for him whether by law  or  custom
                  and makes a claim for asylum;

             (b)  a person shall be an  unaccompanied  minor  until  he  is
                  taken into the care of such an adult or until  he  reaches
                  the age of 18 whichever is the earlier;

             (c)  an unaccompanied minor also includes a minor who is  left
                  unaccompanied after he arrives in  or  enters  the  United
                  Kingdom but before he makes his claim for asylum.



The Hearing

11. At the hearing Ms Sreeraman submitted there was  one  sole  ground  for
    challenge which was a failure to resolve the conflicting evidence which
    was found at paragraphs 20 and 21.  On the one  hand  it  was  accepted
    that the appellant had parents who had taken  steps  to  look  for  his
    safety and yet on the other hand it was found that he was an  abandoned
    child.  The appellant was not at risk per se for  a  Convention  reason
    and the judge had erred in applying LQ, without referring  for  example
    to cases such as TN and MA Afghanistan and Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2015] UKSC 40.  I was referred to paragraph 36 of  the
    decision which states as follows

         "The appellants all  contend  that  the  respondent's  decision  to
         reject their asylum claims was vitiated by her failure to carry out
         her tracing duty and, in particular, that they were  prejudiced  by
         the failure because proper inquiries may have produced evidence  to
         support their accounts which the respondent disbelieved".

12. Was the mere fact that there is a lone child  sufficient  to  engage  a
    Convention reason when the parents at paragraph 20 were recorded to  be
    in Vietnam and steps could be taken for the resumption of contact?   In
    these circumstances was it correct  to  go  on  and  allow  the  appeal
    outright?  A failure to trace did not qualify the appellant for  asylum
    and this appellant was not at risk on return.

13. Ms King argued that the essence in the Afghan case authorities was that
    the appellants were prejudiced by the failure because proper  inquiries
    had not been made which  would  have  enabled  them  to  support  their
    accounts which were disbelieved but there were two important ways those
    authorities could be distinguished.  First they concerned  the  tracing
    obligations when the person turned 18 already and in  those  situations
    they could not engage the Convention reason per se.  She  submitted  it
    was not appropriate  to  say  a  lone  child  did  not  come  within  a
    Convention reason.  Secondly the case has dealt with a  scenario  where
    the person was not believed and that the Secretary of State was alleged
    to have  acted  unlawfully  thereby  depriving  the  appellant  of  the
    opportunity to get further evidence.

14. In this case the appellant had been believed and it was the  case  that
    the court heard credible evidence from a social worker that he had  had
    no contact with his parents since he had arrived.   There  was  a  real
    risk that he would be without support on return and therefore the  line
    of authorities which had been produced were of  no  assistance  to  the
    Secretary of State in this case.

15. The Secretary of State had not said that she had  wished  to  undertake
    their own investigations and there was enough  evidence  on  which  the
    judge could safely make a finding regarding the family's support  which
    was likely to be available on return.

16. Ms King submitted that the claim did engage a Convention reason and the
    judge dealt succinctly at paragraph 22 regarding the risk  attached  to
    lone children returning.   There  was  evidence  before  him  that  the
    appellant would be at risk of persecutory  harm  because  he  would  be
    liable to be a street child and/or trafficked.  It  was  accepted  that
    there was evidence from Social Services that there is no  contact  with
    the parents and it was reasonable to conclude that they did not show an
    interest in checking him thereafter.

17. Ms Sreeraman submitted that the  judge  found  there  was  no  risk  of
    trafficking but she accepted that  the  respondent  in  this  case  had
    merely referred the case to the Red  Cross  which  was  not  enough  to
    discharge the duty to trace the parents.  At this  point  Ms  Sreeraman
    submitted that it was open to the judge to allow the matter to remit it
    back to the Secretary of State to make inquiries and that  it  possibly
    should have been allowed to a limited extent.

18. In conclusion I note that there was a very narrow issue  on  which  the
    grounds of challenge to the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    premised and that that was on the failure to resolve the  evidence.   I
    am not persuaded that that in fact is the case  and  I  agree  with  Ms
    King's submission that  the  grounds  do  quote  selectively  from  the
    findings and that when read as a whole it is plain that the judge  made
    rational and logical findings that were open to him on the evidence.

19. Of importance and that which distinguishes this claim from that of  the
    papers referred to in TN and MA, is that this appellant  was  found  by
    the judge at paragraphs 14 and 15 to have given a credible and coherent
    account of his circumstances in Vietnam before leaving. I note that he
    was 13 years old when he left Vietnam and was  now  15  years  old  and
    maintained throughout that he had no contact with his  parents.   There
    remained as the judge found a concern on the part  of  Social  Services
    about the ability and/or willingness of the appellant's parents to care
    for him should they make an attempt to reclaim him, [17],  and  of  key
    importance is that there had been no contact between the appellant  and
    his parents since the arrival in the UK which was some two years  prior
    to the hearing and promulgation of the decision, that means  have  been
    identified to make contact had not yet happened and he would return  as
    a lone child.

20. The second point which is important to distinguish this appellant  from
    the authorities in TN is that this is a child who  is  still  currently
    under the age of 18 and indeed at present only 15 years old.

21. I find that the judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  LQ  (Age
    immutable characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT when coming  to  his
    decision as to whether the appellant was a member of a social group and
    at risk of persecutory harm on return to  Vietnam.   Indeed  the  judge
    finds at paragraph 18 that the appellant  is  an  orphan  and  with  no
    suitable reception facilities would be in a  particular  social  group,
    namely a child vulnerable to exploitation.

22. It was open to the judge to state that the possibility of contact being
    made some time in the future was not  necessarily  a  matter  for  this
    appeal.  The Secretary of State has an obligation under Regulation 6 of
    the Asylum Seekers (Reception Conditions) Regulations 2005 (SI  2005/7)
    to carry out tracing of the appellant's family  and  had  not  complied
    with those obligations in this case.  It was the appellant's case  that
    he was not in contact with his parents  and  indeed  had  not  been  in
    contact with them for the previous two years and it was  not  just  the
    appellant's evidence on which the  judge  relied  but  also  took  into
    account the fact that the social worker's evidence that there had  been
    no contact since the appellant's arrival in the  United  Kingdom  (21).
    The judge records that indeed on the appellant's evidence the  promised
    SIM card was never provided on arrival.  The judge stated  that  "means
    have been identified as a possibly useful manner of attempting to trace
    the  appellant's  parents  but  the  separation  and  lack  of  contact
    remains".

23. It was open to the Secretary of State to remedy this factor and  indeed
    the Secretary of State was under an obligation to remedy  this.   There
    appeared to be no application for an adjournment as at the date of  the
    hearing on behalf of the Secretary of State to make  inquiries  and  it
    was open to the judge to find as he did at paragraph 21

    "were the appellant to be returned now, therefore, it  would  be  as  a
    person who had proven an effective abandonment and loss of contact with
    his parents: no present means of  communication  with  them:  and  thus
    returned to Vietnam as a lone child".

24. That was in essence the judge's conclusion  having  found  against  the
    background of evidence that there was a reasonable degree of likelihood
    of a vulnerability to exploitation for  lone  children  without  family
    support.  The judge was under a duty to make a decision on the evidence
    as it was presented to him as at the  date  of  the  hearing.   It  was
    submitted at the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  there  were  insufficient
    facilities for children on return and the NGOs did not demonstrate that
    they could offer shelter or  practical  assistance  to  lone  children.
    Children were victims of abuse and trafficking and  at  risk  of  being
    street children.  The  judge  accepted  that  the  background  evidence
    established to a reasonable degree of likelihood the  vulnerability  to
    exploitation of lone children without family support and that

         "The appellant has thus proven a present  status  as  a  child  who
         would be vulnerable to  exploitation  as  one  separated  from  his
         family, with no family  means  of  protection,  on  his  return  to
         Vietnam.  This status, on the authority of LQ,  is  not  adequately
         addressed by the procedural measure of deferral of removal  pending
         a majority"[22].

25. On the findings overall and a reading of the decision in context, I  do
    not accept that there was a failure to resolve facts.

26. Had the Secretary of State wished  to  explore  the  issue  of  contact
    further before the decision on asylum was made, it was open to  her  to
    seek to either delay the asylum decision or to seek an  adjournment  of
    the hearing but the respondent did neither,  apparently  being  content
    for the matter to proceed on the available evidence.

27. For these reasons I find there is no error  of  law  and  the  decision
    should stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 10th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

