



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06504/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6th November 2013                            |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                              ms hui ping kang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Ficklin
For the Respondent:    Mr M Steward, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal brought by the Appellant, a citizen of China who  was
    born on 16th September 1985 against the determination of  a  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  (Judge  Manuel)  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 20th June 2013 refusing her leave to enter the
    United Kingdom and refusing to grant her asylum or any  other  form  of
    international protection.

 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 15th June 2007 and  claimed
    asylum at port. She then absconded and her claim for asylum was refused
    on  noncompliance  grounds.  She  submitted  further  grounds  on  25th
    November 2011 and these were accepted as a fresh claim.

 3. In pursuing her claim she stated that she could not return to China  as
    she would be persecuted on account of her  Christianity  and  the  fact
    that she has now become a Jehovah's Witness. In addition she has  given
    birth to a child and by the time of the hearing before Judge Manuel  in
    August 2013, was pregnant with her second child. She claimed  therefore
    that she would also face persecution in  China  and  possible  forcible
    sterilisation.

 4. Judge Manuel did not accept  the  Appellant's  account  of  events  and
    concluded therefore she would not  be  at  risk  on  return  to  China.
    Further it would be in the best interests of  her  child  to  accompany
    her.

 5. The grounds of application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal take issue with aspects of  the  Judge's  adverse  credibility
    assessment. It is contended that the findings on the Appellant's  faith
    are flawed because the Judge  has  attached  too  much  weight  to  the
    Appellant's  morals  (or  rather  lack  of  them)  when  assessing  the
    genuineness of her faith as a Jehovah's Witness. Further there is error
    in the  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  account  of  there  being  an
    outstanding arrest warrant against her in China.

 6. On 11th September 2013 Judge Gibb granted permission to appeal  in  the
    following terms.

         "The grounds, which were in time, complain that the judge erred in:
         (1) reaching his (sic) adverse  findings  as  to  her  faith  as  a
         Jehovah's  Witness,   through   giving   weight   to   her   sexual
         relationships outside marriage,  which  were  prohibited;  (2)  his
         (sic) adverse findings as to the behaviour of the  Chinese  Police,
         which were contrary to background evidence, failing to take account
         of widespread corruption and actual police practice.

         The grounds are arguable. The last  sentence  of  para  60  of  the
         determination could arguably be said to show flawed  reasoning,  in
         that the adverse findings referred  to  as  justification  for  not
         applying the sensible comments of HHJ Gilberts QC rest in  part  on
         the very approach warned against. It is arguable that the  approach
         in para 55  gives  the  unfortunate  appearance  of  a  failure  to
         understand that may with genuine religious faith do not  follow  at
         all times the behaviour suggested by their faith, for all sorts  of
         reasons (consider devout Catholics who do not follow  the  line  of
         the  Church  on  contraception);  and   the   equally   unfortunate
         impression, even if unintended, of condemnation by the judge of the
         Appellant's  choices.  The  second   ground   is   also   arguable,
         particularly in relation to the observation at the end of para 68".

     Thus the matter comes before me to decide if the Judge's  determination
discloses an  error requiring it to be set aside and the decision remade.

Submissions

 7. Mr Ficklin relied on the grounds seeking permission.  In  amplification
    he submitted that the Judge's determination  relies  too  much  on  the
    moral failings of the Appellant rather  than  the  evidence  which  was
    before her. The fact of the Appellant's breach of  the  moral  code  of
    Jehovah's Witnesses is not the same as determining whether someone is a
    genuine follower or not. In any event what has to be looked at is  what
    assessment the Chinese authorities would make of her  religious  views.
    He referred generally to RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 and  specifically
    to paragraphs 51 and 52 of that judgment. He submitted  that  the  core
    question is what would be the reaction of the  Chinese  authorities  to
    the Appellant's beliefs? Would the Chinese authorities' reaction amount
    to persecution?

 8. He asked me to note paragraph 48 of the Judge's  determination  wherein
    she found adversely, after dispersal, the Appellant had not sought  out
    the Jehovah's Witnesses for some time. He wished to emphasise  that  at
    the time of dispersal the Appellant was a single mother relying on NASS
    support and no adverse criticism should  be  drawn  from  her  lack  of
    seeking out the Jehovah's Witnesses.

 9. The second point where the Judge fell into error is  contained  in  her
    conclusions in  paragraphs  66  and  67  of  the  determination.  Those
    findings based on the risk from  the  Chinese  police  are  flawed.  He
    submitted that there was no background evidence put before the Judge to
    allow her to interpret and reach a conclusion that six years after  the
    Appellant's departure from China, the police would not be interested in
    her. He added, that it was wrong of the Judge to conclude that, because
    she had left China without any apparent trouble from  the  authorities,
    they were not interested in her. The Appellant left with an  agent  and
    she had no knowledge of the documentation that the agent had  used.  In
    all the circumstances the determination should be  set  aside  and  the
    decision remade.

10. Mr Steward on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  submitted  that  ground  1,
    amounted to no more than a disagreement with  the  clear  findings  and
    conclusions reached by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Judge,  did
    not rely exclusively on findings of moral  failings,  to  come  to  her
    conclusions that the Appellant was not genuine  in  her  profession  of
    Christianity nor genuine in her claimed  membership  of  the  Jehovah's
    Witnesses. He  referred  to  paragraph  48  of  the  determination  and
    submitted that there was a full exploration of the Appellant's strength
    of faith. The Judge had found a lack of consistency in the  Appellant's
    accounts and had based her findings on the evidence as a whole. This is
    what she was entitled to do and having done so, ground 1 fell away.

11. With regard to the second ground there  was  no  inconsistency  between
    paragraph 66 and 67. Those paragraphs had to be read in the context  of
    paragraphs 64 and 65 which is where the Judge had started her reasoning
    on the credibility of the claimed risk from  the  Chinese  police.  The
    Judge was correct at paragraph 67, to question the credibility  of  the
    warrant and having done so, found that the Appellant was  not  at  risk
    from the Chinese police as claimed. The determination was  sustainable,
    contained no error and should be upheld.

12. After hearing  submissions  I  reserved  my  decision  on  whether  the
    determination of Judge Manuel contained a material error  of  law  such
    that it should be set aside. Having carefully considered matters I have
    concluded the determination does not contain a material error of law. I
    set out my reasoning below. Much has been made by Mr Ficklin on how the
    Judge gave too much weight to what he describes as a moral  judgment  -
    the Appellant being an unmarried mother; and sex outside marriage being
    against the beliefs of Jehovah's Witnesses. In my judgment that is only
    one part of the evidence which the Judge took into account. The task of
    the Judge in an appeal of this nature is to take into account  all  the
    relevant evidence in the round. That is precisely what the  Judge  did.
    She evaluated the evidence before her and formed a  judgment  that  the
    Appellant was an unreliable witness. She took into account not only the
    evidence of the birth out of wedlock but, set that out in  the  context
    of  the Appellant's lack  of  knowledge  of  the  faith  that  she  was
    professing to follow. The Judge spent a great deal of the determination
    outlining why the Appellant's evidence was unreliable. For  example  in
    paragraph 28 the Judge finds it not credible  that  the  Appellant  was
    unaware of which branch of Christianity she and her family  claimed  to
    follow  particularly  bearing  in  mind  the  restrictions  placed   on
    unregistered and illegal religious groups in  China.  In  paragraph  29
    when asked if the church she attended had a name she responded that she
    did not remember. In paragraph 30 when asked why she was not  baptised,
    she claimed it was because she did not have sufficient  knowledge.  The
    Judge found this evidence to be inconsistent with the Appellant's claim
    to have attended church regularly for two years between 2004 and  2007.
    This was an assessment fully open to the Judge on the  evidence  before
    her.

13. Whilst I acknowledge Mr Ficklin's explanation  for  the  Appellant  not
    immediately seeking out Jehovah's Witnesses on  her  dispersal,  it  is
    simply one more factor which  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account. There is nothing perverse in the Judge's findings, when looked
    in the context of her findings as a whole.

14. So far as ground 2 seeking permission is concerned, it is claimed  that
    the findings of paragraph 67 do not follow on from paragraph 66. As  Mr
    Steward correctly pointed out however paragraph 66 and 67  have  to  be
    looked at in the context of paragraphs 64 and 65. It is there that  the
    Judge begins setting out her reasoning and her analysis of why she  did
    not find that the history of the arrest warrant would pose a threat  to
    the Appellant. Whilst I agree that the Judge may  have  overstated  the
    case in paragraph 68; it nevertheless does not detract from  the  sound
    reasoning of paragraphs 64 to 67. In paragraph  64  the  Judge  records
    that the Appellant claimed that she threw a small stone at one of three
    policemen who were called by a local authority  official  and  she  was
    told she would be arrested. The Judge formed the conclusion that  given
    her claim that there were three police officers  present,  it  was  not
    credible that she would not have been arrested immediately. Instead the
    Appellant claimed that she managed to escape whilst her father held  on
    to a policeman's leg. The Judge records that the Appellant's account is
    lacking in detail and on the basis of this  information  found  it  not
    credible that if a warrant had been issued, the police would be  intent
    six  years  later,  on  arresting  her.  On  a  full  reading  of   the
    determination the Judge is stating that she comprehensively disbelieves
    the Appellant's version  of  events.  That  is  a  conclusion  she  was
    entitled to reach when assessing the evidence before her.

15. For the sake of completeness I record that no issues were put before me
    concerning that part of the Appellant's claim  on  the  Chinese  family
    planning scheme. There were no Section 55 best interests of  the  child
    points raised either.

16. For the above reasons, my conclusion is that the determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge does not contain a material error of law. The
    determination shall stand.

17. Judge Manuel did not make an anonymity direction. I have not been asked
    to. The Appellant has been competently represented throughout and I  am
    sure if it were felt such a direction was appropriate or  necessary  it
    would have been sought.





DECISION

18. The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Fee Award

To the Respondent fee award. No fee is  payable  so  there  can  be  no  fee
award.

Signature                                             Dated

