
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06026/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |   Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th December 2014                        |   On 12th January 2015       |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                               s G - APPELLANT
                        (PLUS two dependent children)

                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Faryl, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, who claims to be  a  citizen  of  Eritrea  appeals  with
    permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Herwald) which in a determination promulgated on 25th  September  2014,
    dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's refusal  of  11th  August
    2014 to grant her asylum/Humanitarian Protection in the UK and to issue
    removal directions.

 2. The Appellant SG is the mother  of  the  two  dependant  children.  The
    children are minors and for this reason I grant the Appellant anonymity
    in these proceedings.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant SG claims she is a citizen  of  Eritrea  born  23rd  July
    1985. Her claim to Eritrean nationality is doubted by  the  Respondent.
    She claims to have been born in Asmara but moved to Ethiopia  with  her
    parents when aged 1 year.

      i) She claims  to  be  not  only  an  Eritrean  national  but  also  a
         Pentecostal Christian. She was born in Eritrea on  23rd  July  1985
         but the following year her parents moved with her  to  Ethiopia.  A
         sister and her mother died in 1989  and  her  father  converted  to
         Pentecostal Christianity when she was 4 years old.

     ii) In February 2000 she was deported back to Eritrea  along  with  her
         father, younger brother and younger sister. She lived with an uncle
         but in December 2000 married an Eritrean soldier,  and  lived  with
         him in Eritrea until March 2003 in relative safety.

    iii) From May 2002 her religion was banned. The police raided her  house
         in March 2003 and she was "detained and harassed and  subjected  to
         ill-treatment as well as interrogation". She said that  the  police
         were rough and violent. She was detained for  nineteen  days  at  a
         police station.

     iv) On the last day of detention she reported "I was told to  leave  my
         cell to clean a van. While doing this, the police officer  who  was
         supervising me told me not to panic but to hide  whilst  the  truck
         drove away from the prison".

      v) She was driven to an unknown place where she  saw  her  uncle  "who
         informed me that my life was in danger and  my  uncle  had  paid  a
         bribe to secure my escape". She  followed  unknown  men  for  about
         eight hours and then travelled by car to Sudan where she lived  for
         twenty days.

     vi)  In April 2003 illegal people smugglers got her a "passport" -  she
         did not say what sort of passport - but she  went  to  Turkey.  She
         stayed in Turkey for a month and then in May or June 2003 travelled
         to Greece.

    vii) She worked illegally in Greece for a period of time.  In  2005  her
         husband joined her there. They stayed there long term. A child  was
         born there. She did not work after the birth of her child  and  her
         husband supported her.

   viii) She was in regular contact with her family  in  Eritrea.  She  said
         that her brother had been taken to a military camp and her  younger
         sister had gone away. There was no further contact with  her  uncle
         after 2008.

     ix) All was going well in Greece, and she attended church. But  on  8th
         October 2013 she reported

             "We   had   no   choice   but   to   leave   Greece,   as    a
             ...group...targeted Africans and it was no longer safe to live
             in Greece. My husband had been detained in Greece  for  living
             illegally. I was pregnant. I had no income  and  the  landlord
             evicted both me and my child". So  she  arranged  for  another
             people smuggler, to help her leave the country.

      x) In October 2013 she flew to France. She said "we lived in a jungle"
         On 25th November 2013 she and her son hid in the back  of  a  lorry
         and travelled to the UK.

 4. The Respondent did not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was  an  Eritrean
    national; or that she was a Pentecostal Christian as claimed,  or  that
    she had exited Eritrea illegally. It is of relevance to note here  that
    the Appellant's representatives  wrote  to  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  to
    enquire if she was eligible for Ethiopian nationality. It  is  reported
    that the Appellant was told that she was not eligible as  "she  has  no
    documents to support her claim".

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 5. The Appellant's appeal came before FtT Judge Herwald on 18th  September
    2014. Judge Herwald considered the Appellant's claims,  had  regard  to
    the background material and then made findings dismissing her appeal.

 6. He noted at [14] that there were problems with the Appellant's  general
    credibility,  in  particular  when  assessing  her  claim  to  Eritrean
    nationality. For sound reasons he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant on balance was not Eritrean as claimed. His reasons for those
    findings are as follows;

      i) The Appellant did not speak the language of Eritrea.

     ii) There were difficulties with her claim that Ethiopia had refused to
         recognise her as a national of that country.

    iii) He did not accept that the Appellant fled Eritrea as claimed.

 7. In coming  to  these  conclusions  the  Judge  took  into  account  the
    Appellant's answers in interview  and  this  led  him  to  the  further
    conclusion that the Appellant was not a life-long Pentecostal Christian
    as claimed.

 8. Having made those findings the Judge concluded that the  Appellant  was
    not at risk on return to Eritrea and that she had not exited  illegally
    from there.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. Before me Miss Faryl on behalf of the Appellant relied in the main,  on
    the grounds seeking permission to appeal. She claimed support also from
    the grant of permission and said that the Judge's error of applying the
    wrong standard of proof on the Appellant's nationality led the Judge to
    an improper assessment of the evidence before him. She  submitted  that
    such error made the decision unlawful and that the  appropriate  remedy
    would be for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    fresh rehearing.

10. Mr Diwnycz staunchly opposed Miss Faryl's submissions. He relied on his
    Rule  24  response  and  emphasised  that  this  is  an  appeal   where
    credibility lies at the heart  of  the  issues.  The  Judge  fully  and
    properly reasoned that he could not believe  the  Appellant's  account.
    There was ample evidence before the Judge to show  why  he  should  not
    believe the Appellant's core account. Whilst the Judge may have wrongly
    set out the appropriate standard of proof, there was  nothing  to  show
    that the correct standard had not been applied when one looked  at  the
    substance of the determination. Thus any error was not material and the
    decision was sustainable.

Consideration

11. The grounds seeking permission identify two bases for claiming that the
    Judge erred in his decision-making. First it is claimed that he applied
    the wrong standard of proof relating  to  the  Appellant's  nationality
    (and  from  this  flowed  errors  in  the  overall  assessment  of  the
    evidence).  It  is  correct  that  in  paragraph  [7]  to  [9]  of  his
    determination the Judge sets out what are clearly  standard  paragraphs
    which  are  clumsily  phrased  and  for  which  the  Judge  is  rightly
    criticised. However what  matters  is  whether  the  self-direction  in
    paragraphs [7] to [9]  shows  that  the  Judge  materially  misdirected
    himself.  The  answer  to  this  is  found  within  the  body  of   the
    determination, which includes the Judges findings.

12. What was before the Judge was a claim by the Appellant that  she  is  a
    national of Eritrea and is at risk  of  return  there  because  of  her
    Pentecostal Christianity and illegal departure. He found  she  was  not
    someone who could be believed on the core issues. In  coming  to  those
    conclusions he sets out fully his reasons for not accepting the core of
    the Appellant's claim. It is clear  he  kept  fully  in  mind  all  the
    surrounding evidence including the Appellant's lack of claiming  asylum
    in Greece and France despite being in the former  country  for  several
    years, his finding that the Appellant could not answer basic  questions
    concerning the Pentecostal faith and her somewhat late claim  that  she
    was distracted when answering questions in interview.

13. In my judgment the determination shows good reasons why the Judge  gave
    little  credence  to  the  Appellant's  claims.  Any  misdirection   in
    paragraph [7] to [9] provides no substance to the claim that the  Judge
    materially erred in his assessment of the evidence before  him.  It  is
    clear when reading the determination that the Judge kept  in  mind  the
    appropriate standard of proof.

14. Following on from that the second basis for seeking permission revolves
    around criticism levelled at the Judge stating  he  failed  to  make  a
    finding on the Appellant's claim of being deported  (with  her  family)
    from Ethiopia. It is said that the Judge failed to properly  take  into
    account the  relevance  of  the  Appellant  approaching  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy in London to make enquires  about  whether  or  not  she  could
    obtain  Ethiopian  nationality.  In  my  judgment  this  criticism   is
    unfounded.

15. All that there was before the Judge was an assertion by  the  Appellant
    that she had approached the  Ethiopian  Embassy  and  been  interviewed
    there and refused Ethiopian nationality. In support of  this  a  letter
    from her representatives addressed to the Embassy dated  9th  September
    2014 was produced.  So  far  as  establishing  her  claim  to  Eritrean
    nationality it is hard to  see  how  a  claim  that  she  attended  the
    Ethiopian  Embassy  to  enquire  about  nationality   there   goes   to
    establishing a claim to Eritrean nationality.

16. The matter which was before the Judge was whether the  Appellant  could
    show a reasonable likelihood that she was an Eritrean  national.  There
    appears to have been two misconceptions throughout this  case.  Firstly
    in the Appellant's representatives' letter they  state  in  the  fourth
    paragraph,

         "It has been the view of the Secretary of  State  of  this  country
         that she is an Ethiopian national ....

17.  Nowhere,  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  nor  the  subsequent
    correspondence sent by the Secretary  of  State,  do  I  see  that  the
    Respondent has  given  a  view  that  the  Appellant  is  an  Ethiopian
    national. The Respondent's  view  is  limited  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant has not demonstrated that she is an Eritrean national such as
    to make her at risk if retuned there. That  is  not  the  same  as  the
    Respondent  saying  that  the  Appellant  therefore  is  an   Ethiopian
    national.

18. The second misconception arises in the grounds of appeal. In  paragraph
    12 of the grounds seeking permission it is said:

         "....the appellant approached the Ethiopian Embassy  in  London  to
         make enquiries about his (sic) claim to Ethiopian  nationality  but
         she was refused and a letter from the Ethiopian Embassy was  before
         the IJ."

    No such letter was before the Judge. The fact  is  that  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy, so far as I can see,  made  no  response  to  the  Appellant's
    representatives' letter of 9th September 2014 at all. And what  has  to
    be borne in mind is that the Judge found the Appellant to be lacking in
    credibility.

19. To summarise therefore the Judge's findings are ones which were open to
    him on the evidence before him and ones for which  he  has  given  full
    reasons in his findings. In my  view  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
    evidence before him and the  findings  he  made  are  ones  which  were
    reasonably open to him; in other words  they  cannot  be  described  as
    irrational or perverse.

20. For the foregoing reasons  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    discloses no material error and the decision dismissing the Appellant's
    appeal stands.




Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date



Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts





