
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06174/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 December 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                     ta
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel instructed by K Ravi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This appellant who is a national of Sri Lanka, born  in  1998,  appeals
    with permission the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe  who
    for reasons given in a determination dated 7 August 2013, dismissed the
    appellant's appeal on asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  against  the
    decision dated 12 June 2013 to remove him.  He had entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 18 March 2011 with a passport and a student visa.  He made a
    claim to asylum on 13 May 2013. I continue the direction for  anonymity
    made by the FtT.

 2. In summary, the appellant  is  a  Tamil  from  Batticaloa  district  in
    eastern Sri Lanka where his family were supporters  of  the  LTTE,  his
    father having joined the movement as a policeman.  In  2006,  when  the
    area where they lived came under the control of the  army,  his  father
    was arrested and his mother and sister were beaten  up  by  the  Karuna
    group which had split from the LTTE in March 2004.  That arrest led  to
    the appellant's uncle taking the family to his village.   His  mother's
    fear for her son's safety led to the appellant being sent  abroad  with
    his maternal uncle's help.  The appellant studied Travel and Tourism in
    Singapore from 3 December 2007.  Whilst he was absent  his  father  was
    released on  payment  of  a  bribe  and  the  appellant  returned  from
    Singapore on 3 December  2008  by  when  his  visa  had  expired.   The
    appellant lived thereafter in Colombo with a friend who  was  Sinhalese
    where he worked for a share broker company called SK  Associates  until
    he was arrested on 25 April 2010.

 3. That arrest arose during a visit by the appellant to see his mother two
    days earlier.  She was staying with her brother, the appellant's  uncle
    in Kurukkalmadam.  Persons wearing uniform and civilian  clothing  came
    to the house and took the appellant with them in a white van.  After  a
    drive for an hour and a half he was taken into  a  building  where  his
    blindfold was removed and  where  his  handcuffs  were  taken  off  and
    photographs and fingerprints taken in addition to his ID card.

 4. During the course of that detention the appellant was questioned  about
    a friend of his father called Murali.  This individual with  two  other
    friends had been in the LTTE.  The appellant had previously met them on
    the bus one day in September 2009 when they asked if he could help them
    find a job and he did so.  This was to work in his  uncle's  restaurant
    in Kluwanchikudy.  A third individual,  Murali,  also  needed  help  in
    finding work which the appellant found with his aunt for whom he worked
    as an ice cream van  driver.   The  appellant  was  unaware  that  this
    individual had escaped from detention and was a wanted person.

 5. The appellant was forced to sign a Sinhalese document.  On  release  on
    payment of a bribe, the appellant was taken by his uncle and another to
    Colombo where he met an agent and where he  stayed  with  that  agent's
    sister until he  left  the  country  on  18  March  2011.   Since  that
    departure the authorities had visited the appellant's uncle's house  in
    search of him.

 6. In the United Kingdom the  appellant  first  learnt  about  the  asylum
    process towards the end of April 2013 and he became involved in  London
    demonstrations through announcements on Tamil TV and through  leaflets.



 7. The judge found the appellant had told the truth as  to  his  claim  to
    have been assaulted by  the  authorities  and  burnt  with  cigarettes,
    taking account of a medical report from  Mr  Martin,  a  consultant  in
    emergency medicine.  As to the employment that he had arranged for  the
    LTTE friends of his father, the judge observed there was no evidence to
    suggest that the uncle and aunt, his employers, had  attracted  adverse
    attention and found it implausible the  appellant  had  not  found  out
    whether they had come to harm.  She considered the explanation that the
    appellant was too scared to speak even to his mother was not  credible.
    He had had ample opportunity to make enquiries in the two years he  has
    been in the United Kingdom and in any event he had been in  touch  with
    his relatives, in the light of evidence that his sister and  uncle  had
    been harassed by the authorities because of  him.   The  appellant  had
    also produced an e-mail sent to him by his paternal uncle in Sri Lanka.

 8. The judge also considered it significant  that  the  appellant  had  no
    problems with the Sri Lankan authorities in the nine months between the
    date of his claimed release and his arrival in the United Kingdom.  The
    account the appellant had given was that he had not gone out  from  the
    agent's sister's house apart from four times when he had  gone  to  the
    Visa Officer (there had been three previous  unsuccessful  applications
    for entry clearance).  The judge considered it unlikely that the  agent
    would  not  have  pursued  some  alternative  method  of  removing  the
    appellant from Sri  Lanka  rather  than  making  repeated  unsuccessful
    applications for a student visa.  She also  found  it  highly  unlikely
    that the agent would not have informed the appellant to claim asylum on
    arrival and referred also to his involvement  in  the  Tamil  community
    here on this aspect.

 9. In evidence before the judge, the  appellant  had  explained  that  the
    recent interest by the authorities included going through his  sister's
    computer looking for his photo and that  interest  had  not  just  been
    because he had helped his father's friends find jobs but  also  because
    he had been participating in demonstrations in the United Kingdom.

10. Having reached these conclusions the judge  turned  to  GJ  and  Others
    (post civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).   She
    found it inconsistent with the background material that interest in the
    appellant would be re-ignited two years after he had  left  Sri  Lanka.
    In the  light  of  the  sophisticated  intelligence  available  to  the
    authorities it was unlikely that the appellant's sister or uncle  would
    have been harassed as claimed some three years  after  the  appellant's
    last involvement with the LTTE.

11. The appellant gave evidence he had attended eight or so  demonstrations
    in the United Kingdom and the judge accepted this.   He  had  told  the
    judge that thousands of people attended those demonstrations  and  this
    too was accepted.  There was no suggestion that the  appellant  was  in
    any way involved in organising these demonstrations and the judge  also
    observed in the interview the appellant had said he did  not  know  the
    name of the leader of the Tamil Association in this country.

12. There are three grounds of challenge to this decision.  As  I  observed
    to Mr  Muquit,  I  had  difficulty  in  identifying  exactly  what  the
    complaint was in the  first  which  states  that  having  accepted  the
    detention  and  ill-treatment,  it  was  important   that   the   judge
    investigated the reasons for that with care.  The grounds refer to  the
    questions which were put to the appellant by the Sri Lankan authorities
    on that occasion  as  recorded  in  the  record  of  interview  by  the
    Secretary of State.  It is argued that the arrest of the appellant  was
    based on specific intelligence.

13. I understand this ground to be that having accepted the  appellant  was
    assaulted by  the  authorities  and  burned  with  cigarettes,  it  was
    incumbent upon the judge  to  examine  why  in  order  to  inform  risk
    assessment on return.  It is not the case that the judge  accepted  the
    account of detention; she reached her positive finding on  the  assault
    on the basis of a medical report rather than the  explanation  advanced
    as to the circumstances that led to it coming about. Although accepting
    the adverse attention, the judge was not persuaded by the story of what
    had triggered it.  She gave valid reasons  at  [32]  for  doubting  the
    account  that  the  appellant  had  been  arrested  based  on  specific
    intelligence and was not  under  an  obligation  to  come  up  with  an
    alternative account. This ground is a disagreement on the evidence  and
    does not identify legal error.

14. The second ground of challenge  relates  to  the  judge's  observations
    regarding the likelihood of repeated applications for a  visa.   It  is
    argued that by making this observation the judge  was  suggesting  that
    the appellant submitted to being trafficked out of the country with the
    consequent risk of being arrested and prosecuted for illegal  entry  in
    any number of countries he travelled to en  route  and  being  deported
    back.  This was neither appropriate nor rational.  I think  this  is  a
    misunderstanding of the point the judge was making.  She observed  that
    given the appellant was apparently fleeing Sri Lanka for his  life  she
    thought it unlikely the agent would not have pursued  some  alternative
    method of removing the appellant.  This rose  out  of  her  observation
    that the appellant had encountered  no  problems  in  the  nine  months
    following his claimed release.  I find no merit in this ground.

15. As to the third ground, it is argued that the judge had failed to  note
    that it was likely the appellant will be asked whether he had  attended
    protests in the United Kingdom because of the Government of Sri Lanka's
    concern  with  the  activism  he  had  undertaken  with  reference   to
    photographs carrying anti-GOSL banners.  It  is  likely  the  appellant
    would be asked about the nature  of  his  asylum  claim  and  political
    activities in the UK with reference to GJ. The judge  was  required  to
    determine what would happen to a returnee if he was interrogated as  to
    whether he supported Eelam (a separate Tamil  homeland)  on  return  or
    whether he would be  forced  to  deny  his  political  principles  thus
    raising matters which were  considered  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  RT
    (Zimbabwe).

16. It is not at all clear that this was the case put before the judge.

17. It cannot be argued that  the  judge  failed  weigh  all  the  relevant
    factors in carrying out the risk  assessment  in  accordance  with  the
    guidelines in GJ.   The  circumstances  of  other  family  members  are
    addressed in [42] and [43].  Furthermore,  it  cannot  be  argued  that
    attendance at demonstrations alone is sufficient to create a real  risk
    of harm.  The judge's analysis is at [44]:

         "The appellant's claim to be at risk on return comprises  a  number
         of composite factors; he was detained and ill-treated before as the
         result of helping LTTE members, the authorities retain an  interest
         in him, he has been involved in anti-government protests in the  UK
         and he has familial links to the LTTE.  The appellant has satisfied
         me that he was ill-treated in Sri Lanka.  There was  a  substantial
         delay in the appellant making  a  claim.   The  appellant  has  not
         provided me with any reasonable or plausible explanation  for  that
         delay.  Notwithstanding his ill-treatment in Sri Lanka, I find that
         the appellant has not demonstrated that he left Sri Lanka  in  fear
         of his life."

    Further at [45]:

         "Even if I am wrong on that, the claimed ongoing  interest  in  the
         appellant is not consistent with background material detailing  the
         sophisticated intelligence available to the Sri Lankan authorities.
          There is no evidence that the appellant  did  anything  more  than
         attend protest demonstrations in London  along  with  thousands  of
         others.  There is no evidence that he  was  in  any  other  way  an
         activist for Tamil separatism.  The  appellant's  own  evidence  is
         that his father is no longer active for the LTTE and I consider  it
         highly likely that his uncle is no longer active for the LTTE."

18. After correctly directing herself in accordance with GJ, the judge went
    on to observe at [46] that the appellant had  adduced  no  evidence  to
    show that he was involved in any attempts to revive the  LTTE  and  the
    Sri Lankan authorities will be aware of that. She expanded her findings
    on this in paragraphs [47] and [48].

19. The question to be asked is whether the judge in  her  risk  assessment
    left out any important evidence or failed to  understand  the  guidance
    given in GJ.  The answer to both points  must  be  that  she  did  not.
    Returning to the RT (Zimbabwe) point,  in  the  light  of  the  judge's
    legitimate conclusion that the authorities in Sri Lanka would  have  no
    interest in the appellant, it  follows  that  there  is  no  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that he would be subject to anything more  than  a
    cursory questioning  on  his  return  and  would  not  be  required  to
    dissemble to protect himself.

20. I am therefore satisfied that the judge made no material error of  law.
    Her decision stands and the appeal before me is dismissed.






Signed                                                Date 20 January 2014
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
