
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06833/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2016                  |On 15 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                            MARK ANTHONY ROLLINS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, instructed by Greater Manchester
Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mark Anthony Rollins, was born on 20 December 1970,  and
    is a male citizen of Barbados.  He appealed against the decision of the
    respondent dated 27 March 2015 to refuse his claim for  asylum  and  to
    remove the appellant from the United Kingdom.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Andrew Davies)  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  29  July  2016
    dismissed the appeal on Article  3  ECHR  grounds  but  allowed  it  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to
    the Upper Tribunal.  There is no cross-appeal in respect of the Article
    8 decision by the Secretary of State.

 2. The appellant claims to be in fear in Barbados of a criminal gang  from
    whom the claims to have stolen drugs.  Further, the appellant's  mental
    health is problematic.  As regards the latter, Judge Davies  was  aware
    that the appellant is currently detained under the  Mental  Health  Act
    1983 (I was told that he remains in hospital as  at  the  date  of  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing).  Section 86(3) of the 1983 Act  provides  that
    the powers to be exercised in the case of  any  patient  shall  not  be
    exercise except with the approval of the appropriate  Tribunal  (Mental
    Health Tribunal).  Judge Davies found that it  would  be  a  breach  of
    Article 8 for the respondent to remove the appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom at a time when he was detained under the 1983 Act.  As  I  have
    noted above, that finding is not challenged by the Secretary of State.

 3. The judge was satisfied [33] that Article 3 ECHR would not be  breached
    as a result of the  decision  to  remove  the  appellant.   As  regards
    Article  3,  the  appellant  had  pleaded  that   his   mental   health
    difficulties placed him at real risk in Barbados.  The  judge  recorded
    [32]  that  Barbados  has  a  comprehensive  health  system   including
    inpatient care in hospital, community care, pre-primary  and  secondary
    mental health services, and provision for "100% of the population  have
    free  access  to   essential   medication   such   as   antipsychotics,
    antidepressants and other drugs".

 4. As regards Article 3 and the criminal gang which the  appellant  claims
    to fear, the judge found [28] that the Barbadian state authorities were
    willing and able to offer  protection  to  the  appellant  against  the
    actions  of  non-state  agents  including  criminals.   Notwithstanding
    corruption in the country, there is "nonetheless a functioning internal
    security and police apparatus" [27].

 5. The appellant complains that the judge unjustly and unfairly refused an
    adjournment of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  The judge  dealt  with
    the application for the adjournment at [20]:

         An application has been made for an adjournment and  refused  by  a
         Duty Judge on 12 July  2016.   The  judge  indicated  that  he  had
         already refused an adjournment.  The earlier request was made on 11
         July 2016.  The appellant's solicitors enclosed a letter from  Home
         Bird Care indicating that  the  appellant  had  been  sectioned  in
         hospital.   A  medical  report  was  also  enclosed  following   an
         assessment of 31 March.  The refusal of 11  July  referred  to  the
         fact  that  the  matter  had  been  adjourned  previously  for  the
         psychiatric  report  but  none  had  been  filed.   There  was   no
         indication of when the appellant would be released and  no  medical
         evidence.  I note that the original adjournment was as long ago  as
         6 July 2015.   There  was  very  considerable  delay  in  obtaining
         medical evidence.   There  was  no  statement  in  the  appellant's
         bundle.  Although I understand clearly Mr  Brown's  point  that  it
         would not at present be possible  to  take  instructions  from  the
         appellant given the state of his mental health,  it  would  clearly
         have been possible to obtain evidence for his  asylum  claim  which
         relates to events allegedly occurring years  ago  had  a  statement
         been taken a year ago before the deterioration in his mental health
         and to deal also with  Article  8  and  children  issues.   I  must
         however make it clear that this implies no criticism  of  Mr  Brown
         who was most helpful in his submissions at the hearing.

 6. The judge notes that the hearing then proceeded by way  of  submissions
    only.  Given the appellant's mental health deterioration, the appellant
    submits that the judge should have adjourned the hearing  in  order  to
    enable medical evidence to be obtained but also, should  the  appellant
    again become lucid, for a witness statement to be taken from him by the
    solicitors.

 7. I do not consider the ground has merit.  As I have recorded above,  the
    judge concluded that the  appellant  was  not  at  real  risk  of  ill-
    treatment upon return to Barbados, not because his account  was  untrue
    but because Barbados has a  functioning  security  and  police  service
    which would be willing and able  to  offer  the  appellant  protection.
    Those findings have not been challenged by the appellant.   It  follows
    that, if the judge had received either written or  oral  evidence  from
    the appellant testifying to a fear of criminals in Barbados and had  he
    accepted that evidence, the claim in respect of Article  3  ECHR  would
    nonetheless have been defeated in the light  of  the  judge's  findings
    regarding sufficiency of protection. The presence  of  the  pp  at  the
    hearing would, therefore, have made no difference to the outcome.    In
    any event, I find that the reasons given  by  the  judge  at  [20]  are
    adequate to dispose of the  adjournment  application.   The  judge  was
    faced with an application for an adjournment with no realistic prospect
    fixing a future date for the hearing by which time  the  appellant  may
    have given  evidence.   Without  any  evidence  concerning  the  likely
    duration of the  appellant's  mental  health  difficulties,  the  judge
    would, in effect, have been adjourning the appeal sine  die.   Had  the
    judge fixed a future date and had the appellant not been  fit  to  give
    instructions to his solicitors prior to that date then the same problem
    would arise again and,  having  granted  an  adjournment,  might  prove
    difficult for the First-tier Tribunal to deny a  second  or  subsequent
    applications.  With those considerations in mind and having regard also
    to the overriding objective,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  such  an
    adjournment might be justified.  In any event, I do not find  that  the
    decision not to adjourn the hearing resulted in  any  unfairness  given
    that the judge has, in  effect,  assessed  the  appellant's  Article  3
    appeal on the basis that his account regarding the  criminal  gang  was
    true.

 8. The appellant also appeals on the ground  that  the  judge  has  failed
    properly to assess the consequences for his mental and physical  health
    should he be removed from the treatment regime in  the  United  Kingdom
    which he currently enjoys to Barbados.  I find that that ground has  no
    merit.  As I have noted above,  the  judge  has  made  a  finding  that
    Barbados has a fully functioning health  service,  including  provision
    for mental illness.  There is no reason to suppose that  the  Secretary
    of State would expose the appellant to the risk of suicide or self-harm
    during the course of his return to Barbados,  whereupon  the  Barbadian
    health authorities would assume responsibility for his care.  That  was
    a finding clearly available to the judge on  the  evidence.   It  is  a
    finding which the judge has supported by  clear  and  cogent  reasoning
    having proper  regard  to  all  the  evidence  and  in  particular  the
    background material regarding health services in Barbados.

 9. In the circumstances, the appeal is  dismissed.   Finally,  Mr  McVeety
    informed me that  the  appellant  has  been  granted  leave  to  remain
    (following the success in the First-tier Tribunal of his Article 8 ECHR
    appeal) until 9 May 2019.

Notice of Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed.

11. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 10 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

