
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06859/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 August 2016                             |On 9 August 2016              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     G K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 THE SECRFETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Daykin, counsel,
                    instructed by Rashid and Rashid Law Firm
For the Respondent:   Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal arises from a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Green
    promulgated on 28  April  2016.  The  appellant  (whose  identity  will
    continue to be subject to an anonymity order) was born on [ ] 1984  and
    is a national of Uzbekistan. She entered the United Kingdom in December
    2012 as  a  student.  In  2013  she  met  her  husband,  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan, and returned to Uzbekistan later that year. The  appellant
    came back to the United Kingdom, married  the  gentleman  in  question.
    They have one child and the appellant is now expecting a further child.



2.   The issue before the Judge arose out of a refusal by the  Secretary  of
    State  to  grant  asylum  to  the  asylum.   The  First-tier   Tribunal
    considered the matter on the basis of the asylum claim and  also  under
    Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The  Judge
    reviewed the evidence before him which  included  statements  from  the
    appellant and her husband, together with their oral testimony which was
    subject to cross-examination.   There  was  considerable  documentation
    before the Judge, filed by both parties.

3.    The  Judge's  findings  were  that  although  there  were  significant
    difficulties  with  the  appellant's  family  in  consequence  of   her
    relationship with an Afghan national, nonetheless there was no risk  to
    her on return to Uzbekistan on  the  basis  that  even  if  there  were
    hostility to the appellant from her family she could live independently
    with her child elsewhere in Uzbekistan.

4.   There were three grounds of appeal in the written application,  one  of
    which (with my  permission)  was  expanded  somewhat  during  counsel's
    submissions.  The first ground was  ultimately  not  pursued  with  any
    great rigour as  it  dealt  with  alleged  failures  by  the  Judge  in
    assessing issues of credibility.  The way in which it was put to me  by
    Miss Daykin in her very helpful and  able  submissions,  was  that  the
    Judge's finding that this was  a  more  liberal  family  does  not  sit
    happily with the conduct of mother, father and brother in the way  that
    they apparently reacted to the appellant marrying outside her  cultural
    community. There is no material error of law on  the  Judge's  part  in
    dealing with this. The Judge noted  a  marked  disconnect  between  the
    manner in which the appellant's sisters had lived their lives  and  the
    manner in which the appellant had done  so,  the  appellant  showing  a
    greater degree of independence of spirit than her  sisters.  The  Judge
    recorded the reaction of the appellant's family in these  circumstances
    but there is no error on the Judge's part in making the  findings  that
    he did on  the  evidence  before  him.   He  was  fully  aware  of  the
    background and there is nothing  'incoherent'  in  the  conclusions  he
    reaches.

5.   Dealing with the second ground of appeal relating to certain  findings,
    it is necessary to record a lengthy paragraph of the decision in  which
    the substantive conclusions of the Judge are to be found. Paragraph  25
    states:

         "In view of what I have said above, what risk,  if  any,  does  the
         appellant face on returning to Uzbekistan?  She would be  returning
         as a failed asylum seeker and as a woman with a child born  out  of
         wedlock.  The country guidance cases in relation to Uzbekistan  are
         few and  far  between  but  it  is  possible  to  extrapolate  some
         principles from country guidance and other decisions and apply them
         to this  appeal.   In  FN  and  Others  v  Sweden  (Application  No
         28774/09) ECtHR Fifth Section the claimant's asylum claim has  been
         disbelieved.  FN then jointed the Uzbekistan  opposition  Birdamlic
         party in Sweden.  He argued that returning a failed  asylum  seeker
         to Uzbekistan would put him at risk.  ... The judge was aware  that
         the  practice  of  torture  in  police  custody  was  systemic  and
         indiscriminate and remained a pervasive  and  enduring  problem  in
         Uzbekistan.  In those circumstances the appeal was allowed.  In the
         case before me the appellant is not a  political  opponent  of  the
         regime  and  she  is  therefore  unlikely  to   be   detained   and
         interrogated about  her  activities  during  her  time  outside  of
         Uzbekistan.  Further she has the benefit of an anonymity  order  in
         this appeal and cannot be identified as  a  failed  asylum  seeker.
         There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  her  exit  permit  from
         Uzbekistan has expired and therefore she is unlikely to be detained
         and interrogated as an illegal entrant.  Unlike countries  such  as
         Bangladesh there is no country guidance on whether she  would  face
         risk on return by virtue of her status as a woman and I cannot make
         any finding to that effect.  She is not a  member  of  a  religious
         minority.  She has been brought up as a Muslim.   She  is  a  well-
         educated woman who has already pursued a profession  in  Uzbekistan
         and there is no reason to believe that she could not do that again.
          The bulk of her family live in Samarqand and  she  could  live  in
         Tashkent which is a large city.  I am not satisfied on the evidence
         that she would continue to be of interest to  her  family  or  that
         they would be in a position  to  find  out  if  she  had  returned.
         Uzbekistan according to the objective evidence relied upon  by  the
         respondent has a functioning criminal justice system  and  criminal
         law enforcement agency and would be able to provide  the  appellant
         with sufficient protection should she wish to avail herself of  it.
         Under all the circumstances I do  not  accept  that  the  appellant
         qualifies for asylum or humanitarian protection and her Article 2 &
         3 ECHR claims also fail for the reasons given above."

6.   It is accepted by Mr Avery on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  that
    one sentence within this quoted paragraph is perhaps infelicitous.  The
    judge comments  upon  the  absence  of  country  guidance  specifically
    referable to Uzbekistan regarding the risk to  be  faced  as  a  single
    woman and he says 'I cannot make any finding to that effect'.    Looked
    at in  the  context  of  this  determination,  which  is  detailed  and
    meticulous, the judge is doing no more than indicating that there is no
    country guidance which would compel  a  finding  that  the  appellant's
    status as a woman would of itself be determinative of subsisting  risk.
    In doing so the Judge is absolutely correct.  In consequence, the Judge
    cannot make any generic disposal of the matter but must deal with it on
    a fact-specific basis on such information as is available to  him.  The
    Judge did have a significant body of independent material  before  him,
    albeit it was not  country  guidance  in  the  strict  sense.  This  is
    reproduced in paragraph 17 of the decision.  It includes reference to a
    report  by  the  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada  entitled
    "Uzbekistan Domestic Violence Protection  Available"  and  is  dated  6
    February 2006. In addition there is  a  report  prepared  by  the  OECD
    Development Centre which was expressly referred to by the  Judge.   The
    pertinent paragraph reads:

         "In practice, according to a shadow report submitted by  the  CEDAW
         Committee by the Coalition of Uzbek Women's Rights  NGOs,  men  are
         generally considered to be the  heads  of  families  in  Uzbekistan
         while women are responsible for domestic work  and  childcare.   In
         the event of divorce or widowhood, younger women  are  expected  to
         return  to  their  parents'  home;  they  are  only  able  to  live
         independently if they already  have  children.   Official  rhetoric
         promotes the importance of 'traditional Uzbek values' including  in
         regard to traditional gender roles."

7.   For completeness, the third item cited by the Judge is a report by  the
    Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women  dated  20
    November 2015 which includes particular reference to Uzbekistan.

8.   It is clear that the Judge had that material in mind when  he  came  to
    the conclusions which he did.  He formed the view that if it  were  not
    possible for the appellant to live with her family who are in Samarqand
    then she could live elsewhere.  In my assessment, both expressly and by
    implication, the Judge did  turn  his  mind  to  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for the appellant to relocate and came to a measured finding
    on the evidence  before  him.   Although  he  may  not  have  expressly
    mentioned the report to which I have made reference,  he  went  further
    and considered the matter on the individual circumstances  applying  to
    this particular appellant.  The Judge was of the view  that  there  was
    sufficient protection under Uzbek  criminal  law  and  its  functioning
    criminal justice  system  to  ensure  that  the  appellant  would  have
    sufficient protection. There is nothing to suggest that the appellant's
    status as an independently living single woman  would  be  a  cause  of
    difficulty. The passage which I have quoted from the OECD report  makes
    plain that independent living, even of a younger woman,  is  acceptable
    where there are children involved (as is the case  in  this  instance).
    Although the appellant is strictly neither divorced  nor  widowed,  her
    circumstances are such that she would be  living  separately  from  her
    husband.

9.   In the circumstances I  can  find  no  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision in respect of ground 2 or 3 as advanced in  oral  submissions.
    In any event, there was sufficient in the independent reports  which  I
    have cited (and the one from which I have  quoted  in  particular),  to
    sustain the findings which the judge came to. Even had I been satisfied
    that there was substance in the argument that there may  have  been  an
    error of law, I would not have regarded it as material.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
maintained.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   Mark Hill                           Date         8 August 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
