
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06706/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10th June 2015                    |On 22nd June 2015                     |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     K Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P.Haywood, Counsel, instructed by AP Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr.S.Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. An anonymity direction has been requested and I have agreed  that  from
    now the proceedings should be anonimised.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis  it
    was arguable that First tier Immigration Judge Grant gave  insufficient
    reasons when dismissing the appellant's appeal.

 3. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 9 May 1988. He  sought
    asylum on the basis he was at risk of persecution from the  authorities
    in Sri Lanka because of his involvement with the LTTE for  many  years.
    His claim was rejected on 21 August 2014 on  credibility  grounds.  His
    appeal was heard by First-tier Immigration Judge Grant  on  3  November
    2014 with the decision dismissing his appeal on credibility promulgated
    on 6 November 2014.

 4. The judge did not accept the truth of the claim. The decision  includes
    a reproduction of the entire witness statement of the appellant and the
    entire letter setting out the respondent's  reasons  for  refusal.  The
    judge referred to the decision of Budhathoki  (reasons  for  decisions)
    [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) which states that it is  generally  unnecessary
    and unhelpful for a First-tier Tribunal  judgement  to  rehearse  every
    detail or issue raised in the case.

 5. At paragraph 7  of  the  determination  the  judge  recorded  that  the
    appellant in cross-examination confirmed he lied in three student  visa
    applications  to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom.  The  appellant  also
    confirmed that at his asylum interview he  had  not  mentioned  he  had
    attempted to go to Canada on two occasions. He also  confirmed  he  was
    aware that after his student visa expired in February 2012  he  had  no
    right to remain  thereafter.  At  paragraph  19  under  the  heading`My
    Findings' the judge records:

         "I have taken into account the appellant's claim in the context  of
         the background material, his interview records, the medical report,
         his immigration history and oral evidence before  me.  I  find  the
         appellant to be a most unsatisfactory witness  who,  to  quote  the
         words of Harrison LJ in R (App Sadia Abdi )-v- Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2003] EWHC 2921 has told "a pack of  lies"
         in order to claim asylum in the United Kingdom. I agree and  concur
         with the conclusions set out  by  the  respondent  in  the  refusal
         letter and the submissions made by Ms Parkes before me."

    Then, at paragraph 20 the judge wrote:

         "I followed TP (credibility) Zimbabwe [2004] UKAIT 00159 in finding
         that the appellant is not a credible witness. I find is a matter of
         fact  that  the   appellant's   immigration   history   is   wholly
         inconsistent with his claim to be at risk  of  persecution  in  Sri
         Lanka. A genuine refugee in need of International protection  would
         have claimed asylum at the  first  possible  opportunity  but  this
         appellant did not do so. The evidence of the appellant had so  many
         contradictions and inconsistencies highlighted both in the  refusal
         letter and by  Ms  Parkes  in  cross-examination  that  I  have  no
         difficulty in finding that the account has been fabricated. I  find
         as a matter of fact that the appellant has fabricated  his  account
         to have been detained and tortured in Sri Lanka in  order  to  gain
         asylum in the United Kingdom."

 6. Mr  Walker,  in  opening,  argued  that  it  was  not  enough  for  the
    immigration judge to simply say the account was not  believed.  Rather,
    there is a need to explain in sufficient detail why the account is  not
    believed. Furthermore, in support of the claim of torture the appellant
    had submitted photographs of marks on his body; a report from a  doctor
    when he was in detention in the United Kingdom commenting on the marks;
    and  a  consultant's  report  obtained  by  his  representatives  which
    comments on scarring. The latter complied with the  Istanbul  protocol.
    The First-tier immigration judge at paragraph 21 indicates the  medical
    evidence has been taken into account and the judge  comments  that  the
    reports were based on information supplied by the appellant,  including
    how the scarring was caused. The judge referred back  to  the  negative
    credibility finding and does not accept that the marks were  caused  as
    described by the appellant  and  do  not  assist  in  establishing  his
    credibility. Before me, the appellant's representative submitted it was
    not sufficient to simply reject this evidence without more explanation,
    bearing in mind the report was compliant with the Istanbul protocol.

 7. Mr Haywood acknowledged that whilst the immigration judge  made  strong
    credibility findings at paragraph 17 and 23 the reasoning was brief. He
    accepted that there was force in the argument that the  judge  had  not
    fully explained the reasoning behind the conclusions.

 8. Clarity of thought and brevity frequently go together. It is much  more
    difficult to produce a precise determination than  one  which  rambles.
    However, as was said in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014]  UKUT
    00341 (IAC) it is necessary to explain in clear albeit in  brief  terms
    reasons setting out the key issues; the areas in dispute and  not  only
    the conclusions but the reasons. In the present  instance    the  judge
    did not find the appellant credible and did not believe the claim as  a
    consequence. The judge gave some indicators  relating  to  credibility.
    However, in  this  circumstance  those  indicators  were  insufficient,
    particularly in relation to the medical evidence. For those reasons the
    decision cannot stand and will have to be remade afresh  with  none  of
    the findings preserved.

Decision.

 9. The decision of the first-tier tribunal in set aside. The appeal is  to
    be heard afresh in the First tier with none of the facts preserved.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly
