
                                    [pic]
IAC-AR-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06068/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 November 2016                      |On 17 November 2016               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                     r v
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms A. Seehra of counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr. L. Tarlow , Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   The Appellant, who was born on 19 April 1985,  is  a  national  of  Sri
    Lanka of Tamil origin. He entered the United Kingdom as a student on  6
    April 2011 and applied for asylum on 21 March 2013. His application was
    refused on 23 March 2015. He appealed and his appeal was dismissed  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge MacDonald in a  decision  promulgated  on  20
    June 2016. Upper Tribunal Judge Martins, sitting  as  a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, refused permission to appeal in  a  decision  sent
    out on 10 August 2016.

2.   Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  20
    September 2016 on the basis that, if the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
    accepted that the Appellant was on bail and still of  interest  to  the
    Sri Lankan authorities, he should  have  given   adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the Appellant was not at risk of persecution on return  to
    Sri Lanka.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   At the hearing counsel for the Appellant relied on the  fact  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had not taken into account the fact that  the
    Appellant was on bail when he left Sri Lanka in a context when  he  had
    found that the Appellant was  a  member  of  the  LTTE,  who  had  been
    detained on three occasions in the past.  She also relied on  the  fact
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not  taken  the  Appellant's
    family's political profile into account when he reached a  decision  as
    to risk on return.

4.   The Home Office Presenting Officer then  replied  and  stated  that  he
    relied on the reply. He also relied on the fact that the Appellant  had
    returned to Sri Lanka from India having previously breached  the  terms
    of his bail. He asserted that, even if the Appellant was still on bail,
    he could resolve this through bribery. He also submitted  that  it  was
    open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge to find that  the  Appellant  did
    not pose a threat to the unitary nature of the Sri Lankan state.

FINDINGS

5.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted in paragraph 95 of his  decision
    that the Appellant had been a member of the LTTE and in paragraph 96 he
    accepted that the Appellant was engaged  in  the  production  of  media
    footage.  He also implicitly accepted in the latter paragraph that  the
    Appellant had been arrested on a ship going to India with  cameras  and
    footage to be used abroad by the LTTE.  In addition, in  paragraph  111
    he implicitly accepted that the Appellant breached his bail  conditions
    when he left Sri Lanka, when he said that "this  would  be  the  second
    time that he has breached these conditions and, as was demonstrated  on
    this return from India and his arrest,  he  was  subsequently  released
    again on bail". Furthermore, the First-tier Tribunal Judge appeared  to
    accept that the authorities had been asking his family where he was.

6.   As a consequence, the First-tier Tribunal Judge should have  considered
    whether the Appellant would be at risk of persecution,  if  removed  to
    Sri Lanka as a former LTTE member who had breached his bail  conditions
    and who was still being looked for by the authorities.  In  particular,
    he should have reminded himself that in GJ &  Others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that "if
    a person is detained by the Sri Lanka security services there remains a
    real risk of ill-treatment or harm requiring international protection".
    The failure to do so amounted to an arguable error of law.

7.   In his grounds of appeal the Appellant also submitted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge should  have  considered  the  evidence  about  his
    brothers' activities along with the other evidence  before  reaching  a
    decision about his credibility. The appeal  had  been  adjourned  on  a
    previous hearing for the Respondent to consider the provenance of these
    documents. However, apart from making a few preliminary enquiries,  she
    had not taken any action. In this context,  there  was  no  basis  upon
    which to doubt that one of the Appellant's brothers was subject  to  an
    EUROPOL warrant procured by the Sri Lankan government and  another  had
    been granted asylum in Norway.

8.   I accept that this evidence is not  determinative  of  the  Appellant's
    appeal but it is certainly relevant evidence  which  should  have  been
    considered before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  reached  a  negative
    decision on the Appellant's appeal in paragraphs 116  and  117  of  his
    decision. This was the proper approach, as confirmed in  Karanakaran  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000] EWCA Civ 11

9.   I do not find that there is merit in the  ground,  which  asserts  that
    the  Appellant  would  be  treated  more  harshly  than  his  superior,
    Nanthagapan, if returned to Sri Lanka. There was no evidence  on  which
    to base this assertion, which amounted to speculation.

10.  In my view the ground relating to the No Fire Zone programme  was  also
    speculative.

11.  However, for  the  reasons  given  above  in  paragraphs  2-  8,  I  am
    satisfied that First-tier Tribunal Judge MacDonald did make  errors  of
    law in his decision and reasons.

DECISION

11.  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

DIRECTIONS

12.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing  before
    a First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    MacDonald.

13.  The following findings of fact are to be preserved:

     (i) The Appellant was a member of the LTTE.
     (ii)     He was engaged in the production  of  media  footage  for  the
    LTTE.
    (iii)    He was arrested and detained three times in the  past  by  the
         Sri Lankan authorities.
    (iv) He was on bail when he left Sri Lanka on the last occasion.
    (v)  The Sri Lankan authorities continue to ask his  family  about  his
         whereabouts.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Nadine Finch




Signed                                  Date 14 November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


