
IAC-BH-PMP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06199/2013
                                                               AA/06243/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17th February 2015                |On 30th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

     N N First Appellant
     CUA Second Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms G Patel, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 24th October 2014 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Wellesley-Cole
    gave permission to the appellants to appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  T  R  P  Hollingworth  in  which  he
    dismissed the appeal  on  all  grounds  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse asylum, humanitarian and human  rights  protection
    to the first appellant and her minor son, the second appellant, who are
    both citizens of the Gambia.

 2.  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  considered  it  "just  possible"   that   Judge
    Hollingworth had fallen into error because, in considering the  Article
    8 claim, he had wrongly referred to Section 174 of the Immigration  Act
    2014 which, it was assumed, should have been a reference to Section 117
    of the "new 2014 Act".  I have assumed that  the  latter  reference  by
    Judge  Wellesley-Cole  was  intended  to  be  to  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  amended  by  the
    Immigration  Act  2014.   Although  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  limited  her
    comments to the judge's  consideration  of  the  Article  8  claim  she
    indicated that all grounds could be argued.

 3. At the hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal submissions were made by
    Ms Patel based upon the nine pages of grounds of application dated 13th
    October 2014 which I summarise, below.

 4. The grounds take issue with the judge's findings of fact  arguing  that
    the evidence was not properly assessed in the light of  expert  opinion
    and was inadequately reasoned.  It is also  contended  that  the  judge
    failed to deal properly with the Article 8 claim.

 5.  More  specifically,  the  grounds  pick  out  alleged  errors  in  the
    determination to which there is objection.  It is  suggested  that  the
    judge wrongly determined the appeal by reference to an earlier decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal; raised for the first time an issue relating
    to the first appellant's birth certificate; failed to take into account
    that the appellant's claimed Mandinka ethnicity could be  derived  from
    her father even if her mother was Wolof; and  failed  to  consider  the
    expert evidence about FGM and ethnicity. It is also contended that  the
    judge did not take into consideration the permanent right of  residence
    granted to the appellant's partner when  dealing  with  the  Article  8
    claim.  Other, more detailed, issues are also  raised  in  the  grounds
    relating to the obtaining of a death  certificate  by  a  12  year  old
    niece, erroneous conclusions about the first appellant's father and  an
    alleged use of the wrong standard of proof.  It is also contended  that
    the judge was wrong to comment on the appellant's use of  her  visa  to
    remain in the United Kingdom before claiming asylum  and  also  reached
    the wrong conclusion about the  appellant's  intention  to  convert  to
    Christianity.

 6. At the hearing Ms Patel expanded upon the grounds.   As  to  the  birth
    certificate issue she indicated that the Home Office had never asserted
    that this would  show  that  the  appellant  was  Mandinka.   She  also
    contended that the judge had failed to consider both expert reports  in
    relation to FGM and the explanation given for that operation not taking
    place at an earlier age.  She suggested that the  judge's  approach  to
    the evidence was on the basis that the appellant could not be  believed
    and was wrong to suggest that corroboration might be required.   Whilst
    she argued that the errors in the  asylum  findings  were  of  greatest
    importance, the reference to the wrong Section of the  Immigration  Act
    2014 affected the Article 8 conclusions.

 7. Mr McVeety submitted that the judge had clearly considered  the  expert
    reports  and  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  reports  contradicted
    themselves.  There was only one example given to support the contention
    (page 78 of the appellant's bundle) that FGM may take place later  when
    Wolof women marry Mandinka men.  The same report also appears  to  omit
    consideration of the fact that the first appellant's father was an Imam
    who, incredibly, had allowed his daughter to delay FGM  when  Paragraph
    37 of the report makes it clear that the "initiation" is an ethnic  and
    religious obligation.

 8. Mr McVeety also submitted that the judge had applied the right standard
    of  proof  throughout  the  determination.   He  had  not  taken   into
    consideration the earlier  decision  at  all  even  though  he  reached
    conclusions which were consistent  with  it.   Even  though  the  birth
    certificate might not have shown  evidence  of  the  first  appellant's
    ethnicity there were copious additional credibility  points  justifying
    the judge's conclusions.  The judge was entitled to conclude that a  12
    year old child could not obtain a birth certificate.  Other findings of
    credibility were similarly open to the judge.  He ventured  to  suggest
    that the claim that the first appellant's father  had  delayed  FGM  on
    cost grounds, despite being an Imam, was ridiculous.

 9. As to the Article 8 issues, Mr McVeety pointed out that the  judge  had
    applied  the  reasonableness  test  correctly  after  considering   the
    circumstances under the  Immigration  Rules.   The  mistake  about  the
    relevant  statutory  section  was  immaterial  and  may  be  simply   a
    typographical  error.   The  five  stage  tests  in  Razgar  had   been
    considered.

10. In conclusion, Ms Patel argued  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    comprehensive consideration to the expert reports and  that  they  were
    not contradictory.  The issue that might have  been  contained  in  the
    birth certificate should have been raised at the hearing rather than in
    the decision.  As to the Article 8 conclusions,  Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act might have assisted the Appellant if the judge had  considered
    it.  She also submitted that, as  the  claimed  errors  would  lead  to
    consideration of credibility, the matter  should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Conclusions

11. I have little hesitation in concluding that most of the  issues  raised
    in the grounds amount to no more than a disagreement with the  reasoned
    findings of the judge which he was entitled to reach  on  the  evidence
    put before him.  The judge's consideration of the two expert reports by
    Dr Knoerr and Dr Kea, respectively, is detailed covering two and a half
    pages of the decision under separate headings  for  each  report.   The
    judge's detailed analysis shows that he  was  clearly  aware  that  the
    appellant was of mixed ethnicity parentage as paragraph 28 shows.   The
    judge was entitled to disagree with the conclusions in Dr Kea's  report
    about the reasons for delaying the circumcision ceremony for the  first
    appellant when it was  considered  that  her  father  is  an  Imam  and
    therefore keenly aware  of  the  importance  of  the  ceremony  in  the
    community.   The  decision  also  points  to  inconsistencies  in   the
    appellant's evidence (paragraph 38) about this matter  along  with  the
    claimed Mandinka ethnicity.

12. As to the birth certificate and death certificate issues, whilst it may
    be arguable that the birth certificate for the appellant might not show
    her ethnicity, that conclusion does not give rise to a  material  error
    against the background of the numerous  other  areas  where  the  judge
    found the first appellant's claims to be inconsistent.   Certainly,  in
    relation to the death certificate, it  was  not  unreasonable  for  the
    judge to find that a 12 year old relative could not have  been  capable
    of obtaining this document let alone  sending  it  abroad  on  his  own
    initiative.

13. As to the allegation that the judge did not  consider  the  appellant's
    claims "de novo" the contention is wrong.  Paragraph 31 of the decision
    is merely a comment that the judge was reaching the same conclusion  as
    an earlier judge.  There  is  no  detailed  reference  to  the  earlier
    decision and it is plain that the judge  reached  his  own  conclusions
    with reasons for finding that the first appellant was not a witness  of
    truth.

14. Similarly, the allegation that the judge used  the  wrong  standard  of
    proof  in  relation  to  the  issue  of  forced  marriage  is   without
    foundation.  Reference to the arrangement remaining "unproven" does not
    mean that the judge departed from the lower standard of proof mentioned
    within  the  decision.   Further,  there  is  no  error  in  the  judge
    concluding, for the reasons  given,  that  the  appellant  had  made  a
    perfectly normal visitor application to come to the United Kingdom  but
    never intending to return to Gambia.

15. As to the appellant's wish to convert from Islam to Catholicism,  I  am
    unable to see that the judge's conclusions in  paragraph  123  are  any
    more than a fair assessment of the position from the time it would take
    for such conversion to be achieved  and  to  become  a  member  of  the
    Catholic faith.

16. In relation to the Article 8 claim the reference in  paragraph  103  of
    the decision to Section  174  is  clearly  an  error  although  not,  I
    conclude, material.  The judge's  consideration  of  Article  8  issues
    follows the Razgar five stage tests taking into consideration  that  it
    had not been shown that the second appellant is a British citizen.  The
    judge evidently considered the best interests of the  second  appellant
    and the first appellant's second child as a primary issue  taking  into
    consideration Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009.  No arguable material error is shown in this respect.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a material error on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

As this appeal involves the interests of children  I  repeat  the  anonymity
direction given by the First-tier Tribunal as follows:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 30th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
