

                                    [pic]




                               UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Birmingham
On: 5 December 2013
                                             Decision Promulgated:


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                                    F I A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Mozam of Immigration Advice Service
For the Respondent: Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 1 February  1990.  He  claims
asylum on the basis that he is from Afgoye in  Lower  Shabelle  where  there
was a serious threat to him from  Al-Shabab  as  he  is  from  the  minority
Ashraf clan.

I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal in  order  to
avoid the possibility of serious harm  arising  for  the  appellant  or  his
relatives from the contents of this decision.

This is an appeal by  the  appellant  against  the  determination  dated  16
September  2013  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sommerville  refusing  the
appellant's appeal on  asylum,  human  rights  and  humanitarian  protection
grounds.

The written  grounds  of  appeal  related  only  to  the  finding  that  the
appellant was not from the minority Ashraf clan and the manner in which  the
First-tier Tribunal dealt with the evidence of  the  appellant's  aunts  and
their immigration status.

It is not disputed that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  before  it  country
evidence indicating that members of the  Ashraf  clan  from  Lower  Shabelle
speak a particular dialect; see [27]. In the same paragraph the judge  found
that the appellant's failure to demonstrate that he  spoke  the  appropriate
dialect indicated that he was not from the Ashraf clan.

The appellant provided evidence from his maternal aunts in  support  of  his
claim to be Ashraf. They gave oral evidence, provided pages from  their  own
screening  interviews  and  their   immigration   status   documents.   They
maintained that they had been accepted as Ashraf and granted refugee  status
even though they had spoken only Somali rather than  a  dialect  thereof  in
their own asylum claims. The appellant's case  was  therefore  that  if  his
maternal aunts had been accepted to be from  the  Ashraf  clan  even  though
they spoke Somali, he should also be accepted to be Ashraf.

The evidence from the appellant's aunts  that  they  had  been  accepted  as
Ashraf and granted refugee status even though they had  only  spoken  Somali
therefore had to be considered against the country evidence that members  of
the Ashraf clan from Lower Shabelle  speak  a  particular  dialect  and  the
appellant had  not  shown  that  he  did.  The  First-tier  Tribunal   judge
undertook that consideration at [30] and was entitled to prefer the  country
evidence where he had little information  as  to  the  role  played  by  the
language spoken by  the  aunts  in  their  own  asylum  claims.  It  is  not
suggested now that he had  evidence  other  than  from  the  aunts  and  the
appellants in their evidence, that the aunts  spoke  only  Somali  in  their
asylum claims or how this issue featured in their cases.

In addition, the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  was  also  provided  with  the
appeal determination for the appellant's sister which  found  that  she  was
not Ashraf. He referred to her incorrectly at [31] as the appellant's  aunt.
Nothing hangs on that error  as,  if  anything,  it  makes  the  appellant's
situation worse if an even closer relative, his sister, was found not to  be
Ashraf. Mr Mozam sought to argue that  the  determination  of  the  sister's
claim was flawed. That argument can have no basis  in  law  where  there  is
nothing to indicate that the sister's determination was ever challenged  and
the submissions he made about it were not put to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
The determination of the sister's claim also cannot assist  the  appellant's
credibility as her determination indicates at [28] that she stated that  her
mother was killed by USC militia in 2002 but the appellant stated  that  his
mother died of natural causes in 2000; see [17]  of  the  determination  and
[3] of the appellant's asylum witness statement.

Certainly, the First-tier Tribunal was incorrect to state at [30]  that  the
appellant's aunts had been given status under the legacy policy rather  than
being recognised as refugees. In the absence of  more  detail  on  the  role
that the language they spoke in their own asylum  claims  featured  and  set
against the evidence from the asylum claim of the appellant's sister it  did
not appear to me that the mistake as to the immigration status of the  aunts
was sufficiently material so as to amount to an error of law.  Even  if  the
judge had accepted that the aunts were refugees there remained the  lack  of
detail as to the part played in their own appeals  on  which  language  they
spoke and the serious difficulties arising from  the  asylum  claim  of  the
appellant's sister.

Mr Mozam also maintained that the First-tier  Tribunal   judge  should  have
made a clear finding on whether the appellant was related to  his  aunts.  A
proper reading of [28] to [30] shows that  he  did  accept  that  they  were
related as claimed.

Mr Mozam, seemingly taking his lead from the grant of permission  to  appeal
which queried whether the First-tier Tribunal  had taken a  proper  approach
to the country evidence on Al-Shabab and the  country  situation  generally,
maintained that the First-tier  Tribunal   erred  in  its  approach  to  the
country evidence and whether it showed the appellant to be from  the  Ashraf
clan.

The determination shows at [6], [25] and [33] and [26] that  the  First-tier
Tribunal judge was referred to and considered the country evidence that  was
before him and assessed the appellant's evidence in relation to the  country
evidence. It is correct that the  country  evidence  showed  that  Al-Shabab
carried  out  forced  recruitment  in  areas  which  they  controlled  which
included, for a time, Afgoye. That did not oblige  the  First-tier  Tribunal
to find the appellant's claim to be Ashraf to be  credible,  however,  given
the appellant's inability to show  that  he  spoke  an  Ashraf  dialect  and
conflicting evidence given by the appellant on the approaches  made  to  him
by Al-Shabab (see paragraph 18 of the refusal letter) and  the  difficulties
raised by the determination of his sister's asylum claim.

The First-tier Tribunal was  also  correct  to  identify  from  the  country
evidence at [33] that Al-Shabab was losing control,  the  same  point  being
made at 1.34 of  the  respondent's  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report
regarding Al-Shabab having lost control in  the  appellant's  home  town  of
Afgoye.  The conclusion that there would no longer be a risk  on  return  to
Afgoye even for an Ashraf was therefore open to him.


DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error on a point of  law
and shall stand.

Signed: [pic]                                Date: 20 January 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt




