
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06964/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 September 2016                 |On 27 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     RT
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Lewis, Counsel instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Easterman, promulgated  on  3  May  2016,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  refusal  to
    grant asylum.


 2. We make an anonymity direction, continuing that made in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "While  the  judge  clearly  gave  consideration  to  the   medical
         evidence, an overall reading of the decision  appears  to  indicate
         that no clear findings were made as to whether the  judge  accepted
         the core diagnosis given by psychiatric professionals or  not.   It
         is also arguable that  the  judge's  negative  credibility  finding
         relating to the past history of traumatic events is not underpinned
         with  sufficient  reasoning  [99].   The  sole  reason  given   for
         rejecting the account of past events appeared  to  be  the  earlier
         negative finding regarding late disclosure, which was said to  have
         "severely shaken his credibility".  However, no assessment  appears
         to have been made of the credibility of his account of past  trauma
         in light of the background evidence relating to events in Sri Lanka
         at the relevant  time,  which  on  the  face  of  it,  was  broadly
         consistent with his account and the psychiatric diagnosis."


Application to amend grounds of appeal


 4. At the outset of the hearing, Mr. Lewis applied to amend his grounds of
    appeal with reference to handwritten  amended  grounds.   He  submitted
    that the judge had failed to make any assessment of  the  risk  arising
    from the Appellant's involvement in the TGTE.  He  submitted  that  the
    Court of Appeal was due to hear an appeal on the risk arising from TGTE
    involvement soon.  The TGTE remained a proscribed organisation and  had
    a continuing connection to the LTTE.


 5. He referred to paragraph [90] of the decision where the judge  set  out
    the evidence from the TGTE.  This evidence showed  that  the  Appellant
    was organising events for the  TGTE.   The  judge  had  considered  the
    Appellant's sur place activities but his assessment was directed solely
    at the photographs of the Appellant attending demonstrations,  and  did
    not refer to his organising events for the  TGTE  [92].   He  submitted
    that the  judge  had  failed  to  assess  the  risk  arising  from  the
    Appellant's involvement with the TGTE.  This led to a failure  properly
    to determine the risk on return to the Appellant which  amounted  to  a
    material error of law.


 6. In response Mr. Clarke submitted that the new ground of  appeal  should
    not be admitted.  The case had not yet  been  heard  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal, and the circumstances of that appellant  were  not  known.   In
    paragraph [92] the judge had found that the Appellant's activities  sur
    place were a sham.  He had found that it was highly unlikely  that  the
    Sri Lankan authorities would consider  the  photographs  anything  more
    than an attempt to substantiate an asylum claim.  This was in line with
    the case law on the sophisticated intelligence used by the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  In paragraph [93] the judge pointed out that there was no
    additional evidence explaining what the  Appellant  was  doing  at  the
    events set out in the photographs.  Further, the application  to  admit
    the new ground had been made far too late.


 7. Mr. Lewis in response stated that he had spoken to Counsel in the Court
    of Appeal case, UB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD (C5/2015/0753), and the issue  to
    be decided is the risk that arises from involvement with the TGTE,  the
    same as in the Appellant's case.  He submitted that the judge  had  not
    rejected the Appellant's sur place activities as sham.   The  issue  of
    the risk arising from the Appellant's membership of the TGTE  had  been
    argued at the First-tier Tribunal.  In particular, the case of  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)
    had been raised, which held that diaspora activities were an  issue  to
    be determined.


 8. Having considered these submissions, and the decision, we decided  that
    where the issue of the Appellant's involvement as an organiser for  the
    TGTE had been put expressly to the judge this was a  ground  of  appeal
    coming within the "Robinson-obvious" category and had materiality  such
    that it was in the interests of justice to extend time  and  admit  the
    further ground of appeal.


Application to admit new evidence


 9. Mr. Lewis then made an application to admit new  evidence.   This  took
    the form of an additional report from Dr.  Dhumad  submitted  with  the
    grounds of appeal.  He submitted that  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
    ability to take part in diaspora events and demonstrations, despite his
    mental health, had not been raised by the  Respondent's  representative
    in the First-tier Tribunal, but the Judge had expressed concern in  the
    decision about the  Appellant's  ability  to  do  so,  given  his  past
    experiences.  The additional report addressed this point.  He submitted
    that it was evidence which would assist the Tribunal in its approach to
    the medical evidence.


10. In response Mr. Clarke  submitted  that  this  evidence  had  not  been
    available to the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  application  should  be
    refused.


11. We considered that it was not in the interests of justice to admit this
    new evidence which had not been before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    when he had made his decision, and therefore  would  not  assist  in  a
    decision as to whether or not he had made an error  of  law.   The  new
    evidence was therefore not admitted.


Submissions


12. Mr. Lewis relied on the grounds of appeal and his amended grounds.   He
    submitted that there were two main grounds.  The first was the  judge's
    failure to have regard to the relevant medical evidence, and the second
    was the new ground relating to the TGTE.


13. In relation to the first ground, we  were  referred  in  particular  to
    paragraphs [6] and [11] of the grounds of appeal.  In his  report,  Dr.
    Dhumad  had  considered  how  the  Appellant  would  behave  given  his
    experience of trauma  (Appellant's  Bundle  C,  page  20).   Mr.  Lewis
    submitted that the judge was compelled to have regard to this evidence,
    and his failure to do so rendered his findings unsafe.  The  judge  had
    relied on the Appellant's late disclosure for  a  negative  credibility
    finding, but had failed to be guided  by  the  evidence  regarding  the
    reasons for the late disclosure.  The evidence from Dr. Dhumad had been
    obtained in order to assist the Tribunal to take the  correct  approach
    to the issue of the Appellant's late disclosure.   The  judge  did  not
    have any personal experience or expertise in this area.   He  had  been
    explicitly referred to this paragraph of Dr. Dhumad's report  regarding
    the approach to be taken to the Appellant's late disclosure.


14. In relation to the TGTE, Mr. Lewis relied on the submissions made  when
    applying to admit this additional ground  ([4],  [5]  and  [7]  above).
    Evidence  of  the  Appellant's  involvement  with  the  TGTE  had  been
    provided.  Although  some  groups  had  been  taken  off  the  list  of
    proscribed  organisations  in  November  2015,  the  TGTE  remained   a
    proscribed  organisation.   GJ   made   explicit   reference   to   the
    sophisticated  monitoring  and   intelligence   of   the   Sri   Lankan
    authorities.  We were referred to paragraph 335 of GJ.  The  judge  had
    cited the evidence of the Appellant's  TGTE  involvement  and  had  not
    rejected it [90].  The Appellant had  an  organisational  role  in  the
    TGTE.  The judge's failure to consider this when  considering  risk  on
    return was a material error of law.


15. Mr. Clarke relied on the Rule 24 response.  In relation  to  the  first
    ground, he submitted that the Appellant had been  changing  his  story.
    He referred to page 20 of Dr. Dhumad's report,  where  the  Appellant's
    late disclosure was attributed to a very narrow point,  which  was  the
    Appellant's fear.  However he submitted that  this  issue  was  not  as
    narrow as the grounds of appeal sought to  argue.   With  reference  to
    paragraphs [18], [33] and [39] of the decision, he submitted that there
    was a comprehensive analysis of Dr. Dhumad's  report.   The  judge  was
    mindful of page 20 of the report, as evident from paragraph [47] of the
    decision.  In paragraph [56]  the  judge  made  explicit  reference  to
    paragraph 8.B.III on page 20.  It was clear from the decision that  the
    judge was aware of the case which was being advanced [60].


16. He submitted that  reasons  were  given  for  the  judge's  finding  in
    paragraph [79] in the analysis in the paragraphs which  followed.   The
    judge had considered the Appellant's failure to disclose this  part  of
    his account given that he had  already  disclosed  it  elsewhere.   The
    judge was entitled to take into account the fact that the Appellant was
    unwilling to give evidence  to  the  Tribunal,  although  he  had  been
    willing to give evidence elsewhere, such as to  the  ICPPG  [89].   The
    judge had set out the chronology [74].


17. The judge had set out the other medical evidence  before  him  [94]  to
    [96].  Mr. Clarke submitted that the judge had rightly  questioned  how
    the Appellant was unable to come to the Tribunal to give evidence,  but
    had been able to go to the ICPPG, [81], [83] and [89].  The  judge  had
    considered the evidence in the  round  [90].   He  had  considered  the
    Appellant's inconsistent actions holistically, and the fact that he had
    been able to give evidence in other situations.

18. The judge referred to the Appellant's diagnosis of PTSD [86].   He  had
    questioned the fact that he had not brought  the  evidence  of  illegal
    weapons with him, nor provided the photographs which formed the core of
    his case, [87] and [88].  The judge had looked at the  Appellant's  sur
    place activities but these had not been considered in  isolation,  [92]
    and [93].  He submitted that a clear finding had  been  made  that  the
    Appellant's sur place activities were a sham.

19. In relation to the TGTE, the evidence indicated that the Appellant  was
    a volunteer, and there was no reference  to  membership  of  the  TGTE.
    There was no evidence of his role in the TGTE.  There was  no  evidence
    that he was actively seeking to revive the Tamil conflict, and he would
    not be perceived as such.  He submitted that the Appellant's attendance
    at the TGTE was underpinned by his asylum claim alone and that  he  did
    not have any separatist agenda.

20. The Appellant would be returning on his own passport.  He was not on  a
    stop list.  Although he may be on a watch list, GJ had held  that  this
    may not lead to anything.  He submitted that the Appellant  was  not  a
    Tamil separatist and did not engage the risk  categories  in  GJ.   The
    circumstances of the appellant in UB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  were  unknown.
    In this case it was clear that the judge had found that the  sur  place
    activities were a sham.

21. In response Mr. Lewis submitted that the fact that  the  Appellant  had
    given evidence to other organisations and had been able to instruct his
    solicitors did not undermine the psychiatric evidence that he was unfit
    to give evidence in court.  The other scenarios in which he  had  given
    evidence were more supportive.  The judge  had  been  wholly  wrong  to
    reject the evidence of Dr. Dhumad.  We were referred to paragraph  [91]
    of the decision.  He submitted that a very clear  assessment  had  been
    provided of the Appellant's inability to attend the Tribunal.

22. In relation to Mr. Clarke's submission that the Appellant's  sur  place
    activities were self-serving, we were referred to the  case  of  Danian
    [2000] Imm AR 96.  Even if his activities were self-serving,  the  onus
    was on the judge to assess the risk.  There had been no  assessment  of
    the Appellant's involvement in a proscribed organisation, and the judge
    had not rejected the  clear  evidence  of  this  involvement.   It  was
    incumbent upon the judge to assess the risk which he had failed to  do.
    The evidence of the Appellant's sur place activities was not limited to
    the photographs.  The Appellant would have come to the attention of the
    authorities because of his diaspora activities.

23. We reserved our decision which we set out below with reasons.

Decision and Reasons

Ground 1 - assessment of the medical evidence

24. Paragraphs [98] and [99] of the decision state:

         "Putting all the evidence together, including  from  these  medical
         reports in bundle B, and Dr. Dhumad, I find  that  the  appellant's
         account of the matters that arose in 2012 involving the finding  of
         ordnance and wishing to expose this to the public is not true.

         I also  find  as  a  result  of  the  above  that  the  appellant's
         credibility is severely shaken.  As to  the  earlier  part  of  the
         appellant's account of what had happened to him up until 2009,  the
         account he gave to the authorities  when  he  arrived,  an  account
         which  at  that  stage  might  have  met   the   country   guidance
         requirements and put him at risk of return is also  unreliable.   I
         find it significant that the change in the appellant's account  has
         come about since the change in the Sri Lankan country guidance  and
         that the new account or such evidence of it  as  I  have  has  been
         manufactured in order to ensure a better chance of success in  this
         appeal."

25. The judge placed significant emphasis upon the late disclosure  of  the
    part of the Appellant's  account  relating  to  the  discovery  of  the
    illegal weapons, which was the fundamental  basis  of  the  Appellant's
    claim.  It is this late  disclosure  which,  in  the  judge's  opinion,
    damages his credibility such that he  rejects  the  Appellant's  entire
    account.

26. The evidence before the judge included a psychiatric  report  from  Dr.
    Dhumad.  In this report  Dr.  Dhumad  dealt  with  the  issue  of  late
    disclosure at 8.B.III (page 20).

         "He stated that he has been avoiding the following reminders of the
         torture; such as, violent movies, sirens,  and  people  in  uniform
         such as police.

         He has stated that he did not previously disclose  his  involvement
         with the demining  company  and  the  evidence  that  was  obtained
         through this on account of a fear that he  would  be  returned  and
         this would cause greater danger for him.  I am not in a position to
         comment upon whether there is any objective basis for this fear but
         it would be entirely consistent with his  condition  to  hold  such
         subjective fears, which appear to be genuine, even if they  may  be
         considered to be irrational.

         Late disclosure is also consistent with the avoidance of situations
         associated  with  the  trauma  and  this  should  be  given  proper
         consideration when assessing his account."

27. In Dr.  Dhumad's  expert  opinion,  late  disclosure  of  part  of  the
    Appellant's account is consistent  with  his  avoidance  of  situations
    associated with the initial trauma.  We  find  that  there  is  in  Dr.
    Dhumad's report an explanation for the Appellant's late disclosure, but
    little consideration  is given to this by the judge.

28. Dr. Dhumad also addressed the Appellant's inability to give evidence to
    the Tribunal, paragraph 14(e) (page 22):

         "In my opinion he is  unfit  to  attend  court  hearings,  or  give
         evidence at present.  He is depresses [sic] and anxious, last  time
         he felt suicidal prior to court hearing and wanted to  jump  off  a
         bridge; he is unable to tolerate intense fear and acts impulsively.
          Therefore [he] is at risk of self-harm  now.   In  my  opinion  he
         needs psychological therapy to help him  to  manage  his  fear  and
         intense emotions safely, and  when  he  is  able  to  regulate  his
         emotions and learn healthy coping strategies he  would  be  fit  to
         attend court hearing."

29. It is Dr. Dhumad's professional opinion, having assessed the Appellant,
    that he is unfit to give evidence at a Tribunal hearing.  Although  the
    judge states that he does not hold against the Appellant his  inability
    to give evidence before him [72], throughout the decision he  questions
    the Appellant's ability to give an account of events in some scenarios,
    but not in others, despite the evidence of Dr. Dhumad as to the reasons
    for the late disclosure, and his opinion that the Appellant  was  unfit
    to give evidence in court.

30. In [74] he states that it appears that the Appellant was able  to  give
    Dr. Dhumad a coherent account.  In [81] he states:

         "Of course I take into account Dr. Dhumad's  report  and  his  view
         that the appellant is medically unable to give evidence before  the
         Tribunal, although it would have been more helpful  if  Dr.  Dhumad
         could have explained how it was possible for the appellant  to  re-
         live his experiences when giving what amounts to  a  very  detailed
         account in his statement which runs to some eleven typed pages  and
         to him but not to me."

31. In paragraph [90] the judge set out the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    involvement in the TGTE.  In paragraph [91] he states:

         "It would have been more than helpful  if  Dr.  Dhumad  could  have
         commented on how  the  appellant  was  able  in  his  condition  to
         actively  pursue  those  things,  when  dealing  with  whether  the
         appellant could or could not attend  a  hearing  supervised  by  an
         experienced judge and give his account of these matters in his  own
         interest."

32. The judge points out areas which he would  have  liked  Dr.  Dhumad  to
    address, but he does not address substantively what Dr. Dhumad actually
    said in his report.   The  judge  had  evidence  before  him  that  the
    Appellant was unfit to give evidence at  the  Tribunal.   Although  the
    judge states that he does not hold anything against the  Appellant  for
    this inability, this is  not  borne  out  by  his  questioning  of  the
    Appellant's ability to give evidence in other scenarios.  For  example,
    in paragraph [89] he questions how  the  Appellant  was  able  to  give
    evidence to the ICPPG.  We accept the submission of Mr. Lewis  in  this
    regard that it is entirely different giving evidence,  for  example  to
    the ICPPG, which is a supportive  environment,  rather  than  the  more
    confrontational environment of the Tribunal.

33. In paragraph [93] the judge states that it is difficult to  square  the
    Appellant's abilities to attend  public  events  "where  no  doubt  his
    memories of what has happened to him would be refreshed  while  at  the
    same time apparently being suicidal and endeavouring to resist anything
    that brought the memories back to him".    However  he  does  not  make
    reference to the evidence in Dr. Dhumad's report of  the  things  which
    the Appellant was  actually  avoiding,  or  make  findings  as  to  why
    avoidance of these things meant that the Appellant would not be able to
    attend the public events to which he refers.

34. In relation  to  both  the  late  disclosure  of  his  account  to  the
    Respondent, and also his inability  to  give  evidence  at  a  Tribunal
    hearing,  the  Appellant  had  provided  evidence  in  the  form  of  a
    psychiatric report from Dr. Dhumad.  We find that the judge  failed  to
    take a proper approach to potentially probative aspects of this report.
     He gave significant weight to the Appellant's delay in disclosing part
    of his account, which led him to make an adverse  credibility  finding,
    but he did not take into account  the expert  evidence  when  assessing
    the reasons for the late disclosure.   We  find  that  the  failure  to
    consider the late disclosure in the context of the  Appellant's  mental
    health, as set out in the medical evidence, is an error  of  law  which
    renders the credibility findings unsafe.

Ground 2 - Failure to assess the risk arising from TGTE involvement

35. The judge sets out the documentary evidence from  the  TGTE  [90].   He
    notes that the evidence states that the Appellant has  "volunteered  in
    organising several public events in the United Kingdom  in  support  of
    creating a free Tamil Eelam in Sri Lanka".  He does not state  that  he
    rejects this evidence, but merely sets it out.  Paragraph [92] states:

         "Dealing with the appellant's  alleged  activities  in  the  United
         Kingdom and whether those sur place activities would be  likely  to
         be within the knowledge of the Sri Lankan authorities  and  whether
         they would  put  the  appellant  at  risk  I  notice  a  number  of
         photographs where the appellant is standing with a large number  of
         others at demonstrations.  In my view, even if those pictures  were
         available to the Sri Lankan authorities it is highly unlikely  that
         they would think any more  of  them  than  that  the  appellant  is
         endeavouring  to  substantiate  an  asylum  claim  in  the   United
         Kingdom."

36. Although he states at the outset of this paragraph that he  is  dealing
    with the Appellant's alleged activities in the United Kingdom, he makes
    no reference to his activities with the TGTE referred to  in  paragraph
    [90].   He  considers  the  photographs  which   show   attendance   at
    demonstrations, but he does not consider the evidence from the TGTE and
    the volunteering activities described in that evidence.

37. There is no clear finding in paragraph [92] that  the  Appellant's  sur
    place activities are a sham, but  rather  the  judge  states  that  the
    authorities would be highly unlikely to think any more of them than  an
    attempt to substantiate an asylum claim.  In any event,  even  if  they
    were a sham, following Danian this does not  affect  the  necessity  to
    carry out  an  assessment  of  the  risk  caused  by  such  activities.
    Further, as stated above, the judge has not considered all of  the  sur
    place activities in paragraph [92].  In paragraph [93] again  there  is
    no reference to the Appellant's activities with the  TGTE.   The  judge
    refers to the Appellant's ability to attend public events, but there is
    no reference to his volunteering to help organise such events.

38. The judge acknowledged that he had evidence before him which showed the
    Appellant's involvement with the TGTE.  He  summarised  the  sur  place
    activities with reference to the photographic evidence, but ignored the
    evidence from the TGTE.  He failed to take account of the fact that the
    TGTE is a proscribed organisation.  There is no reference to  the  fact
    that it is proscribed, and no assessment of the risk on return  to  the
    Appellant as a result of being involved with the TGTE.   We  find  that
    this amounts to a material error of law.

39. Where the assessment of credibility is a holistic exercise, the  errors
    of  law  identified  are  sufficiently  material  for  the  credibility
    findings here to be set aside entirely.

40. We have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February 2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, we find that it is appropriate to remit this case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision


41. The decision involves the making of material errors of law and  we  set
    it aside.  No findings are preserved.


42. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

43. The appeal is not to be listed until the Court of Appeal has given  its
    decision in the case of UB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD (C5/2015/0753).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 23 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

