

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
AA/06534/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 24 April 2015                         |On 27 April 2015          |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR NAM NGOC PHAM
                        (no ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Harris, Counsel (Direct Access)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 11 February 2015
           against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oakley made in
           a determination promulgated on 20 October 2014,  dismissing  the
           Respondent's asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  appeal,  but
           allowing his appeal on Article 3 ECHR grounds.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Vietnam, born on 30 May 1978. He
           had appealed under section 82 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
           and Asylum Act 2002 against the Secretary of State's decision to
           refuse him asylum and to remove him from the United Kingdom. The
           Respondent had claimed that he was at real risk if  returned  to
           Vietnam because he was wanted  by  the  police  because  of  his
           involvement in a fraudulent  bank  loan  scheme.   Judge  Oakley
           found that the Respondent was not a refugee within  the  Refugee
           Convention but that  he  not  could  return  safely  to  Vietnam
           because he would not receive a fair trial and would be  at  risk
           of torture or inhuman and degrading treatment.


      3.    Judge Oakley found  that  the  Respondent's  evidence  had  been
           broadly consistent and so accepted  his  account  of  events  in
           Vietnam.  As to the Respondent's claim that  he  been  arrested,
           fingerprinted  and  released  in  connection  with  charges   of
           cannabis farming in the United Kingdom, the judge found that the
           Secretary of State had produced no evidence to show that the PNC
           had in fact been checked as claimed and that there was no  trace
           of the Respondent.  The judge also found that the  Secretary  of
           State had failed to conduct checks to  verify  the  Respondent's
           documents from Vietnam, when that could  and  should  have  been
           done.


      4.    When granting permission to appeal, Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
           Bruce considered that it was  arguable  that  Judge  Oakley  had
           erred in his approach to the Vietnamese "wanted"  poster  as  it
           was unclear that the document could easily have been verified by
           the Secretary of State.  There was less merit in  the  Secretary
           of State's claim that the judge ought to have placed  weight  on
           the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  without  the  production  of
           evidence showing that checks had indeed been made on the  Police
           National Computer database.


      5.    Standard directions had been made by the tribunal and the appeal
           had been listed for adjudication of whether or not there  was  a
           material error of law. The Respondent filed no notice under rule
           24 indicating  that  the  appeal  was  opposed,  but  Mr  Harris
           indicated at the start of the hearing that  the  onwards  appeal
           was indeed opposed.




      Submissions


      6.    Mr Kandola for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal earlier submitted and the grant of permission  to  appeal
           by the Upper Tribunal.   He  contended  that  Judge  Oakley  had
           imposed an impossible evidential  burden  on  the  Secretary  of
           State.   There was nothing on the PNC.  Given what  the  country
           background evidence said about Vietnam, it was  hardly  possible
           for the Secretary of State to have made  any  enquiries  without
           placing the Respondent at risk.  It  was  potentially  a  double
           jeopardy  situation.   The  judge's  credibility  findings  were
           flawed and the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal and reheard.


      7.    Mr Harris for the Respondent submitted that this was a situation
           where the Secretary of State had  confused  assertions  of  fact
           with evidence.  The PNC was in the United Kingdom and  contained
           records readily accessible to the Appellant.  It could not  have
           placed the Respondent at any risk to have produced evidence that
           the PNC had been accessed to verify his story.  There  had  been
           no explanation for the absence of evidence.  A simple print  out
           was all that was needed.  The judge had not  erred  in  reaching
           that finding.  The Respondent had produced  supporting  evidence
           as to his documents from Vietnam and had explained  how  he  had
           obtained access to them.  The Secretary of  State  had  had  the
           option of taking  the  same  procedures  and  in  particular  of
           contacting the lawyer in Vietnam identified by  the  Respondent.
           That would not have created a double jeopardy situation for  the
           Respondent.


      8.    Mr Kandola indicated that there was nothing he wished to add  by
           way of reply.




      No material error of law


      9.    The tribunal reserved its determination  at  the  conclusion  of
           submissions, which it now gives.


      10.   The problem with the Secretary of State's submissions about  the
           PNC records (concerning which Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Bruce
           had expressed reservations) was that no supporting evidence  was
           produced to the First-tier Tribunal.  It was reasonable for  the
           judge to have expected that the assertion made at  [26]  of  the
           reasons  for  refusal  letter  that  there   were   no   records
           corresponding  to  the  Respondent's  claim  that  he  had  been
           arrested and fingerprinted in the United Kingdom would have been
           supported by documentary evidence.  All judges of the First-tier
           Tribunal are familiar with the standard form of PNC  print  out,
           which state the names against whom a search has  been  run,  and
           also state the identity of the person  entitled  to  access  the
           computer.   Nothing  could  be  simpler,  yet  no  evidence  was
           provided.  It would, of course, have been possible for the judge
           to  have  accepted  the  Secretary  of  State's  assertions   as
           amounting to assurances, but he was not bound to have  done  so.
           His decision on that issue was open  to  him  and  discloses  no
           error of law.


      11.   As to the judge's observation about  the  Secretary  of  State's
           failure to check the Respondent's  documents  from  Vietnam,  no
           doubt the judge had in mind the Respondent's  witness  statement
           where the Respondent described in detail the check he  had  made
           on the Vietnamese government website.  The Respondent also named
           his lawyer contact.  It was thus open to the Secretary of  State
           to have run elementary verification checks.  Her failure  to  do
           so left the Respondent's evidence unchallenged before the judge,
           meaning  that  it  was  open  to  him  to  give  weight  to  the
           Respondent's documents as he did.  Again no  error  of  law  has
           been shown.


      12.   The judge's  findings  were  reached  following  a  careful  and
           logical analysis of the evidence to the  lower  standard.    The
           determination, prepared by an  experienced  judge,  is  of  good
           quality.  The judge plainly applied anxious scrutiny to  a  full
           and balanced in the round assessment.


      13.   Thus the tribunal finds that there was no error of  law  in  the
           determination.  There is  no  basis  for  interfering  with  the
           judge's decision to allow the Respondent's appeal on  Article  3
           ECHR grounds.










      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there is no  error  of  law  in  the  original
decision,   which stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




