
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06911/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11th January 2017                       |On 06th February 2017            |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL



                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D O'Callaghan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Morocco.  In a  decision  promulgated  on
    24th October  2016,  his  appeal  against  a  decision  to  refuse  his
    protection claim was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andonian
    ("the judge").  The appellant claimed to be at  risk  on  return  as  a
    homosexual.  The judge disbelieved this core claim, concluding that  he
    would not be at any real risk on return.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought, on the basis that the judge  erred  by
    failing to consider material evidence.  The appellant's bundle included
    medical notes which showed that he disclosed his sexuality to  his  GP,
    and that he was offered numerous tests in response to what he  revealed
    about his sexual activities.  It was contended that the judge failed to
    consider this evidence at  all.   Secondly,  the  judge  erred  in  his
    approach to medical evidence regarding  a  serious  psychotic  episode,
    leading to the appellant being detained under section 3 of  the  Mental
    Health Act 1983 for a period of three months.  The judge described  the
    appellant as having been "sectioned for a very short time as he was  in
    a fit of temper,"  which  amounted  to  a  serious  misreading  of  the
    documentary evidence.

3.   In a rule 24 response, the Secretary of State  opposed  the  appeal  on
    the basis that the judge had directed himself  appropriately  and  that
    his findings of fact were open to him on  the  evidence.   It  was  not
    incumbent upon the judge to comment expressly on  each  aspect  of  the
    appellant's evidence.

Submissions on Error of Law

4.   Mr O'Callaghan said that at the heart of the appellant's case  lay  the
    claim regarding his sexuality.  The skeleton argument prepared for  the
    hearing, which was before  the  judge  made  clear  his  reliance  upon
    medical evidence (at paragraph 19), including notes  contained  in  his
    medical records.  These showed that he disclosed his sexuality  to  his
    GP and his sexual activities in  the  United  Kingdom  soon  after  the
    substantive asylum interview.  That evidence was  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant at his hearing.   The  appellant's  screening  interview  was
    conducted in October 2014 and the substantive asylum interview on  11th
    November that year, the appellant living in Middlesbrough at the  time.
    Page 163 of the appellant's bundle showed that he registered  with  his
    GP on 12th December 2014, a  month  after  the  substantive  interview.
    Records also showed that he was offered an HIV test and  screening  for
    sexually transmitted infection, following his attendance at surgery  on
    12th December 2014.  At page 166 of the  bundle,  his  medical  records
    showed that he disclosed his fear of persecution on return  to  Morocco
    as a homosexual and that he was again offered screening on 1st  October
    2015.  That was a significant date.  It was the day he  was  discharged
    from his Mental Health Act section and it was  most  unlikely  that  he
    would have sought at the time to lay down a false path  to  hoodwink  a
    judge at a hearing in the future.   The  records  showed  that  he  was
    brought to his GP from the hospital following  his  discharge  so  that
    there could be some liaison regarding appropriate treatment.

5.   All of this was raised in the skeleton argument before  the  judge  but
    the decision showed no engagement with it.  Instead, the judge  focused
    on the appellant's apparent claim following his arrival in  the  United
    Kingdom that he had a wife and two children.  The judge also failed  to
    appreciate the significance of the section 3 detention for a period  of
    three months, a very long period when seen in context.

6.   Mr Melvin relied upon the rule 24 response.  The  judge  made  numerous
    findings regarding the appellant's claim to be homosexual and explained
    why he concluded that this claim was not made  out.   He  gave  careful
    consideration to a report from an expert instructed on the  appellant's
    behalf.  Paragraph 8 of the decision included many  discrete  findings,
    showing how the judge reached his conclusions.  At paragraph 21 of  the
    decision, the appellant's Mental Health Act section was referred to and
    it was up to the judge to decide whether a long or a  short  period  of
    time was concerned.  Overall, the judge considered all of the  evidence
    before him and gave sustainable reasons for dismissing the appeal.   By
    the time of the hearing, the appellant's psychotic illness appeared  to
    have resolved.  The medical records did not amount to an acceptance  by
    the GP that the appellant was homosexual or any  indication  that  this
    was the GP's assessment.  The notes recorded a  reaction  to  what  the
    appellant had said.

7.   Although the judge did not  refer  to  the  GP's  notes  or  make  full
    findings regarding them, this particular evidence did not show that the
    appellant was homosexual and so the absence of any express  mention  of
    the notes was not material to  the  outcome,  given  the  judge's  full
    findings and his credibility assessment.

Conclusion on Error of Law

8.   I gave my decision briefly at the hearing.  I find  that  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside, as containing  material
    errors of law.

9.   Paragraph 8 of the decision is important.  It is there that  the  judge
    makes a series of discrete, adverse findings regarding the  appellant's
    core claim.  He concluded that much of what was said and alleged should
    have been disclosed earlier but was not.   What  is  missing  from  the
    decision is anything to show that the judge engaged with the GP's notes
    and took them into account in making his  overall  assessment.   As  Mr
    O'Callaghan submitted, these notes show that  the  appellant  disclosed
    his sexuality and that he was offered screening tests shortly after the
    substantive asylum interview.   They  do  not  appear  in  the  judge's
    summary of the relevant chronology at paragraph 8, or elsewhere in  the
    decision.  If the judge was minded to find against the  appellant  that
    his claims should have been made earlier, it was incumbent upon him  to
    take into account evidence which bore directly on the salient issue. On
    any sensible view, that evidence was not disclosed at the last  minute.



10.  The skeleton argument which was before the judge (it is the first  item
    in the appellant's bundle) draws attention  to  the  medical  notes  at
    paragraph 19, in support of a submission that the  appellant  disclosed
    his sexuality to his GP several times  following  his  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom, evidence which was consistent with what appeared in his
    witness statement.  All of this was plainly before the  judge  and  was
    required to be properly engaged with.

11.  In a brief discussion on the appropriate venue  for  the  re-making  of
    the decision, the two  representatives  agreed  that  the  case  should
    return to the First-tier Tribunal.  In view of the extent of the  fact-
    finding required, this is the appropriate course.  The decision will be
    remade by the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House, before a judge other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It  will  be  re-made
in the First-tier Tribunal, at Taylor  House,  before  a  judge  other  than
First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian.  The hearing will  be  de  novo  and  no
findings of fact are preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  anonymity
direction made in the First-tier Tribunal  shall  continue.   No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of their family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

