
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06463/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham City Centre Tower     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13th March 2015                        |On 24th March 2015                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              mr Mussie Frezghi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Woodhouse (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Thomas promulgated on 29th October 2014, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 3rd October 2014.   In  the  determination,
    the judge dismissed  the  appeal  of  Mussie  Frezghi.   The  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Eritrea, who was born  in  Asmara
    City, and has been a practising Orthodox Christian.  His father was  in
    the military. The Appellant's claim is that his brother is aged 17, but
    his whereabouts are unknown,  and  his  elder  sister  lives  with  his
    mother.  He attended school from the age of 11  to  12.   Since  birth,
    however, he has been blind in the  right  eye.   When  he  was  12,  he
    suffered an injury to his left eye when  a  stone  was  thrown  at  him
    accidentally.  He now has poor sight  in  that  eye  however  and  this
    caused him to stop his studies.  His reason for claiming asylum is that
    he will be subjected to compulsory military duties through conscription
    in Eritrea were he to be returned.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge gave consideration to the relevant legal authorities.   These
    were MA (Draft evaders - illegal departures - risk) Eritrea  CG  [2007]
    UKAIT 00059 and MO (illegal exit - risk on  return)  Eritrea  CG.   The
    judge considered the evidence that, although some children are taken up
    in round ups, the authorities  would  not  recruit  the  Appellant  for
    military service whilst he was under 18 years.  On the other hand,  the
    Appellant maintained that he was not exempt from military service.   He
    was not completely blind.  He had partial sight in his  left  eye.   He
    would be required to serve.  He would be examined by a military  doctor
    in Sawar, who would decide whether he  would  be  exempt  or  not,  and
    something would be found for him.  Moreover, because  he  left  Eritrea
    illegally he would be severely punished for having done so.

 4. The judge also observed that the Appellant left to go to Sudan where he
    received medical treatment soon after his arrival.  The judge concluded
    that the Appellant left Eritrea of his own free will and did so legally
    and "had no difficulty with the authorities" so  that  "this  paints  a
    picture of normal life being resumed" (paragraph 27).  The  judge  also
    concluded that the Appellant was 15 years of age, had lived in  Eritrea
    legally, and had not been called up for military service at that  time,
    and "there is no evidence that he has been called up since he left  the
    country".  Moreover the Appellant was partially sighted, and  until  he
    has seen a military doctor, it was not known whether he would be exempt
    from military  service  or  will  be  given  non-military  duties  (see
    paragraph 29).  Accordingly, the Appellant was unable to prove that  he
    had left Eritrea illegally before he could  complete  military  service
    and he was not at risk in Eritrea of persecution or serious harm on any
    other grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in  law  in  that
    she found there to be inconsistencies in the evidence when  in  reality
    there were no inconsistencies.  The judge made findings as to  how  the
    Eritrean authorities would have  behaved  in  circumstances  for  which
    there is no evidential basis.  It was not clear why the judge felt that
    the Appellant's credibility was damaged by going  to  another  country.
    The judge did not properly consider the country guidance which makes it
    clear that an exit permit for medical treatment abroad is on the  basis
    of a very narrow category.  The Appellant did not fit into this  narrow
    category.  The judge did not explain how he did.  Normal  exit  permits
    are granted to countries "friendly" with Eritrea, such as Qatar, China,
    or Libya.  Many people who leave illegally end up in  Sudan,  and  that
    there is where the Appellant went, and  the  judge's  conclusions  were
    accordingly wrong.

 6. On 19th November 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

 7. On 5th December 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered.   It  was  stated
    that there were a series of credibility findings that could be upheld.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 3rd March 2015, Mr Woodhouse, appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant submitted that the country  guidance  case  was
    clear that anyone who is conscripted into the army effectively  becomes
    a slave to the officers there.  The Appellant had  shown  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that he would be conscripted.  Although the  judge
    had referred to the case of MO, the fact was that  this  had  not  been
    properly followed at all.  Prior to the hearing, Mr Woodhouse had  sent
    an email to the Eritrean expert who had  appeared  in  both  the  cited
    cases to elicit his views.  He had replied by email  to  say  that  the
    Appellant would not be exempt from military  service  even  if  he  was
    partially sighted.  There is no reference to this email by the judge.

 9. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that he  would  have  to  accept  that
    there was a possibility of a call up for a  person  even  such  as  the
    Appellant.  However, he would  then  go,  as  the  judge  found,  to  a
    military doctor, and there be assessed.  If it was found that he  could
    serve he would be given military duties.  Otherwise he would  be  given
    non-military duties.  Second, it is true that the judge did  not  refer
    to the email from the country expert, but  the  email  would  not  have
    changed the decision made by the judge, because the expert's  reference
    to "partially sighted" would have covered a  very  wide  category,  and
    without the expert examining the Appellant, he would not have known how
    partially sighted the Appellant was.  In the country guidance  case  of
    MA, it had been made clear that if one was not found to be  a  credible
    witness then one could not have been believed about the unlawful  means
    used  allegedly in making one's exit.  It is  true  that  MO  (Eritrea)
    changed this to confirm that, even if one had been found to be  lacking
    in credibility, one could still have left illegally, given how few were
    the exit permits given by the Eritrean state.  Nevertheless, the  judge
    had not found the Appellant to be credible.  The judge  held  that  the
    Appellant had left legally for medical  treatment.   Therefore,  he  is
    unlikely to be subjected to ill-treatment.

10. In reply, Mr Woodhouse submitted that the case of MO  (illegal  exit  -
    risk on return) Eritrea CG is clear that those who are allowed to leave
    for medical treatment reasons are a  category  that  is  very  narrowly
    drawn.  For the judge to have  made  this  assessment,  she  needed  to
    examine the Appellant's case much more carefully.  In  any  event,  the
    Appellant would not have been given an exit visa to go to Sudan,  where
    many of the illegally arrived Eritreans find their way,  and  which  is
    not categorised as a friendly country to Eritrea.  Reference  was  made
    to pages 28, 34 and 108 of the bundle.  Mr Woodhouse submitted that  no
    anxious scrutiny had been exercised by the judge.  He drew attention to
    his skeleton argument.  The inconsistencies were not sustainable.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, the operative country guidance case  currently  is  MO
    (illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 190.  The  judge
    concluded that, "one of the grounds for securing  a  permit  to  travel
    abroad for medical treatment is if one is unable to receive appropriate
    medical treatment in Eritrea.  This appears to  be  the  case  for  the
    Appellant. ..." (paragraph 28).  Yet, no analysis is provided as to why
    this should be the case.  This is important because  the  case  of  MO,
    makes it clear that the lawful exit  categories  "are  limited  to  two
    narrowly drawn medical categories  and  those  who  are  either  highly
    trusted government officials or their families or who  are  members  of
    ministerial staff ....".  The judge fails to explain how the  Appellant
    satisfied  the  requirements  of  the  two   narrowly   drawn   medical
    categories.   Given  the  application  of  the  principle  of  'anxious
    scrutiny' in asylum cases this should have been done as an exercise  in
    fact-finding to be sustainable.

12. Second, the Appellant is a person who left Eritrea after September 2008
    (having done so on 30th July 2013) and did so, "by  public  bus".   The
    judge states that "it is unlikely that he would have risked  travelling
    in this public manner or that he would have been able to do so  without
    being encountered" (paragraph 25).  However, the case of  MO  makes  it
    clear that even if the Appellant is not found to be credible,  that  he
    has left Eritrea on or after August/September 2008, "if  inference  can
    be drawn from their health history  or  level  of  education  or  their
    skills profile as to whether legal exit on their part was feasible  ...
    " then such an inference should be drawn.  The  judge  fails  to  apply
    this jurisprudence to the conclusion arrived at.  It has not shown  why
    the Appellant is not credible in what  he  says  about  his  exit  from
    Eritrea given his level of education.  This is a  significant  omission
    given that lawful exit visas are highly restricted.

13. There is significant evidence that the majority  of  exits  (given  the
    tight limitation on Exit Visas)  of  such  persons  are  likely  to  be
    perceived as having left illegally.  If this is right of the  appellant
    here then it will mean that on return he  will  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm. It is not possible to  say  this  of  this
    particular Appellant without an proper application of the jurisprudence
    of MO to his case.  It is also significant that the Appellant has found
    his way to Sudan which is a country that is not seen  as  a  "friendly"
    status country.  Indeed, many that have left illegally do go to Sudan.

14. For all these reasons, given that  the  Judge  erred  in  the  decision
    making process in this determination, this determination  must  be  set
    aside.  The appropriate course of  action  is  for  the  matter  to  be
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Thomas so that appropriate findings can be made on the
    basis of the application of MO.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  This appeal is remitted back to be  determined  de
    novo to be determined by a judge other than Judge Thomas under Practice
    Statement 7.2.

16. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd March 2015


