
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06008/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23 June 2015                      |On 24 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                               Ms Arzu Yentur
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bonavero, Counsel instructed by Trott & Gentry
LLP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Feeney ("the  Immigration  Judge").  Following  a  hearing  on  9
    January 2015 at Taylor House, in  which  the  Immigration  Judge  heard
    evidence from the appellant and her brother  and  submissions  by  both
    representatives, she  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse the appellant asylum and  human  rights
    protection in the UK.  In her determination, dated  14  February  2015,
    the Immigration Judge found that the appellant's account was incredible
    and she rejected the evidence given by the appellant.

The proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

2.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was subject to  an  application
    for permission to appeal on 11 March 2015.  The grounds are  succinctly
    drafted but they perhaps go somewhat  further  than  those  that  could
    realistically be argued.  Indeed when they were considered by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Cruthers on  23  March  2015,  it  is  fair  to
    describe his consideration of  the  grounds  as  less  than  a  ringing
    endorsement  of  the  grounds.  He  made  it  clear  that  in  granting
    permission he did not see it as an indication  that  the  appeal  would
    ultimately be successful.  Apart from anything else he considered  that
    the judge's reasoning in relation to a number of  key  aspects  of  the
    case may well stand up to closer scrutiny and he referred to  a  number
    of paragraph numbers.  However,  he  did  grant  permission  to  appeal
    because he considered that it was at least worth  hearing  argument  on
    the question of whether the Immigration Judge  should  have  said  that
    there was a corroborating statement from the appellant's brother  which
    helped to assist the Tribunal to reach a conclusion on whether in  fact
    the appellant was an Alevi Kurd.

3.   I heard helpful argument by both representatives at  the  hearing  that
    was set to determine whether or not there was a material error of  law.
    Mr  Bonavero,  who  represented  the  appellant,  and  Mr  Duffy,   who
    represented the Home Office, both set out their grounds in the case  of
    Mr Bonavero and the Secretary of State's response  succinctly  focusing
    on the key points rather than dealing with all the  exhaustive  grounds
    that have not been effectively the subject of a  grant  of  permission.
    Mr Bonavero, whose submissions will be  summarised  more  fully  below,
    explained that his client claimed to be an Alevi Kurd but  her  brother
    had attended the First-tier Tribunal and given evidence.   He  had  not
    been asked any questions by the respondent's representative and he took
    that to  be  an  acceptance  that  the  witness  was  giving  at  least
    potentially credible evidence and given the lack of challenge the First-
    tier Tribunal ought to have accepted that evidence at face value.

4.   Secondly he said that his client  had  made  a  specific  reference  to
    torture in July 2012 when she was detained  in  Yarl's  Wood  detention
    centre and that reference given the difficulties in victims of  torture
    recalling the precise circumstances,  particularly  where  there  is  a
    possible sexual component, ought to at least have  been  considered  by
    the Tribunal.

5.   Mr Duffy on the other hand said that  even  if  the  appellant  was  an
    Alevi Kurd it did not mean that the Tribunal had to accept her account.
     There were comprehensive findings including the findings  in  relation
    to relocation which must be allowed to  stand  and  overall  the  judge
    although she may be criticised for aspects  of  her  determination  had
    reached a conclusion that she was  entitled  to  come  to  in  all  the
    circumstances.



Conclusions

6.   Having carefully considered these arguments, I have concluded that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was one that  it  was  entitled  to
    come to on the evidence  it  heard.   It  is  right  to  say  that  the
    brother's evidence was recorded in the notes of  the  hearing  and  the
    Immigration Judge asked him some questions.  It might have been  better
    if the Immigration Judge had dealt more fully with his evidence  rather
    than mentioning it in  passing.   However,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Immigration Judge made comprehensive adverse credibility findings  from
    which it is very difficult to see  how  the  appellant's  appeal  could
    succeed.

7.    The  appellant  had  not  given  a  consistent  account  including   a
    consistent account of having been tortured at all.  There was no proper
    medico-legal report confirming that she suffered from PTSD.  It appears
    (see paragraphs 27 and 28 of the determination) that there were reports
    from  the  appellant's  GP  and  psychiatrist  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal. However, the Immigration Judge  was,  I  find,  justified  in
    rejecting that evidence for the reasons she gave in those paragraphs.

8.   The Immigration Judge made comprehensive findings in  relation  to  the
    appellant's  knowledge  of  Kurdish  culture,  her  knowledge  of   the
    background from which she is said to have come. The appellant's lack of
    knowledge placed her outside the class of potential  claimants  on  the
    basis of her Kurdish ethnicity.

9.   Additionally, I am satisfied, for the reasons Mr Duffy gave,  that  the
    Immigration Judge made a finding that was open to her  in  relation  to
    the appellant's ability to successfully relocate if she desired  to  do
    so on her return to Turkey.

10.   Clearly,  the  appellant  suffers  from  stress  and  has  had  mental
    problems. I have seen her distressed condition at the  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal. I have considerable sympathy for  her  but  the  burden
    rests on her to show that the decision of the FTT contained a  material
    error of law. Having reviewed that decision I  am  satisfied  that  the
    decision is one that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to come to on
    the evidence before it and that there was no material error of  law  in
    that decision. I  will  therefore  dismiss  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the appellant against the decision of the First tier  Tribunal
is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  her
application for asylum and humanitarian protection, as well as  refusing  to
recognise her human rights' claim, stands.

No anonymity direction was made and here is no challenge to that decision.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

