
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Aa/06943/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT(IAC) Birmingham                |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 17 February 2016                        |On 13 April 2016                |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mrs R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:   Mr A Syed-Ali, Counsel, instructed by Vasuki
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 1. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Borsada)  allowing  the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 30 March to refuse  the
    respondent's asylum claim and to remove the respondent from the UK.

Introduction

 2. The respondent is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1993. He  claims  that
    his uncle was a member  of  the  LTTE  who  had  a  role  in  supplying
    communication devices. The uncle  was  also  involved  in  a  terrorist
    bombing incident at the Pakistani High Commission in  2006.  The  uncle
    and his family fled to India in 2009. The  respondent  and  his  mother
    were questioned in 2011 and questioned about  the  uncle's  activities.
    The uncle returned in 2012 and was arrested  at  the  airport.  He  was
    forced into testifying against other LTTE members. The uncle was beaten
    to death in detention at the behest of a man  called  Douglas  Devanada
    who then took possession of family property in 2013. The respondent was
    arrested in April 2013, accused of actively supporting the LTTE. He was
    sexually assaulted and tortured. His fingerprints and photographs  were
    taken. He was released on a bribe and remained in  the  custody  of  an
    agent for the next three and a half months before obtaining a visa  for
    the UK. Since arriving in the UK he has attended meetings of  the  TGTE
    in London and has been to several demonstrations.

 3.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded that his account was not credible and that he
    was not at risk upon return.

The Appeal

 4. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing in Birmingham on 7 September 2015. He  was  represented  by  Mr
    Paramothy of Counsel. The First-tier Tribunal found that  the  core  of
    the respondent's account was credible. The medical  evidence  indicated
    that the respondent was likely to have  obtained  his  scars  during  a
    period of detention and there was no reason to suspect  assisted  self-
    harm. The psychiatric diagnosis of depression and PTSD  was  consistent
    with the respondent having been tortured. The respondent provided false
    information for his visa because he was in fear of persecution. He  has
    explained why he had not lodged his asylum claim sooner. He was a  very
    committed activist to the cause  of  an  independent  Tamil  state  and
    wished to pursue that goal in the UK and  Sri  Lanka.  He  admitted  to
    undertaking LTTE activities when he was detained in Sri Lanka. He  gave
    the clear and wholly  believable  indication  that  he  would  want  to
    continue anti-government activity in the future. The appeal was allowed
    on asylum and human rights grounds.





The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding that the respondent was  at  risk  given  the  absence  of  any
    adequate findings as to why the respondent would be  someone  perceived
    as playing  a  significant  role  in  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism.
    Attending demonstrations and the alignment to the TGTE were unlikely to
    attract persecution; the profile of a person at risk was much higher.

 6. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Murray on 13 October 2015. It  was  arguable  that  the  evidence
    before the judge was not sufficient to find  that  the  appellant  fell
    into a category which would put him at risk on return in  terms  of  GJ
    and others [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC). To be aligned with the TGTE at a  low
    level was not sufficient.

 7. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 8. Mrs Petterson submitted that the fact of activism within the UK did not
    take the respondent into a risk category. The country guidance was  not
    correctly applied. The respondent was trying to impute something  extra
    to GJ. Being a grassroots worker was not  enough.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    considered those specifically at  risk.  The  findings  here  were  not
    enough - otherwise everyone who was active abroad would be at risk.

 9. Mr Syed-Ali submitted that the appeal hinged  on  one  aspect  and  the
    judge was aware of the case law. The decision would have been the  same
    under Articles 2 and 3 regardless of GJ. Paragraph  24  of  MP  and  NT
    [2014] EWCA Civ 829 was  relevant  -  the  respondent  was  a  diaspora
    demonstrator.  The  relevant  evidential  standard  was  applied.   The
    category is not closed. The UNHCR guidelines cited at paragraphs  15-16
    of MP were relevant. The respondent did not challenge  the  credibility
    findings.

10. I note that the judge found at paragraph 12 of the  decision  that  the
    respondent  was  a  very  committed  activist  for  the  cause  of   an
    independent Tamil state and that he wished to pursue that goal  in  the
    UK and in Sri  Lanka.  The  respondent  was  aligned  to  a  proscribed
    organisation and was arrested and detained post-conflict in Sri  Lanka.
    He admitted in detention to undertaking LTTE activities  in  Sri  Lanka
    and had  undertaken  anti-government  activities  since  departing  Sri
    Lanka. The respondent had been told that the authorities still  had  an
    interest in him as an anti-government operative. Those findings of fact
    are not challenged by the Secretary of State.

11. I have considered GJ and MP. At paragraph 24 of MP, the Court of Appeal
    stated that the concern in relation to sur place  activity  is  genuine
    diaspora demonstrators who may be put at risk on return as a result  of
    surveillance and video recording or  photographs.  The  issue  in  this
    appeal is whether, having regard to the respondent's activities in  Sri
    Lanka, there is a real risk that he  will  be  perceived  as  to  be  a
    diaspora activist  with  a  significant  role  in  diaspora  activities
    designed to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan  state  and  revive  the
    internal armed conflict.

12. On balance, I am satisfied that the findings of fact made by the  judge
    are sufficient to justify such a conclusion. The judge did  not  simply
    rely upon low level diaspora activity. The judge  could  usefully  have
    more closely related the findings in paragraph 12 of  the  decision  to
    the risk category set out in paragraph 356(7)(a) of GJ. However, in  my
    assessment the findings of fact permitted the judge  to  conclude  that
    the respondent was perceived to be a threat to  the  integrity  of  Sri
    Lanka as a single state because he was perceived to have a  significant
    role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora
    and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka. That  conclusion  was
    based upon the whole factual matrix including all of the events in  Sri
    Lanka, sur place activities, the respondent's political  loyalties  and
    intentions and the continued interest from the Sri Lankan authorities.

13. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal did not involve the making of an error of law and  its  decision
    stands.

Decision

14. Consequently, I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.



Signed        [pic]                 Date 2 April 2016


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
