
IAC-BH-PMP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06928/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House,              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Stoke-on-Trent                       |                                     |
|On 9th April 2015                    |On 22nd April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES


                                   Between

                       MS ZEINAB MOHAMMADI CHELKASARI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Keith Gayle of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Appellant is an Iranian national who was granted a  visitor's  visa
    valid from 22nd June 2012 until 28th September 2012.  The Appellant had
    previously entered the United Kingdom as a visitor, the first  occasion
    being in 2010.  On 28th September 2012, the day her visa  expired,  the
    Appellant applied for a variation  of  leave  on  the  basis  that  her
    removal from the United Kingdom would be  contrary  to  this  country's
    obligations under the Refugee Convention. The Appellant also applied on
    humanitarian protection grounds.  Her application was refused  on  30th
    August 2014 and her appeal against that refusal  and  the  decision  to
    remove her from the  UK  was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Holt on 30th October 2014.

 2. In summary, the Appellant's asylum claim was based on her fear  of  the
    Iranian authorities because she had written a blog which was  published
    on the internet and which was critical of the Iranian regime.

 3. It is the Appellant's case that her  identity  was  discovered  by  the
    authorities when a female friend named Movarid was taken into detention
    and questioned.  The Appellant believes that  Movarid  must  have  been
    tortured and, as a result, gave details  of  the  Appellant's  blogging
    activities.

 4. Judge Holt made various positive credibility findings.   In  particular
    she was satisfied that the Appellant had made comments in various blogs
    which would be perceived as critical and disrespectful of  the  Iranian
    regime and of the disadvantaged role of women in Iran.  She also  found
    that the Iranian authorities try to control  information  published  on
    the internet which is critical of the regime.  Furthermore, Judge  Holt
    was satisfied that if the Iranian regime were able to trace the  author
    of such criticism, such as a critical blog author, then they might well
    be at risk of being prosecuted and punished under the Iranian so-called
    justice system.

 5. In summary, and applying the lower standard of  proof,  the  judge  was
    satisfied that  the  Appellant  had  been  involved  in  some  blogging
    activity, that the blogs would be of the type that the  Iranian  regime
    would want to censor, although the judge stated that she  had  no  real
    sense  of  the  extent  of   the   Appellant's   blogging   activities.
    Furthermore, she was satisfied that the Appellant's blogs  were  closed
    down by the Iranian authorities.  Nevertheless,  Judge  Holt  dismissed
    the appeal because she found that  other  aspects  of  the  Appellant's
    account were not credible for the reasons which  are  set  out  in  her
    decision and reasons.

 6. The Appellant's representatives applied for permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Deans,
    sitting as a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, on 21st  November  2014.
    The Appellant's grounds in support of the  application  for  permission
    argued that the First-tier Judge's adverse  credibility  findings  were
    unsound  and  not  adequately  reasoned.   The  Upper  Tribunal   Judge
    considered that the grounds were arguable  and  accordingly  permission
    was granted.

 7. Thus the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal on 9th April 2015.
     The Appellant was present.  Representation was as mentioned above.

 8. In submissions, Mr Gayle adopted and amplified the grounds which he had
    submitted in support of the application for permission.

 9. Mr Gayle submitted that the First-tier Judge found that  the  Appellant
    was blogging and that her blog was critical of the regime.   Therefore,
    he submitted that the judge should have been very  wary  of  making  an
    adverse finding, particularly in view of the fact that the  authorities
    had closed down the blog.

10. Mr Gayle referred to paragraph 33 of the  decision  and  reasons  where
    Judge Holt stated that she had no real  sense  of  the  extent  of  the
    Appellant's blogging activities.  It was submitted that  extracts  from
    the Appellant's blogs were included in the appeal bundle and  therefore
    this analysis was flawed.

11. Mr Gayle pointed out that the Appellant  did  not  use  her  own  email
    address and that the judge has clearly misunderstood  the  evidence  in
    that respect.  He referred to paragraph 36 of the decision where  Judge
    Holt held that there was no evidence at all at the hearing  to  explain
    how it was that the Appellant had been able to print off and provide to
    her solicitors significant quantities of evidence from  her  blogs  and
    yet, at the same time, provided the notice from the three blogs  saying
    that they had been closed down.  Mr Gayle submitted that the  Appellant
    had never been asked to explain how such information had been provided.
     She could have answered the question if it had been asked.

12. Reference was made to paragraph 37 where the judge found that there was
    no corroborating evidence.  In  this  respect  it  was  submitted  that
    evidence from the Appellant's brother had been ignored.

13. Mr Gayle drew my attention to paragraph 39 where the  First-tier  Judge
    found it inconsistent that the Appellant's family would apparently have
    somebody who was a contact and a friend of the authorities and yet  the
    authorities, at the same time, were trying  to  trace  and  arrest  the
    Appellant.  The judge found that the evidence on that particular  point
    was unclear.  Mr Gayle complained that the judge's  reasoning  in  this
    respect was confused.

14. At paragraphs 41 and 42 it was argued that the First-tier Judge ignored
    evidence from  the  Appellant's  family  explaining  delay.   This  was
    another area in  which  an  explanation  provided  by  the  Appellant's
    brother had not been taken into account.

15. Finally, referring to paragraph 44, Mr Gayle submitted that the  First-
    tier Judge misunderstood the Appellant's evidence.  It was not her case
    that her address had been obtained from the blog.  It had  always  been
    her case that her  details  were  disclosed  by  her  friend,  Movarid,
    following her arrest.

16. For the Respondent, Mr  McVeety  attempted  to  persuade  me  that  the
    decision was adequate  and  should  be  upheld.   Nevertheless,  whilst
    making no concessions, he accepted that it was "less  than  perfect  in
    some areas".

17. Having given the matter careful thought, I am satisfied that  there  is
    merit in the arguments advanced on the Appellant's behalf by Mr  Gayle.
    This has been clearly set out in the Grounds of Appeal  and  I  do  not
    propose to repeat it in this decision.  I agree with Mr Gayle that,  in
    view of the positive findings made by the judge,  considerable  caution
    was necessary before concluding, to the low standard of proof, that the
    Appellant would not be at risk of serious harm on return to Iran.   The
    judge was satisfied that she had been writing a blog which was critical
    of the regime, the Iranian authorities do  persecute  such  people  and
    they had discovered the Appellant's identity.  In the  light  of  those
    findings, cogent reasons would be necessary in  order  to  satisfy  the
    Tribunal that the Appellant would, nevertheless,  not  be  at  risk  of
    serious harm.  I find that there are problem areas  in  the  First-tier
    Judge's reasoning.  In particular, she does appear to  have  overlooked
    evidence which was provided by the Appellant's brother.  The judge does
    appear to have misunderstood  the  evidence  at  paragraph  44  of  the
    decision where contradictory findings have been made.  The judge states
    that the Appellant claimed that the Iranian authorities had traced  her
    blogging activity online, and had been  able  to  pinpoint  her  family
    address, despite the use of a disguised name.  This has never been  the
    Appellant's case.  The Appellant consistently maintained that  she  had
    come to the attention of the authorities following the  arrest  of  her
    friend.  There was never  any  suggestion  that  she  had  been  traced
    online.

18. I am satisfied that these matters amount to a  material  error  of  law
    which justify setting aside the decision and having  the  matter  heard
    afresh.  I have reminded myself of  the  Practice  Statements  for  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    Upper Tribunal.  In particular I refer to part 3, paragraph 7.2(b)  and
    have concluded that this is an appropriate case  for  remittal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal in order that the appeal may be heard afresh  by  a
    First-tier Judge other than Judge Holt.

19. The making of the decision by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision
    and direct that the matter shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing.   No findings are preserved.

DIRECTIONS

20. The hearing shall be listed  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Bennett
    House, Stoke-on-Trent on the first available date.

21. The time estimate is three hours.

22. A Farsi interpreter shall be provided by the Tribunal.

23. The parties are not required to re-serve  evidence  which  has  already
    been served.  However, any new evidence or witness statements shall  be
    served and filed not  less  than  seven  days  before  the  substantive
    hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 17th April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates

