

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06238/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 16 November 2015                           |On 04 January 2016           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                     ES
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Saleem of Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues  and  I  find  that  it  is  appropriate  to
continue the order. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant is a 19 year old man who claims that he entered  the  UK
    clandestinely on 21 October 2013. He claimed asylum on 21 October  2013
    and was subsequently looked  after  by  Croydon  Social  Services.  The
    respondent refused his asylum application in a decision dated 08 August
    2014. First-tier Tribunal Judge Emerton  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 06 May 2015.

2.    The judge accepted the core account given by the appellant  as  likely
    to be true [28]. He went on to make the following findings:

           "29. I accept that the appellant is gay. He is young (only  just
           18) and has had no experiences of an openly  sexual  nature;  he
           came across at the hearing as fairly shy. He wishes to  be  able
           to live openly as a gay man, even though he has chosen not to do
           so, so far, in the UK. I accept that he left Albania after being
           subjected to  insults  and  minor  physical  abuse  from  school
           colleagues and his father, and possibly  from  neighbours,  once
           people heard that he was gay. I accept that he did not feel safe
           in Albania, although he was able to report  his  concerns  to  a
           teacher who plainly took his complaint seriously and promised to
           deal with the boys she named. He also felt able to report to the
           police in Tirana, albeit when he did  not  manage  to  speak  to
           anybody he appears to have given up, rather than being  rebuffed
           because he was gay. It is not entirely clear to  me  as  to  the
           extent to which he left Albania because he [had] fallen out with
           his family.


           30. He has been in the UK  since  October  2013,  and  has  been
           assisted by social workers  and  with  his  education  and  with
           learning English. He has been able to be educated in the  normal
           education system in Albania and reports no difficulty  with  his
           education or with sitting exams, although I accept that  he  was
           assessed in the UK (at least for those parts of the  test  which
           could be assessed through an  interpreter)  as  having  learning
           difficulties. I attach less weight  to  the  assessment  of  his
           being more "vulnerable" - this would not appear to be a  logical
           conclusion from the data. He clearly felt able, at  the  age  of
           16, to run away from home and make his own way overland  to  the
           UK, to a country where he did not speak the language. He was not
           prepared to remain in Albania and be subject to abuse, including
           from his own  father.  That  all  indicates  a  high  degree  of
           determination, resourcefulness and  self-reliance.  His  private
           life in the UK appears to have been rather subdued, and  on  his
           own  account  he  has  done  little  socialising  and  has  been
           concentrating on his studies."

3.    The judge directed himself to the correct legal framework as  outlined
    in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2011] 1AC 596 and went on to consider whether  the
    appellant would be at risk of treatment amounting to persecution if  he
    returned to Albania. He recognised that the appellant  wished  to  live
    openly as a gay man but noted that he had chosen not to be  open  about
    his sexuality in the UK. However, he accepted that  the  appellant  was
    still young and that if he chose not to live openly as  a  gay  man  in
    future "it would be the result of his subjective fears" [31]. The judge
    then conducted a review of the evidence relating to  Albania.  He  took
    into account the relatively old country guidance decision in IM (risk -
    objective evidence - homosexuals) Albania [2003] UKIAT as well as up to
    date background evidence. The Tribunal in IM (Albania)  concluded  that
    the evidence showed that, in general, gay men were not at real risk  of
    serious harm  in  Albania.  The  judge  concluded  with  the  following
    findings:


           "36. Overall, it does appear that the position is  that,  within
           Europe, Albania still has an unenviable  reputation  as  a  very
           unsatisfactory place to live in as a gay man, and there  remains
           discrimination and some risk  of  violence.  However,  there  is
           nothing before me suggesting that the situation has deteriorated
           since IM [2003]. Rather, there  have  been  some,  if  faltering
           steps, by the authorities to introduce anti-discrimination  laws
           and deal with the situation, even if the reality is  that  there
           has been little improvement. Perhaps the  time  is  overdue  for
           another Country Guidance case  dealing  with  the  position  for
           homosexuals in Albania. However, on the basis  of  the  material
           before me, I consider that the proper conclusion to come  to  is
           that the situation remains one, as described in  IM,  where  the
           level of discrimination against gays does  not  generally  cross
           the threshold into persecution.

           37. With respect to  this  appellant,  he  has  not  reported  a
           particularly significant level of ill-treatment so far.  He  has
           fallen out with his family, and left the family home  when  aged
           16. This is consistent with the background evidence. However, he
           is now aged 18, has completed his formal education and is at the
           stage when he might in any event be expected  to  earn  his  own
           living and establish his own life. He plainly has  no  intention
           of returning to  the  family  home,  having  apparently  severed
           connections with his family in their home village. I  would  not
           expect him to wish to return to his village, but rather to  live
           in Tirana or another town. I  would  not  characterise  this  as
           "internal flight", because he has not established that he is  at
           risk  of  persecution  from  his  family  (or  that   sufficient
           protection is not available) but to the extent that he might  be
           at risk, I do not see it as unreasonable, or unduly  harsh,  for
           the appellant to live elsewhere and seek  work  without  contact
           with his family. There is no evidence suggesting that they  have
           any wish to track him down to make his life  difficult:  rather,
           they have lost touch.


           38.   Notwithstanding   the   appellant's   diagnosed   learning
           difficulties, I do not consider that the evidence suggests  that
           he would be unable to find work. He has not  himself  complained
           of being disadvantaged in the education system in Albania, or in
           studying in the UK, and I would expect him to be  able  to  find
           work within his own capabilities. He is plainly determined,  and
           is described in his assessment as "a very pleasant  young  man".
           He suffers, as far as I  know,  from  no  medical  condition.  I
           accept that if he is open about his homosexuality  he  would  be
           likely to face discrimination, but I do not consider that he has
           established, even to the  low  standard  of  proof  required  in
           asylum  cases,  that  he  is  someone  who  needs  international
           protection as a refugee. The asylum appeal is dismissed."

4.    The appellant seeks to appeal the decision on the following grounds:

      (i)   The First-tier Tribunal failed to  consider  factors  that  were
           material  to  a  proper  assessment   of   the   threshold   for
           persecution. There was no bright  line  in  terms  of  age  even
           though he had turned 18. There was no adequate scrutiny  of  the
           fact that he would have no family, community or support  network
           on return that might reduce or eliminate the risks that he would
           face as a gay man.  He  should  not  be  required  to  hide  his
           identity.

      (ii)  The First-tier Tribunal failed to  give  adequate  consideration
           to whether the cumulative  effect  of  discrimination  would  be
           sufficient to amount to persecution in circumstances  where  the
           authorities would not offer him any degree of protection.





Decision and reasons

5.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral arguments I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

6.    In HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2011] 1AC 596 Lord Roger set  out  the  following
    guidance:

           "82. When an applicant applies for asylum on  the  ground  of  a
           well-founded fear of persecution because he is gay, the tribunal
           must first ask itself whether it is satisfied  on  the  evidence
           that he is gay, or that he would be treated as gay by  potential
           persecutors in his country of nationality.
           If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied
           on the available evidence that gay people who lived openly would
           be  liable  to  persecution  in  the  applicant's   country   of
           nationality.
           If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what  the  individual
           applicant would do if he were returned to that country.
           If the applicant would  in  fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
           exposed to a real risk of  persecution,  then  he  has  a  well-
           founded fear of persecution - even if he could avoid the risk by
           living "discreetly".
           If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that the applicant
           would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it  must
           go on to ask itself why he would do so.
           If the tribunal concludes that the  applicant  would  choose  to
           live discreetly simply because that was  how  he  himself  would
           wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g,  not  wanting
           to distress his parents  or  embarrass  his  friends,  then  his
           application should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do
           not amount to persecution and  the  Convention  does  not  offer
           protection against them. Such a person has no well-founded  fear
           of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing to do with
           any fear of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt  a  way  of
           life which means that he is not in fact liable to be  persecuted
           because he is gay.
           If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  a  material
           reason for the applicant living discreetly on his  return  would
           be a fear of the persecution which would follow if  he  were  to
           live openly as a gay man, then, other things  being  equal,  his
           application should be accepted. Such a person has a well-founded
           fear of persecution. To reject his  application  on  the  ground
           that he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would
           be to defeat the very  right  which  the  Convention  exists  to
           protect - his right to live freely  and  openly  as  a  gay  man
           without fear of persecution. By  admitting  him  to  asylum  and
           allowing him to live freely and openly as a gay man without fear
           of persecution, the receiving state gives effect to  that  right
           by affording the applicant a surrogate for the  protection  from
           persecution  which  his  country  of  nationality  should   have
           afforded him."

7.    The judge dealt with the first stage of the  assessment  and  accepted
    that the appellant is a young gay man who has not yet lived openly as a
    gay man either in Albania or the UK. He accepted that this might be  as
    a result of the appellant's young age given that his evidence was  that
    he would like to live openly.

8.    The judge then turned to the second stage  of  the  assessment,  which
    was to ask whether background evidence relating to Albania showed  that
    gay men who lived openly would be subject to sufficiently  severe  ill-
    treatment that would amount to persecution. It was quite proper of  the
    judge to take as his starting point the  last  known  country  guidance
    decision on the  issue  albeit  that  it  was  one  that  assessed  the
    situation as it was in 2003. He also  took  into  account  more  recent
    background  evidence,  which  showed  that  homophobic  attitudes   and
    discrimination continued and that there was a societal stigma to  being
    gay as well as "unhelpful attitudes  from  public  officials"  [32-35].
    While he noted that new anti-discrimination laws  had  been  passed  he
    concluded that "in reality the position does not appear to have changed
    much in recent years" [33]. He also referred to other reports that gave
    examples of homophobic statements made by the police,  police  violence
    against LGBT people and cases where  the  police  had  failed  to  take
    protective measures when asked. He noted that the enforcement of  anti-
    discrimination laws was generally weak [34-35]. His overall conclusion,
    having weighed the evidence, was that although  Albania  was  still  "a
    very unsatisfactory place to live in as a gay man"  because  there  was
    discrimination and some risk of violence, there was nothing to  suggest
    that the situation had deteriorated since the decision in IM (Albania).



9.    The judge specifically  took  into  account  the  appellant's  age  at
    several places in  the  decision  and  it  was  quite  clearly  at  the
    forefront of his mind when assessing what risk he might face on return.
    He found that the appellant had already decided to leave home  and  was
    now of an age where he could develop an independent  life  outside  his
    home area if necessary. It is quite clear  that  the  judge  took  into
    account his potential vulnerabilities  as  a  result  of  the  learning
    difficulties assessment but he went on to give adequate reasons why  he
    considered that those difficulties had not hindered  him  from  showing
    resourcefulness and resilience in leaving home to travel across  Europe
    on his own. I conclude that those findings were open to  the  judge  to
    make on the evidence and that he could not be criticised for failing to
    consider matters that might have related to the  appellant's  potential
    vulnerability.

10.   While the judge considered that the situation remained  difficult  for
    gay men in Albania it was open to him to find, on the  evidence  before
    him, that  the  situation  had  not  changed  significantly  since  the
    decision in IM (Albania). While there were some reported  incidents  of
    violence they were not so frequent or sufficiently severe to give  rise
    to a real risk on return. The threshold for persecution is  quite  high
    and the feared ill-treatment must reach a minimum  level  of  severity.
    Article 9 of  the  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  ("the  Qualification
    Directive") states:

           "1.   Acts of persecution within the meaning of  article  1A  of
                 the Geneva Convention must:
                                (a)     be  sufficiently  serious  by  their
                       nature  or  repetition  as  to  constitute  a  severe
                       violation of basic human rights,  in  particular  the
                       rights from which derogations cannot  be  made  under
                       Article 15(2) of  the  European  Convention  for  the
                       Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms;
                       or
                                 (b)      be  an  accumulation  of   various
                       measures, including violations of human rights  which
                       is sufficiently severe as to affect an individual  in
                       a similar manner as mentioned in (a)."

11.   The judge quite clearly took into account the fact that the  appellant
    may have a subjective fear of living openly as a gay man in Albania but
    in order for a person to be recognised as a refugee a  subjective  fear
    of persecution also needs to be objectively well-founded. The judge had
    taken into account the background evidence relating  to  the  situation
    for  gay  men  in  Albania,  which  included   evidence   of   societal
    discrimination, but concluded that the situation was  not  sufficiently
    severe to amount to persecution. That finding was open to him  to  make
    on the evidence. Having concluded that the second limb of the  guidance
    in HJ (Iran) had not been made out it was not necessary for  the  judge
    to go on to consider whether the appellant would live openly or not  or
    what his reasons were for  doing  so.  Even  if  the  appellant  had  a
    subjective fear of living openly the judge had already  concluded  that
    what he feared was not sufficiently severe to amount to persecution for
    the purpose of the Refugee Convention.

12.   For these reasons I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    did not involve the making of an error on a point of law. The  decision
    shall stand.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]   Date 21 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








