
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/06954/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10th March 2016                        | On 29th April 2016               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                            Fathima Rinaza Nazavi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin, Counsel instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  11th  February
    1989.  The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 2nd September 2008 when
    she was granted leave to enter as a student until  31st  October  2010.
    That leave was subsequently extended until 4th  April  2014.   However,
    that leave was curtailed so as to expire on  27th  May  2012.   On  8th
    February 2013 the Appellant made an unsuccessful application for  leave
    to remain as a dependent spouse, and on 17th January 2014  she  applied
    for asylum.  That application was refused for the reasons given in  the
    Respondent's letter of 28th March 2015.  The  Appellant  appealed,  and
    her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal James  sitting
    at Birmingham on 3rd August 2015.  He decided to dismiss the appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection,  and  human  rights  grounds  for  the
    reasons given in his Decision dated 20th August  2015.   The  Appellant
    sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 17th September  2015  such
    permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge found the Appellant to be credible.  He found as a fact  that
    prior to leaving Sri Lanka the  Appellant  had  worked  for  a  company
    called Hi Tech Group.  As part of her  work,  she  had  assisted  three
    Tamils  to  obtain  visas,  and  she  had  also  provided   them   with
    accommodation at her family home with the consent of her father  whilst
    they waited for the visas to be issued.  These Tamils had been arrested
    on their return to Sri Lanka in December 2013 perhaps on the  suspicion
    of being LTTE members.  As a consequence, the  Appellant's  father  had
    been detained by the authorities and questioned  about  his  daughter's
    involvement with the  men.   However,  he  had  been  released  without
    persecution, although the authorities had continued to  make  enquiries
    concerning the Appellant.  Nevertheless, no  arrest  warrant  had  been
    issued against the Appellant.

 4. The Judge decided that on these facts the Appellant did not come within
    any of the risk categories identified in GJ and Others (Post-civil war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).   In  particular,  the
    Appellant was not on a "stop list" and therefore did  not  come  within
    category 7(d) listed at paragraph 356 of GJ.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Martin argued that the Judge had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to  that  conclusion  as  he  had  not  considered  whether  the
    Appellant's name appeared on a "watch list" of the  sort  mentioned  at
    headnote (9) of GJ.  This had been part of the Appellant's case  argued
    at the hearing.  Mr Martin accepted that if the Appellant's name was on
    such a list, she would not be arrested at the airport  on  return,  but
    thereafter she would be monitored.  Bearing in mind what  had  happened
    to the Appellant's father, such monitoring would lead  to  persecution.
    The Appellant had helped three Tamils leave the country.  These  Tamils
    had excited the interest of the Sri Lankan authorities.  It was  likely
    that the Appellant would be treated more severely than her  father  who
    had not been involved  with  these  men  to  the  same  extent  as  the
    Appellant.

 6. In response, Mr Mills referred to his Rule 24  response  and  submitted
    that there had been no such error of law.  The headnote  to  GJ  relied
    upon by the Appellant was not a risk category.   The  Judge  had  found
    none of the risk categories identified in GJ to apply.  The  background
    evidence was that  people  on  the  "watch  list"  were  monitored  for
    assessment.  Whether that would lead to persecution depended  upon  the
    facts.  In that respect it was significant that the Appellant's  father
    had not been ill-treated whilst in detention.   He  had  been  involved
    with the three Tamils to a similar extent as  that  of  the  Appellant.
    Any post-return monitoring of the Appellant would reveal that  she  was
    not a threat to the State.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  therefore  I
    do not set aside.  It was part of the Appellant's case before the Judge
    that she was at risk as somebody on a "watch list".  It  was  therefore
    an error of law for the Judge  not  to  deal  with  this  part  of  the
    Appellant's case.  However, I am satisfied that such an error  was  not
    material as even to the  lower  standard,  I  find  that  even  if  the
    Appellant's name did appear on the "watch list" it would  not  lead  to
    her persecution or any other form of ill-treatment and  therefore  that
    she is not at risk on return.  Those whose names appear on  the  "watch
    list" are not automatically arrested at the airport on return.  All  it
    means is that their activities are  monitored  following  return.   The
    Appellant has never been involved with the LTTE or any other separatist
    movement and such monitoring will only reveal that she is not a  threat
    to the Sri Lankan state in any way.  I  have  therefore  no  reason  to
    believe that on return the Appellant will be treated any worse than her
    father was, and it is not in dispute that he was not ill-treated.

 8. My conclusion therefore is that if it is the case that the  Appellant's
    name appears on the "watch list", she will not be at  risk  on  return,
    and therefore any error of omission by the Judge is not material.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  find  no
reason to do so.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

