
IAC-AH-DN-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06084/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th January 2015                          |On 27th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                          ms selamawit teklemariam
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born  on  24th  June  1987.   The
    Appellant left Eritrea in January 2014 on foot, stayed in Sudan for one
    month before leaving by plane to France using  a  fake  passport.   The
    Appellant entered the UK clandestinely in a lorry on  26th  April  2014
    and claimed asylum on the same day.  The Appellant's claim  for  asylum
    was based upon  fear  that  if  returned  to  Eritrea  she  would  face
    mistreatment due  to  her  Pentecostal  religion  and  her  failure  to
    complete national service.  The Appellant's application for asylum  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 5th August 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Lever sitting at Manchester on 25th September 2014.  In a
    determination promulgated on 9th October 2014  the  Appellant's  appeal
    was allowed on asylum grounds.

 3. On 16th October 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  On 27th October  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Holmes granted permission to  appeal.   Judge  Holmes  noted  that  the
    grounds complained that the judge found the  evidence  relied  upon  in
    support of the claim to be a genuine convert to the  Pentecostal  faith
    to  be  "extremely  flimsy  and  unreliable"  and  that  the   evidence
    concerning her circumstances in Eritrea "raised  real  concerns  as  to
    credibility".  In conclusion the judge found that the Appellant had not
    given a credible account of her life in Eritrea or the circumstances in
    which she left that country.

 4. Judge Holmes considered that in the circumstances it was arguable  that
    the judge had misunderstood or failed to properly  apply  the  relevant
    country guidance decisions in relation to Eritrea of MA (draft  evaders
    - illegal departures - risk) Eritrea  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00059  and  MO
    (illegal exit - risk on return)  Eritrea  CG  [2011]  UKUT  190  (IAC).
    Judge Holmes found there was no burden of proof upon the Respondent  to
    show that either the Appellant was not who she claimed to  be  or  that
    she was exempt from military service  or  that  she  had  left  Eritrea
    legally.  In the light of the judge's findings that the  Appellant  had
    failed to prove her case in these key respects and in the circumstances
    it was well arguable that there was no proper  basis  for  the  judge's
    assumption that she must have left Eritrea illegally.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law.  This is an appeal  by
    the Secretary of State and for the purpose of continuity throughout the
    legal proceedings the Secretary of State is referred to herein  as  the
    Respondent and Ms Teklemariam  as  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant  is
    represented by Ms Faryl.  Ms Faryl is familiar with this matter  having
    appeared before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr McVeety.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr McVeety submits that it is clear from the Notice of Refusal that the
    Home Office contest the basis upon which the Appellant left Eritrea and
    that the judge was wrong to find at paragraph 33 that  the  Appellant's
    account of having left Eritrea illegally was in any way  not  contested
    by the Respondent.  Further he contends that in finding at paragraph 32
    that there was "no evidence that the Appellant falls within the  highly
    restricted categories of people who could  leave  Eritrea  lawfully  as
    referred to in the case of MO" that it was trite law that the burden of
    proof lay with the Appellant and that it was an error  of  law  by  the
    judge to require the Respondent to provide  evidence  to  disprove  the
    Appellant's account.

 7. Further he contended that the judge  had  misdirected  himself  in  his
    reference to the authority of MO and by concluding  that  the  evidence
    available to him did not allow him to say that  because  the  Appellant
    had been found to be entirely lacking in credibility  it  can  be  said
    that she had left the country lawfully.  He  submits  this  is  exactly
    what the judge states at paragraph 34 and that in doing so  he  creates
    an error of law that is material.

 8. Ms Faryl responds by stating that the judge's findings are  robust  and
    that he has considered quite properly the country guidance authorities.
     She submits there is no presumption that the Appellant would have left
    unlawfully if her account lacked credibility.  She submits  that  Judge
    Lever had considered that the Appellant could have left in  the  manner
    that she did and therefore it is irrelevant if the  Respondent  accepts
    her account or not.  She submits that the fact remains that  the  judge
    was entitled to make the findings that he did and that the  Appellant's
    case fell into the limited category  of  people  who  could  have  left
    Eritrea illegally.  She points out there is no medical issue  here  and
    that the judge was entitled to find that it was more  likely  than  not
    that the Appellant had left Eritrea illegally.

 9. She submits that MO gives a direction to the judge to consider  whether
    or not she could have left legally and that the judge has done this and
    therefore even if the story is  incredible  it  is  for  the  judge  to
    consider whether or not the Appellant left legally or  illegally.   She
    submits that the judge has done exactly this and therefore there is  no
    error of law in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

The Authorities

12. MO (illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 190 (IAC)  is
    the authority for the following propositions.

      i) The general position concerning illegal exit remains  as  expressed
         in MA, namely that illegal exit by a person of or approaching draft
         age and not medically unfit cannot be  assumed  if  they  had  been
         found wholly incredible.  However if such a person is found to have
         left Eritrea on or after August/September 2008,  it  may  be,  that
         inferences can be drawn from  their  health  history  or  level  of
         education or their skills profile as to whether legal exit on their
         part was feasible, provided that such inferences can  be  drawn  in
         the light of the adverse credibility findings.

     ii) The general position adopted in MA, that a person of or approaching
         draft age and not medically unfit who is accepted  as  having  left
         Eritrea illegally is reasonably likely to be regarded with  serious
         hostility on return, is reconfirmed, subject to limited exceptions.

    iii) Whilst it also remains the position that failed asylum  seekers  as
         such are not generally at real risk of persecution or serious  harm
         on return, on present evidence the great majority of  such  persons
         are likely to be perceived as having left illegally and this  fact,
         save the very limited exceptions, will mean  that  on  return  they
         face a real risk of persecution or serious harm.

Findings

13. This is a detailed and  well  constructed  determination  from  a  very
    experienced Tribunal Judge.  The judge has heard the evidence and  that
    paragraph 31 has  made  findings  that  he  was  entitled  to  but  the
    Appellant had not provided a credible account of her life in Eritrea or
    the circumstances surrounding her leaving that  country.   Having  made
    that finding he then went on to  consider  the  relevant  case  law  in
    particular MO which he has analysed in considerable detail at paragraph
    32.

14. At paragraph 33 he has analysed the evidence that was produced  to  him
    and that the only explanation provided as to how she  left  Eritrea  is
    that she crossed the  border  from  Eritrea  to  Sudan  unlawfully  and
    thereafter flew to France using false documents.  He found as a  matter
    of fact that that explanation had not been contested by  the  Secretary
    of State and made findings which he was entitled to that  that  account
    did not suggest a lawful exit from Eritrea.

15. At paragraph 34 the judge therefore made findings that  when  assessing
    MO he was bound to assume for the reasons that he had given that it was
    reasonably  likely  that  the  Appellant  left  Eritrea  illegally  and
    therefore would be at risk on return.  In such circumstances the  judge
    has followed a  structured  approach  and  made  findings  that  he  is
    perfectly entitled to.  The submissions made by the Secretary of  State
    consequently  amount  to  little  more  than   disagreement   and   the
    determination discloses no material error of law and the appeal of  the
    Secretary of State is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 14th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and no fee award is claimed nor one made.



Signed        Date 14th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

