

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06949/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 29 September 2016                          |On 05 October 2016           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                   M S J A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  who  appealed  against  the
    decision to refuse his asylum claim. His appeal  against  that  refusal
    was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Eban ("the FTTJ")  in
    a decision promulgated on 18 July 2016.

 2. I maintain the anonymity direction which was  made  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes  on  30
    August 2015 as follows:

         "...

         3. The grounds argue that the Judge did not look at the Appellant's
             [sic] as a whole and had not made findings about  the  medical
             evidence relating to the Appellant's injuries.  The  Appellant
             had stated that he had left Sri Lanka having paid a bribe  and
             the Judge had erred  in  assuming  how  other  administrations
             behave.   The  documents  relied  on  had  not  been  properly
             analysed. It was  also  suggested  that  the  Judge  had  made
             assumptions on the ability to trade during the war but  be  of
             interest afterwards.  It was argued that  the  Judge  had  not
             applied anxious scrutiny.

         4. The bulk of the grounds have no  merit  as  they  are  simply  a
             disagreement with the findings properly made and open  to  the
             Judge on the information available.  The various findings that
             have been made are set out and those have  to  be  read  as  a
             whole. It cannot be said that  the  decision  was  superficial
             and, for example, with regard to the documents these were  set
             out and considered and contrasted with a DVR.

         5. If there is a concern it would be that the Judge might not  have
             considered  the  medical  evidence  as  fully   as   required.
             Ultimately this might make no difference but is arguable  that
             when faced with reports that supported his  injuries  and  the
             mechanism for the causation a more detailed examination  might
             have been required.  There may be arguments about  the  extent
             to which the reports can be relied on  the  Istanbul  Protocol
             [sic].

         6. Albeit that the grounds overall are a disagreement with findings
             made on the evidence the issue of the medical evidence and the
             need to consider that as part of the overall case lead  me  to
             find that the grounds are arguable and permission to appeal is
             granted."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me.

 5. Mr Jafar, for the appellant, applied for permission to adduce  evidence
    in support of the appellant's appeal pursuant  to  Rule  15(2)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.  He  referred  to  the
    appellant having submitted to the FTTJ three letters  from  Sri  Lanka.
    Issues had been raised with regard to  those  letters  and  "the  first
    opportunity  the  appellant  had  of  addressing  them  was  after  the
    determination".  He submitted that the fresh evidence was  relevant  to
    the issue of whether or not there was an error of  law  in  the  FTTJ's
    decision.  Mr Clarke, for the  respondent,  objected  to  the  evidence
    being admitted on the  ground  that  the  application  failed  the  due
    diligence test: this evidence could have been placed before the FTTJ at
    the hearing. It was not appropriate that evidence be  adduced  at  this
    stage to rebut the findings of the FTTJ. I refused the application: the
    new evidence could, with reasonable diligence, have been  obtained  for
    use at the FTT hearing (Ladd v Marshall [1954] 3 All ER  745  and  R  v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.)

 6. Mr Jafar noted  the  findings  on  credibility  at  [32]  and  positive
    findings in favour of the appellant at [33]. Some of  the  findings  at
    sub-paragraphs 1-17 of [32] were wrong, eg  that  "it  seems  extremely
    unlikely that if there were an arrest warrant out  for  the  appellant,
    that he would have been able to leave Sri Lanka on  his  own  passport,
    notwithstanding what the appellant says about a bribe having been  paid
    to an immigration officer".  He relied on GJ and Ors  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC). The FTTJ  should  have
    stated this  was  possible  and  feasible:  there  were  no  individual
    circumstances which warranted different treatment to that  in  GJ.  The
    appellant had left Sri Lanka using a bribe. He submitted that an  error
    of law in relation to any of the issues in the sub-paragraphs  at  [32]
    rendered the decision on credibilty unreliable.

 7. Mr Jafar referred to sub-paragraph 11 of [32] and the reasons cited for
    preferring the DVR to the attorney's correspondence yet  the  DVR  "had
    problems": there was no written response to  the  respondent's  request
    for verification; the addressee was based in Colombo  not  Polonnaruwa.
    This was second-hand evidence and the FTTJ had made  assumptions  about
    its content. There was insufficient evidence for reliance on the DVR as
    opposed to the attorney's correspondence which was largely consistent.

 8. He submitted the FTTJ had not engaged  sufficiently  with  the  medical
    evidence. Both reports described scarring which was consistent with the
    appellant's account of torture. The FTTJ had failed to take  this  into
    account.

 9. As regards the letter from the Human Rights Commission,  there  was  no
    challenge by the respondent, no DVR. It had been wrong of the  FTTJ  to
    require corroboration of that document, given its age.

10. Mr Jafar submitted that the findings at [32] were largely  assumptions;
    he could not go so far as to say the findings were  perverse  but  they
    were not determinative of credibility whereas the court documents,  the
    medical evidence and other evidence was highly  determinative  and  had
    significant momentum requiring engagement.  Mr Jafar submitted that  an
    error of law in relation to one of the findings in  the  sub-paragraphs
    of [32] would be sufficient to render the decision unreliable.

11. For the  respondent,  Mr  Clarke  submitted  FTTJ  had  considered  the
    evidence meticulously and as a whole. Her sub-paragraphs at  [32]  were
    not findings but concerns, apart from  sub-paragraph  16  which  was  a
    finding on the appellant's sur place activities and consistent with GJ.
    It should be seen with [33]  and  [34]  where  she  had  made  specific
    findings in the light of the background material.   At  [33]  the  FTTJ
    had taken into account the medical evidence cited at [13] - [17].  That
    evidence was accepted.   The medical evidence was not determinative  of
    the appellant's account. It was taken appropriately in the round.  This
    was a text book approach to the evidence.

12. As regards sub-paragraph 13 of [32] and the ability of the appellant to
    leave Sri Lanka on his own passport with a bribe, the FTTJ had given  a
    perfect summary of the evidence and the guidance in GJ; in  the  latter
    case the respondent had  conceded  [170]  that  leaving  on  one's  own
    passport was not probative, given  the  levels  of  corruption  in  Sri
    Lanka. It was not inappropriate for the FTTJ to  find  that,  with  the
    existence of an arrest warrant and the  absence  of  a  bribe,  it  was
    unlikely the appellant would get through the airport.

13. He also submitted the FTTJ's reliance on the DVR was appropriate. There
    was no requirement on the addressee to give a written reply. As regards
    the correspondence from the Human Rights Commission (HRC) of Sri Lanka,
    even if it were construed that the  FTTJ  required  corroboration,  the
    FTTJ was entitled to  draw  an  inference  from  the  lack  of  further
    correspondence as regards the appellant's missing uncle notwithstanding
    it would have been an error of law to require the appellant to  provide
    corroboration  (ST  (Corroboration  -  Kasolo)  Ethiopia  [2004]  UKIAT
    00119). The FTTJ had made findings  which  were  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.

Analysis

14. The FTTJ makes it clear that the issues  she  has  identified  at  sub-
    paragraphs 1-17 of [32] are her reasons  for  her  concerns  about  the
    reliability of the appellant's account.

15. It is unarguable that the FTTJ "erred in law by failing to consider the
    appellant's claim as a whole".  It  is  not  submitted  that  the  FTTJ
    failed to consider any relevant evidence and her decision  is  detailed
    and comprehensive.  She makes it plain at [32] that she has  considered
    the evidence "as a whole". She has  summarised  the  medical  evidence,
    both of Mr Mason and Dr Frazer and the appellant's GP.  Whilst she does
    not make specific findings on the issue at this stage,  she  notes  the
    relevant opinions of the medical experts, none of which  refer  to  the
    appellant's scarring as being more than consistent  with  his  account.
    The medical evidence is not challenged by the respondent and  the  FTTJ
    does not query it.  She notes the diagnosis of  post  traumatic  stress
    disorder (PTSD).   The FTTJ has not misrepresented the opinions of  the
    two medical experts or the nature of the appellant's injuries and their
    causation. She has rightly taken into account the medical evidence when
    considering the evidence in the round [33].  The  report  of  Mr  Mason
    notes only  that  the  lesions  are  consistent  with  the  appellant's
    account; this is at the lower end of the spectrum  under  the  Istanbul
    Protocol. Similarly, Dr Frazer says the appearance of  the  appellant's
    finger is highly  consistent  with  a  fracture  which  has  healed  in
    unsatisfactory alignment; this is not an opinion on the consistency  of
    the scarring or physical features with the appellant's account; it does
    not therefore assist the appellant. I am satisfied therefore  that  the
    FTTJ considered the medical evidence appropriately and in the round  in
    her assessment of the reliability of the appellant's evidence.

16. I am unable to find that the FTTJ's decision to rely  on  the  document
    verification report (DVR) as  opposed  to  the  attorneys'  letters  is
    inadequately reasoned, taking into account [18-24], sub-paragraph 11 of
    [32], and [33] as a whole.  The FTTJ describes the evidence  carefully,
    both individually and in the context of the appellant's  account.   She
    has taken into account the issues identified by Mr Jafar before  me  in
    her assessment of the reliability of the appellant's documents.   There
    is no challenge by the appellant  to  the  FTTJ's  description  of  the
    evidence before her.  I see no merit in the suggestion that the failure
    of the respondent to obtain a  written  response  to  her  request  for
    verification  undermines  the  value  of  the  DVR.   The   appellant's
    challenge is no more than a disagreement with the FTTJ's decision;  her
    reasons are sustainable.

17. It is submitted the FTTJ has erred in law in expecting the appellant to
    have produced  corroborative  evidence  of  his  uncle's  disappearance
    [32.10].  The FTTJ noted there was no follow-up letter  from  the  HRC.
    She also noted the appellant's evidence in interview on the  issue  and
    took this into account. I am unable to accept the proposition that  the
    FTTJ has based her findings on her own assumptions. She has  considered
    the evidence in the round and has given it anxious  scrutiny;  she  has
    identified various matters of concern in the appellant's  account  such
    as the existence of coincidence, tenuous links, the lack of implication
    of the appellant in any terrorist  activity,  the  lack  of  consistent
    background material, the unreliability of the attorneys'  letters,  the
    appellant's delayed asylum claim  as  well  as  the  implausibility  of
    various aspects of his claim.  In ST (Corroboration - Kasolo)  Ethiopia
    [2004] UKIAT 00119 the Tribunal said that  it  was  a  misdirection  to
    imply that corroboration  was  necessary  for  a  positive  credibility
    finding.  However, the fact that corroboration was not required did not
    mean that an Adjudicator was required  to  leave  out  of  account  the
    absence of documentary evidence, which could reasonably be expected. An
    appeal must be determined on the basis of the evidence produced but the
    weight to be attached to oral evidence may be affected by a failure  to
    produce other evidence in support. In the present  case  the  appellant
    had provided various letters from attorneys on other  matters  and  the
    FTTJ was entitled to note he had not done so in relation to this issue.
    The FTTJ was entitled  to  find  that  the  absence  of  such  evidence
    undermined "any inference that this is in some way related to the  fact
    that [the appellant] is wanted". It was a matter of the  weight  to  be
    given to the documentary  evidence  provided  on  this  issue  and  its
    relevance to the appellant's claim that he was at risk on return.   The
    FTTJ was entitled to take into account that the HRC  letter  was  dated
    2009 and that there were no further documents on  the  issue.  She  was
    entitled to take into account, in considering the weight to be given to
    that letter, what other documents might have been adduced, particularly
    as the appellant was on notice from the respondent, in the reasons  for
    refusal letter, that this document was said not to support his claim.

18. The appellant challenges the "finding" of the FTTJ at [32.13] that:

         "it seems extremely unlikely that if there were an  arrest  warrant
         out for the appellant, that he would have been able  to  leave  Sri
         Lanka on his own passport, notwithstanding what the appellant  says
         about a bribe having been paid to an immigration officer."

      Whilst the FTTJ makes it clear that the matters she addresses at  [32]
    are reasons for concern, I agree with Mr Jafar that, on the face of it,
    this statement could be considered to be at odds with the  guidance  in
    GJ.  However, [170] in GJ is as follows:

         "He [for the Secretary  of  State]  accepted  that  there  were  no
         detention facilities at the airport and that, given the  prevalence
         of bribery and corruption in  Sri  Lanka,  having  left  Sri  Lanka
         without difficulty was not probative of a lack of adverse  interest
         in an individual".

    Thus, even if the FTTJ has erred in law (and she makes it clear at [32]
    that this is a matter of concern rather than a specific  finding),  the
    appellant's claimed departure on his own passport having paid  a  bribe
    is not "probative of a lack of adverse interest"  in  him.   There  are
    significant other reasons for the FTTJ's concerns about the appellant's
    evidence  and  she  makes  it  clear  that  she  reaches  her   adverse
    credibility finding on the basis of the evidence as a whole,  including
    the medical evidence.  Thus  her  failure  to  take  into  account  the
    guidance in GJ and her consequent error as to the  appellant's  ability
    to leave Sri Lanka on his own passport using a bribe is not a  material
    error of law, there being sufficient  other  reasons  for  her  adverse
    finding on the reliability of the  appellant's  evidence.   The  FTTJ's
    conclusion on this discrete issue has no impact on the  other  concerns
    the FTTJ has identified or the outcome of the appeal generally.

19. For these reasons I am satisfied that the decision  is  sustainable  on
    the evidence and that the failure to take into account the guidance  in
    GJ in assessing the ability of the appellant to leave Sri Lanka on  his
    own passport by using a bribe does not undermine the  validity  of  the
    decision.

Decision

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


A M Black

Signed                                       Date        4 October 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black





