
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06003/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |    Decision & Reasons         |
|On 29 July 2015                              |Promulgated                    |
|                                             |On 28 September 2015           |
|                                             |                               |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     BN
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Grace Capel, Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 26 February  2014  refusing  to  grant  her
    further leave to remain and to remove her to Somalia.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born in 1943. She arrived in  the
    UK on 15 January 2014 having left Somalia the previous day. She claimed
    asylum on arrival on the basis that she was  a  member  of  the  Ashraf
    minority clan and subject to persecution by Al-Shabab  on  return.  She
    was 72 years old and a widow. She came to the UK because there  was  no
    one to look after her and there was fighting in her area. She lived  in
    Jingadda in the Huraan area of central Somalia.

 4. The appellant stated that she has three children, one lives in  Somalia
    or the USA, one lives in the USA and a daughter lives in  the  UK.  She
    has  hearing  problems,  problems  with   her   memory   and   problems
    understanding questions in interview.  The  respondent  relied  upon  a
    Sprakab language analysis test and rejected the appellant's claim to be
    from central Somalia and a member of a minority clan. Her claim to be a
    lone woman in Somalia was also rejected. She did not otherwise  qualify
    for leave to remain.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. She did  not  attend
    the hearing listed at Columbus House on 4 February 2015  and  her  then
    representatives withdrew on 8 October 2014. The  hearing  was  relisted
    for 2 March 2015 at Columbus House. The appellant did not attend  again
    and the respondent was not represented. The judge determined the appeal
    without a hearing.

 6. The judge found that the appellant was an unreliable witness and relied
    upon the Sprakab evidence which  assessed  the  appellant's  linguistic
    background as the region of Bari in north-east Somalia. She was  unable
    to say which clan she belonged to when asked by  the  Sprakab  analyst.
    Even if she was a member of a minority clan she had not been persecuted
    during her 70 years for being  a  member  of  that  clan.  There  is  a
    presence of Al-Shabab in the Bari region but  the  background  evidence
    and the appellant's personal history did not demonstrate  such  a  high
    level of indiscriminate violence to justify  a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection.

 7. The judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds in  a  decision  dated  2
    March 2015.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 11 April 2015. The grounds
    assert that the appellant is virtually blind, unable  to  walk  unaided
    and is illiterate. She instructed  her  current  representatives  on  9
    April 2015 at a Bristol Refugee Rights drop-in. She was accompanied  by
    her daughter, AO, who was granted  refugee  status  in  the  UK  on  17
    February 2004. The respondent had failed to disclose that evidence. The
    appellant was unable to exercise her right of appeal  unaided.  It  was
    not in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing in absence.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chambers
    on 23 April 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that an error of law
    had arisen as a result of non-provision of the information relating  to
    AO. All grounds were arguable.

10. In a rule 24 response dated 6 May 2015, the respondent sought to uphold
    the judge's decision on the basis that it was not clear on  what  basis
    AO has leave to remain in the UK and it could  not  be  said  with  any
    degree of certainty that, if any material was withheld, that would have
    made any difference to the outcome of the appeal.

11. I have seen a bundle of papers relating to AO's asylum claim from 2002.
    Mr Irwin had no objection to admissibility of those documents.

12. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

13. Ms Capel submitted that it  was  not  clear  who  asked  the  judge  to
    determine the appeal on the papers. AO was granted refugee status as  a
    member of a minority clan but that was not mentioned in the appellant's
    refusal letter. AO's evidence refers to the appellant as being involved
    in incidents. There are supporting  witness  statements  as  well.  The
    respondent should have considered the  grant  and  basis  of  grant  of
    refugee status to AO in the refusal letter. The evidence is capable  of
    undermining the respondent's case. A mistake of fact has given rise  to
    unfairness. The duty of candour applies with full force in the  context
    of asylum appeals. There is an obligation on  the  respondent  to  take
    reasonable steps to ensure that material is placed before the Tribunal.
    Constructive knowledge is enough. There  is  clear  evidence  that  the
    appellant is a victim  of  persecution  and  the  credibility  findings
    cannot be sustained. The decision was taken in absence of an  important
    fact and that is a material error of law. There was no  burden  on  the
    appellant to act on an unknown fairness.

14. Mr Richards submitted that there was no unfairness. Any suggestion that
    the respondent had withheld evidence was entirely  rejected.  There  is
    nothing on the file of any knowledge of the basis of  leave  to  AO.  A
    check on the database comes to the same conclusion. The  appellant  has
    failed to explain why the evidence now submitted  was  not  before  the
    judge and it is not determinative of the issue in  any  event.  Refugee
    status might have been granted in error; there is no evidence  that  AO
    was ever subject to a language test. The  judge  only  had  a  duty  to
    consider the evidence before him and gave sound reasons. Membership  of
    a minority clan is no  longer  determinative  of  refugee  status.  The
    determination should stand.

15. I asked Ms Capel how the respondent could have  known  that  AO  was  a
    recognised refugee. Ms Capel submitted that the scope of  the  duty  of
    candour is that the respondent should have made enquiries about  family
    members named in the screening interview. It would have been reasonable
    for those enquiries to be made  because  AO  was  an  immediate  family
    member. There was no suggestion that information had been concealed but
    the duty of candour required checks to  be  made.  In  any  event,  the
    decision was made in the absence of a highly relevant fact and that  is
    a material error of law. Membership of a  minority  clan  is  still  an
    important factor.

16. I am not persuaded that the duty of candour on the  respondent  extends
    to checking the refugee status of immediate family members named by the
    appellant during the screening interview. The case law cited  does  not
    support that submission. There is nothing to suggest that  such  checks
    would have revealed the basis of the grant of refugee status to  AO  in
    any event. I do not find any fault on the part of the respondent or the
    judge. I  find  that  the  judge  considered  the  position  under  the
    procedure rules and concluded that it was in the interests  of  justice
    to determine the appeal without a hearing. If there  is  any  fault  in
    this appeal it must lie with the former representatives who  failed  to
    submit obviously relevant material to inform the respondent's  decision
    or at least to invite the respondent to reconsider the decision.

17. I find that the appellant has not had a fair hearing. The judge was not
    able to consider highly relevant evidence which goes to  the  heart  of
    the appellant's claim. The witness statement prepared by AO for her  15
    January 2004 appeal hearing states that AO is a member of the  Asharaf-
    Hasan clan, a Benadiri sub-clan. She lived in the Horseed  district  of
    Jowhar with her parents. Her father was shot by a group  of  militiamen
    in 1991 and the family were attacked many times by different groups  of
    militiamen. AO was abducted and  repeatedly  raped  in  1994.  AO  fled
    Somalia in 2002 because she feared  repeat  abduction.  The  respondent
    decided to grant AO indefinite leave  to  remain  refugee  status  just
    prior to the 15 January 2004 appeal hearing; presumably on the basis of
    the evidence now submitted to the Upper Tribunal.

18. All of that material presents  a  wholly  different  picture  from  the
    evidence considered by the judge in the First-tier. I  have  considered
    the case law submitted by Ms Capel. I find that there is force  in  her
    alternative submission that the decision was made in the absence  of  a
    highly relevant fact and I have considered MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan
    [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC). Paragraphs 15-22  are  relevant.  The  judge's
    conduct of the hearing of this appeal  in  the  First-tier  was  beyond
    reproach. However, there was unfairness due  to  the  ignorance  of  an
    established and material fact, namely the  existence  and  basis  of  a
    previous grant of refugee status to AO. I accept  that  there  is  some
    strength in Mr Richards' submission that the appellant or her  advisors
    were responsible for the mistake  but  having  regard  to  the  obvious
    vulnerability of the appellant, I am satisfied  that  this  is  a  case
    where some flexibility in the application of Ladd v Marshall principles
    is required. The criterion to be applied is fairness. The error of fact
    has resulted in significant unfairness and that is a material error  of
    law.

19. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

20. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

21. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.





Signed   [pic]                      Date 25 September 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


