

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06177/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 May 2014                                 |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     AE
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Background

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 9 March  1992.   He
      left Iran on 18 April 2013 and travelled to the UK by lorry.  On 9 May
      2013, he was arrested whilst leaving a lorry and claimed asylum.   The
      basis of his claim was that he had been arrested and detained in  2012
      whilst taking part in a "fire festival".  He was ill-treated and  only
      released when he signed a declaration stating that he had  taken  part
      in an illegal gathering and his father had  paid  a  fine  of  200,000
      Tomans.  After that, he became a member  of  an  unnamed  organisation
      through his friend "M" who had been arrested  with  him  at  the  fire
      festival.  On behalf of the organisation,  the  appellant  distributed
      leaflets which he obtained by printing  off  leaflets  by  downloading
      them on his computer from memory sticks given to him by  "M".   On  26
      March 2013, the police raided the appellant's house looking  for  him.
      He was informed of this by his neighbour and told that his father  had
      been detained.  With the help of his  maternal  uncle,  the  appellant
      went into hiding in a country house where he learned  from  his  uncle
      that he had been accused  of  being  a  "Moharebah"  (one  waging  war
      against the regime) and also a "Mofsed Fel Arz" (the  corrupt  one  on
      earth).  His maternal uncle and father  paid  an  agent  to  take  the
      appellant from Iran and he travelled to the UK, travelling in a number
      of lorries.

   3. The appellant claimed that he was at risk on  return  because  of  his
      political activities; because he no longer considered  himself  to  be
      Muslim and because he had left Iran illegally.

   4. On 3 June 2013, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claim
      for asylum and on humanitarian protection and  human  rights  grounds.
      On 13 June 2013, the Secretary of State made a decision to remove  the
      appellant to Iran as an illegal entrant by  way  of  directions  under
      paras 8-10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

   5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      dated 9 August 2013, Judge  C  J  Woolley  dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal on all grounds.  He made an adverse credibility finding and did
      not accept that the appellant had been arrested in 2010 whilst  taking
      part in a "fire festival"; he did not accept that  the  appellant  had
      been involved with an illegal organisation through his friend "M"  and
      that his house had been raided and his father detained as a result  of
      his political activities.   Finally,  the  Judge  concluded  that  the
      appellant would not be at risk because of his anti-Islamic  belief  or
      on the basis that he had left Iran illegally. The Judge also dismissed
      the appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
      basis that Judge Woolley had erred in  law  in  reaching  his  adverse
      credibility findings.  Permission was initially refused by the  First-
      tier Tribunal but on 30 September 2013, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Coker)
      granted the appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons;

           "1.   The essence of the grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal
                 are that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  give
                 adequate or proper weight to or notice  of  the  background
                 material before him; in particular that the judge failed to
                 have adequate regard to the COIS report on arrest  warrants
                 in the light of the appellant's evidence which itself  was,
                 it is asserted, misconstrued.  A number of other evidential
                 disagreements  with  the  judge's  finding  as  oppose   to
                 allegations of perversity.

              2. It is, just about, arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                 judge misconstrued the appellant's evidence that his father
                 had been released on the  basis  that  he  knew  where  the
                 appellant was and thus he would have been given a  copy  of
                 the arrest warrant.  It is just about arguable  that,  when
                 considered in the light of the COIS report, this fell  into
                 legal error such as to taint the  overall  findings  albeit
                 the other findings do appear  to  e  within  the  range  of
                 findings reasonably open to the judge.

              3. Permission to appeal is granted."

   7. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Gayle adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal
      which he expanded upon in his oral submissions.  He sought to identify
      errors of approach in the Judge's  determination  concerned  with  his
      adverse findings in relation to the "fire festival" (paras 38, 39,  40
      and 41) and in relation to his membership of the illegal  organisation
      and his father's arrest (paras 43 and 44).

Discussion

   8. I deal first with the submission concerning the  Judge's  findings  at
      paras 38-41 concerned with the appellant's involvement in  and  arrest
      at a "fire festival" in 2012.

   9. First, Mr Gayle submitted that the Judge had wrongly  interpreted  the
      background evidence in finding that the appellant would not have  been
      arrested at a fire event involving  only  some  fifteen  people.    He
      relied upon a document at page A97 of the appellant's bundle  entitled
      "Iran to crack down on protests during fire festival"; a  document  at
      page A99 entitled  "Persian  cyberspace  report;  Supreme  Council  of
      Cyberspace  established;  Iranian  New  Year   celebrations   labelled
      'superstitious'"; and a document at page A101 entitled "Iranian leader
      shuns ancient festival".  He submitted that it was entirely  plausible
      that  the  appellant  would  be  arrested  contrary  to  the   Judge's
      conclusion and the Judge had failed to take into account  the  general
      background   evidence   concerning   arbitrary   arrests    and    the
      unpredictability of the Iranian forces.

  10. At para 88, the Judge referred to the documents at pages A98, A99  and
      A101 and said this:

           "I have been referred by both parties to the  fire  festival  in
           Iran, and the attitude of the authorities to those participating
           in  it.   Mr  Gayle  and  Mr  Khalfey   have   urged   different
           interpretations of the objective evidence (at A98, A99 and  A101
           of the bundle) - the former submitting that those  participating
           in such festivals are at risk for that alone, while  the  latter
           suggesting that only where there was an element of demonstration
           involved in such fire festivals would participants be  at  risk.
           After considering the objective evidence I prefer  Mr  Khalfey's
           interpretation.   It  is  clear  from  the  context   that   the
           authorities are most concerned when the fire festival  is  "used
           as an excuse for people to pour onto the streets en  masse"  and
           the article gives the example of the festivities  in  2009  when
           "hundreds of thousands of Iranians threw Molotov  cocktails  and
           firecrackers  in  the  streets  to  show  their  anger  at   the
           government".  The comments reported from the head  of  security,
           Esail Ahmadi-Moghaddam, that "he  didn't  have  a  problem  with
           people enjoying themselves but would  arrest  anyone  who  joins
           gatherings"  has  to  be  seen  in  this  context.    From   the
           appellant's account his participation in the  festival  was  not
           one involving people en masse but was a small gathering  outside
           his parents' house.  He does not describe any political  element
           to the  festivity.   While  the  supreme  leader  (at  A101)  is
           reported as urging Iranians to shun the festival his  admonition
           amounts to a mild warning only: "it is appropriate to avoid  it"
           and the chief prosecutor in the city of Mashad warns that  those
           who engage in disruptive behaviour  during  the  festival  would
           face "strong consequences."  The corollary of this is that those
           who do not engage in disruptive behaviour would  not  face  such
           consequences.  The  picture  that  emerges  is  of  a  reluctant
           toleration by the authorities of a festival that  long  predates
           Islam and which seems to be deeply rooted  in  Iranian  society,
           and of the authorities' crackdown on  behaviour  that  uses  the
           festival as a pretext for political  demonstration.   I  do  not
           find it consistent with the country evidence that the  appellant
           would have been arrested by the police for simply  participating
           in the festival during a purely local event involving only  some
           15 people."

  11. There is no doubt that the Judge considered  the  background  evidence
      relied upon.  Mr Gayle put the  argument,  that  he  now  relies  upon
      before me, to Judge Woolley as he makes  clear  at  the  beginning  of
      paragraph 38.  He no doubt had well in mind the general  situation  in
      Iran (see below at para 15). In my judgement, it was open to the Judge
      to prefer the interpretation of the background evidence put forward by
      the Presenting Officer at the hearing that, although arrests did  take
      place at fire festival events, the real targets were  those  who  were
      being disruptive or were, or  were  perceived  as  taking  part  in  a
      political demonstration.  The  document  referred  to  fire  festivals
      which had been used as "an excuse for people to pour onto the  streets
      en masse" (see page A98).  Likewise, the document at A101 refers to  a
      chief prosecutor warning that "strong consequences" would  follow  for
      those who engaged in "disruptive behaviour".  The Judge  was  entitled
      to take into account  what  is  reported  as  said  by  Ayatollah  Ali
      Khamenei  (at  page  A101)  that  reflects  the  Iranian   authority's
      discouragement of individuals taking part in fire festivals  but  does
      not go so far as to suggest that, in the absence of political protest,
      arrest was likely.

  12. Mr Gayle's submission embodies a disagreement in the interpretation of
      the background evidence  from  that  placed  upon  it  by  the  Judge.
      However, in my view the Judge's interpretation was  properly  open  to
      him and that, therefore, he was entitled to take into account that the
      appellant's claimed arrest was  not  consistent  with  the  background
      evidence.

  13. Secondly, in relation to para 39  of  the  Judge's  determination,  Mr
      Gayle submitted that the Judge was wrong to take into account that the
      appellant was unable to produce a receipt for the 200,000 Tomans  fine
      paid by the appellant's father, so the appellant  claimed,  to  obtain
      his release following his arrest at the fire festival.

  14. At para 39, the Judge dealt with the respondent's case concerning  the
      absence of documentation concerning the appellant's arrest as follows:

           "The appellant says that he was  arrested  with  about  4  other
           people and taken to the police  station  where  he  was  abused,
           kicked, and where they cut his hair.  He  initially  refused  to
           sign any declaration but then his father arrived and paid a fine
           of 200,000 Tomans  and  persuaded  him  to  sign  a  declaration
           stating that they had taken part in an  illegal  gathering.   He
           was then released, and does not describe any  conditions  placed
           on his release (such as reporting)  or  any  further  harassment
           from the authorities even though they would have  known  of  his
           identity. The  appellant  has  not  been  able  to  provide  any
           documentation  about  this  arrest,  such  as  a  copy  of   the
           declaration, of the receipt of the 200,000 Tomans fine, or  even
           of the withdrawal of such an amount of money from  a  bank.   Mr
           Gayle pertinently observed that there was no evidence  that  the
           father would have had to withdraw the money from a bank  and  so
           the absence of a bank statement could not be  held  against  the
           appellant.  I find that this submission does have weight  and  I
           place no reliance on the lack of any bank statement.   Similarly
           the  respondent  has  suggested  that  the  absence  of   police
           documentation is telling.  I note however the  country  evidence
           about court and police  documentation  and  that  the  knowledge
           about documentation is vague and tentative.  There is  no  proof
           that the appellant would have been given anything in the way  of
           official documentation on release to be  able  to  show  to  the
           tribunal.  The position is however different with  the  receipt.
           The appellant has said that his father was given a  receipt  for
           the payment (at Question 91) and  I  find  therefore  that  this
           document not only existed but was in the hands  of  his  father.
           Mr Gayle has suggested that there was no reason for  his  father
           to keep this receipt.  I disagree.  In  a  state  such  as  Iran
           where the country evidence suggests corruption and  venality  at
           every level of the police force there would be every reason  for
           the father to keep such a receipt to show that the fine had been
           paid and to guard against any future suggestion that it had  not
           been.  I do not find it credible that the appellant would not be
           in touch with his father or be able to route a  request  to  him
           for the production of such a receipt.  The  absence  of  such  a
           document when I have found it  is  available  to  produce  is  a
           factor which undermines the credibility of his whole account."

  15. Mr Gayle repeats his submission, previously made to  the  Judge,  that
      there was no reason for the appellant's father to keep  this  receipt.
      Mr Gayle's submission was rejected by the Judge and, in  my  view,  he
      was entitled to do so.  The Judge took into account,  and  it  is  not
      challenged, that the background evidence showed corruption within Iran
      and at every level of the police force.  In the  light  of  that,  the
      Judge was entitled to infer that  the  appellant's  father  had  every
      reason to keep the receipt should the payment  of  the  fine  ever  be
      questioned in the future.  This was a  document  which  the  appellant
      claimed existed.  The Judge was entitled to take into account, as  one
      of his reasons, that the appellant  had  not  sought  to  obtain  this
      document from his father so as to support his case (see TK (Burundi) v
      SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40 at [16]).

  16. Thirdly, Mr Gayle submitted that in para 40 of his  determination  the
      Judge had been wrong to take into account that, in his  view,  it  was
      not credible that the appellant would not have talked to "M" about how
      "M" had come to be released and whether he had paid a fine.   At  para
      40 the Judge said this:

           "The respondent has pointed to the vague and evasive  nature  of
           the appellant's replies when he was asked  about  [M].   I  find
           that there is force in this criticism. On  the  appellant's  own
           account he became close of  [M]  in  the  months  following  his
           release and I do not find it credible that they would  not  have
           talked of their experiences in police detention and that in  the
           course of such conversations that the appellant would  not  have
           learnt a good deal about [M]'s release and whether he had had to
           pay a fine."

  17. Mr Gayle submitted that the appellant could have lied and said that he
      had  spoken  about  the  circumstances  of  "M's"  release  in   their
      conversations  about  their  detention  but  he  had  not.   Mr  Gayle
      submitted that the matter had never been put to the appellant.

  18. There is, in my judgement, nothing in this argument.   The  point  was
      raised by the Secretary of State in para  21  of  the  refusal  letter
      dated 3 June 2013 and so the appellant cannot be  said  to  have  been
      taken by surprise and it was dealt with  in  the  appellant's  witness
      statement in which he said that  he  had  no  reason  to  discuss  the
      details of their  respective  releases  with  "M".    The  appellant's
      evidence was of a close friendship developing with "M" and, of course,
      on the appellant's account they shared a common  political  ideal  and
      had both been detained in 2012 at the fire festival.  It  was,  in  my
      judgement, properly open to the Judge and  not  perverse  for  him  to
      reject the appellant's explanation and to take into  account  that  it
      was not credible that during their conversations the  appellant  would
      not have asked "M" or "M" would not have volunteered the circumstances
      of "M's" release from detention.

  19. Fourthly, Mr Gayle submitted that the Judge was wrong in  para  41  of
      his determination to take into account that, if the appellant had been
      detained, he would have been required to report  back  to  the  police
      station after release.  The Judge said:

           "If he had been perceived as a threat I  do  not  find  that  he
           would have been released without such sanctions."

  20. Mr Gayle submitted that the appellant  had  never  said  that  he  was
      perceived to be an on-going threat to the authorities  at  this  time.
      Whilst that might have been the appellant's evidence,  the  Judge  was
      entitled to take the view that, if in  fact  the  appellant  had  been
      arrested  at  a  fire  festival,  it  would  have  been  because   his
      involvement would  have  been  because  of  the  Iranian  authorities'
      interest in him as someone  engaged  in  anti-Islamic  or  anti-regime
      activity.  It was properly open to the Judge, therefore, to infer that
      in those circumstances further sanctions, such  as  a  requirement  to
      report back to the  police  station  after  release  would  have  been
      applied.  It was, after all, the appellant's case  that  he  was  only
      released because he signed a declaration that he was  involved  in  an
      illegal gathering and a significant fine of 200,000 Tomans had  to  be
      paid by his father to release him.  The Judge's conclusion at para  41
      was not irrational or otherwise not open to him.

  21. I now turn to the grounds relating to the Judge's finding  in  respect
      of the appellant's claimed membership of an illegal organisation  that
      led to his home being raided and his father arrested.

  22. First, Mr Gayle submitted that the Judge had committed three errors in
      para 43 of his determination.  That  paragraph  is  in  the  following
      terms:

           "The appellant has said that the organisation had no name and no
           HQ.  While the absence of an HQ might be a sensible precaution I
           do not find it credible that the organisation itself would  have
           no name.  According to the appellant it published 5 leaflets  in
           his time, on subjects varying from the treatment of  Bahai's  to
           the unequal treatment of women in Islam.  If these leaflets were
           distributed in order to effect regime change I do  not  find  it
           credible that the organisation would have been nameless, or that
           there would not even be a code name used by  the  appellant  and
           "M" to signify their cause.  According to the appellant "M" used
           to give him a memory stick  and  from  this  he  downloaded  the
           leaflets onto his computer and then printed them  off.   If  "M"
           was sophisticated enough to possess a memory  stick  it  is  not
           explained by the appellant why "M"  had  to  give  this  to  the
           appellant for  him  to  print  off  the  leaflets,  rather  than
           printing off the leaflets himself.  As the respondent points out
           in the refusal letter the  downloading  of  the  memory  sticks,
           rather than printing directly off  the  memory  stick  and  then
           deleting, created a needless security risk.   20  leaflets  only
           were produced and distributed by  the  appellant  and  "M".   No
           explanation was given of why such a tiny number of leaflets  was
           produced  and  distributed,  when  there  would  have  been   no
           difficulty in producing and distributing a far larger  quantity.
           The appellant has not said that  he  was  ever  tracked  by  the
           police in any of these activities, and on his own account he had
           no conditions attached to his release from detention  after  the
           fire  festival  incident  (although  I  have  not  accepted  his
           credibility in respect of that detention)."

  23. Mr Gayle submitted that the appellant had given an explanation  as  to
      why he had only distributed a small  number  of  leaflets.   Mr  Gayle
      referred me to the appellant's statement of 19 July 2013 (at P5 of the
      bundle) where at para 20 the appellant said:

           "I would like to point out that there were many 'cells' of anti-
           regime activists doing the same as us throughout Tehran.  It was
           much safer to distribute small numbers of leaflets  in  a  local
           area, than to try anything more ambitious.  Anti-regime activity
           in Iran is very dangerous."

  24. Mr Gayle submitted that the appellant had  never  been  asked  why  he
      chose to download the leaflets onto his computer and print them rather
      than print them directly from the memory stick  he  claimed  that  was
      given to him by "M".

  25. Mr Gayle submitted that  it  was  perfectly  understandable  that  the
      organisation had no name.  There was, he submitted, no  need  for  the
      group to be identified by name in order to pursue its aim.

  26. As regards the latter challenge, the appellant claimed that there  was
      an organisation that he belonged to through a "chain" connection  with
      "M".  It was, in my judgement, entirely open to the Judge to  conclude
      that it was not credible that an organisation would have  no  name  or
      identifying moniker of which the appellant would not be aware.

  27. As regards the downloading of leaflets to the appellant's computer  to
      print, that was a point directly  raised  by  the  respondent  in  the
      refusal letter (see para 26 of the refusal letter) and it was properly
      open to the Judge, given that this had been raised in that way, in the
      absence of any satisfactory explanation by the appellant  to  conclude
      that it cast  doubt  on  the  appellant's  claim  given  the  security
      implications there would be if the appellant's computer  was  obtained
      by the authorities in, for example, a raid on his home.

  28. Whilst the Judge was wrong to state that the appellant had offered  no
      explanation as to why a small number of  leaflets  were  produced  and
      distributed, this was  a  minor  error  in  reasoning  set  amongst  a
      detailed and multiple set of reason for  disbelieving  the  appellant.
      In itself,  it  would  not  justify  disturbing  the  Judge's  adverse
      credibility finding.

  29. Secondly, Mr Gayle challenged the Judge's reasoning in para 44.

  30. He submitted that in para 44 the Judge had been  wrong  to  doubt  the
      appellant's evidence on the basis that he did not know  why  his  home
      was raided or who carried out the raid.  The underlying point made  by
      the  Judge  is  that  the  appellant's  family  engaged  a  lawyer  to
      investigate the accusation and the appellant's father was held for two
      days.  It was, in my judgement, entirely open to  the  Judge  to  call
      into  question the veracity of the appellant's account  on  the  basis
      that no information had been obtained despite the investigation by the
      lawyer engaged by the family and also that his father did not know who
      had detained him for two days.

  31. Further, Mr Gayle submitted that in para 44 the  Judge  was  wrong  to
      take into account that the appellant's family  members  had  not  been
      harassed since his departure from Iran.  Mr Gayle submitted  that  the
      Judge had been wrong to rely on the document at page A64 of the bundle
      as it dealt with the circumstances  of  family  members  of  political
      activists under the heading  "Issues  Concerning  Persons  of  Kurdish
      Origin".  Mr Gayle  submitted  that  this  had  no  relevance  to  the
      appellant whose family were  not  Kurds  or  political  activists  who
      would, therefore, be regarded as opposed to the regime as well.

  32. At para 44, Judge Woolley said this in  relation  to  the  absence  of
      harassment of the appellant's family since he left:

           "The appellant has said that his family members  have  not  been
           further harassed since his departure.  It was  suggested  by  Mr
           Gayle that family members are not generally targeted as if  they
           were there would be more objective  evidence.   I  find  however
           that in respect of family members the  objective  evidence  does
           suggest that they will be targeted.  Thus at A64 of  the  bundle
           there is an account of 70 families of activists being  contacted
           by authorities and of the threats made by the authorities to put
           family members behind bars if  information  cannot  be  provided
           about the wanted person."

  33. It is unfortunate that the Judge referred to a section of the document
      beginning at A36 produced by the Danish Immigration Service  which  at
      A64 was concerned with the families  of  political  activists  in  the
      Kurdish context.  However, the document does deal with  the  "risk  to
      family members" of political activists in general at page A70  of  the
      bundle.  There, it is stated that:

           "Risk to family members

           An international organization in Ankara informed the  delegation
           that following the mass demonstrations in 2009, there were cases
           where the authorities had  squeezed  family  members,  including
           parents, sisters and brothers, in order to get to fugitives.  It
           was explained that the intelligence services  react  differently
           in different areas of Iran.   In  some  instances  where  family
           members are targeted, the authorities are doing this  to  create
           an example for others, and this is highly effective.  The family
           members in Tehran are also at risk and they may  be  arbitrarily
           detained and mistreated in custody.  While the  number  of  such
           cases decreased after the crack-down following the post election
           demonstrations in 2009, however it  was  considered  that  these
           types of cases could still come up.

           It was added that a family member to an activist  who  has  left
           the country might be summoned by the authorities."

  34. In my judgement, the point made by Judge Woolley in para 44 concerning
      the absence  of  harassment  of  the  appellant's  family  whilst  not
      supported by the passage in the report to which he referred at A65  is
      supported by the passage at page A70.   consequently,  the  Judge  was
      entitled to take into account in doubting the appellant's account that
      his family members had not been harassed or contacted by  the  Iranian
      authorities following the appellant's departure if  I  indeed  he  was
      wanted by them as he claimed.

  35. Finally, in relation to para 44 Mr Gayle submitted that the Judge  had
      misinterpreted the appellant's evidence concerning  the  circumstances
      of his father's release from detention and had, therefore,  misapplied
      the objective evidence set out in the COI Report at  para  11.57  that
      the appellant's father would have been handed any  arrest  warrant  in
      relation to the appellant.  At para 44 the Judge said this:

           "...While I have referred above the COIS and its somewhat  vague
           and tentative conclusions about court documentation in Iran  one
           point on which it is clear is that arrest warrants can be handed
           to members of the family if they  are  likely  to  know  of  the
           accuser's person's whereabouts (see COIS dated 2013/1 at 11.57 -
           "the members of the family  cannot  be  served  instead  of  the
           accused unless they acknowledge  that  they  are  aware  of  the
           whereabouts  of  the  accused  and  undertake  to  deliver   the
           notice/summons to the accused").  Here the  appellant's  account
           is that his  father  was  released  on  the  condition  that  he
           informed the authorities where his son was and so it is  I  find
           likely that he would have been handed any warrant produced.  The
           fact that no arrest warrant has been produced by the  appellant,
           when in his circumstances his family would  have  been  provided
           with a copy of it, leads me to find that no arrest  warrant  was
           actually ever in force for the appellant."

  36. Mr Hibbs acknowledged that the Judge had  misstated  or  misunderstood
      the appellant's evidence concerning his father's release.  At para  12
      of the appellant's statement the appellant had said  that  his  father
      had given an undertaking to surrender the appellant to the authorities
      if he came home. He did not say  that  the  his  father  was  released
      because he knew about the appellant's whereabouts.  Further,  the  COI
      Report at para 11.57 only stated that

           "the members of the family cannot be  serviced  instead  of  the
           accused unless they acknowledge  that  they  are  aware  of  the
           whereabouts of the accused and they will  undertake  to  deliver
           the notice/summons to the accused".

  37. Somewhat confusing that report continues:

           "In principal (sic) in criminal cases, the  substituted  service
           through members of the family is not acceptable.  If the accused
           cannot be found, the arrest warrant will be  passed  on  to  law
           enforcement officers to arrest the accused whenever and wherever
           his found."

  38. I accept Mr Gayle's submission that Judge  Woolley  did  misunderstand
      the appellant's evidence and, therefore, was wrong to conclude that on
      release he would have been handed any arrest warrant  in  relation  to
      the appellant.

  39. The crucial question remains whether that error was  material  to  the
      Judge's decision.

  40. In my judgement, the  error  was  not  material.   Standing  back  and
      looking at the Judge's reasons overall, he gave a number  of  detailed
      reasons between para 38 and 44 for rejecting the  appellant's  account
      of his arrest and detention at the fire festival in  2012  and,  as  a
      result of that, his developing friendship with "M" who introduced  him
      to the unnamed illegal  organisation  and  rejecting  the  appellant's
      evidence in relation to that and his claimed subsequent  raid  on  his
      house.  Looking at those reasons overall,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
      Judge's adverse findings are sound and should stand.

Decision

  41. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  dismissing  the
      appellant's appeal on all grounds did not involve  the  making  of  an
      error of law such that the decision should be set aside.  The decision
      stands.

  42. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















