
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06243/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 August 2015                     |On 17 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                ZH (Pakistan)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to recognise  him  as  a  refugee,  or  as
    otherwise requiring international or human rights protection.  Although
    the First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction,  out  of
    caution I consider that it is  appropriate  for  the  appellant  to  be
    accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal,  having
    regard to the nature of the appellant's asylum claim.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 4 March 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "1.  The unrepresented appellant, who was also unrepresented at the
             hearing, seeks permission to appeal  a  decision  of  Judge  P
             Rowlands, promulgated on 6 February 2015 following the hearing
             on 23 December 2014 in which his appeal against the refusal of
             asylum was dismissed.

         2.   This Pakistani male, born on 6 August 1979 sought to  come  to
             the United Kingdom as a visitor in 2010.  His application  was
             refused.  Following appeal he was issued with a  family  visit
             visa valid from 22  September  2011  to  22  March  2012.   He
             overstayed his visa by more than two years and was encountered
             on 7 May 2014 following arrest by the police.  He  was  served
             with IS.151A papers and claimed asylum on the same day.   That
             application was refused.  His appeal  within  the  fast  track
             procedure was dismissed on 2 June 2014.  On 10  June  2014  he
             became appeal  rights  exhausted.   His  further  submissions,
             claiming for the first time to be a gay man, were treated as a
             fresh asylum claim and that claim was  refused  on  18  August
             2014.

         3.   There is merit  in  the  grounds  that  there  was  procedural
             impropriety amounting to an arguably material  error  of  law.
             The  unrepresented  appellant  handed  in  to  the  judge   an
             affidavit written in Pakistani language but, as noted  in  the
             decision at paragraph 7, because the judge could not read  the
             untranslated affidavit it was returned to the appellant.

         4.    Although  the  judge  addressed  both  this  affidavit,   its
             provenance and other documents in paragraph 7, 8, 10  and  29,
             it is arguable that in not asking the appellant  to  translate
             the content to him or to tell him  his  understanding  of  the
             content of the letter, the judge  may  have  made  a  material
             error of law.  Whilst it is correct that the judge  considered
             the letter and the affidavit supplied in the  context  of  the
             guidance of Tanveer Ahmed, it is not possible to discern  that
             he obtained information from the  appellant  as  to  what  was
             contained in those  documents,  rather  concentrating  on  the
             provenance of them, which he rejected as an incredible account
             in respect of each, so undermining his credibility."

Relevant Background

 3. Although the appellant was unrepresented at the  hearing  before  Judge
    Rowlands, he had previously been assisted in  the  preparation  of  his
    appeal by a firm of solicitors.  They compiled  an  appellant's  bundle
    containing,  among  other  things,  a  chronology  of  events  and  the
    appellant's  medical  notes   from   his   period   of   detention   at
    Harmondsworth;  and  a  supplementary  bundle  dated  4  November  2014
    containing letters purportedly signed by the  appellant's  claimed  gay
    partners Ahmed and Imran (Ahmed writing from an address in Rayiadh  and
    Imran writing from an address in Wissembourg) and a psychiatric  report
    dated 11 October  2014  prepared  by  Dr  Ruth  Sagovsky  following  an
    interview of the appellant at Harmondsworth the  day  before.   In  her
    opinion, it was not possible to give a clear diagnosis.  The  appellant
    fulfilled the criteria for a moderate depressive illness and for  PTSD.
    Although both disorders could lead to memory impairment,  she  did  not
    think either was currently of a  severity  fully  to  account  for  his
    cognitive problems.  In order to be clear about the nature  and  degree
    of  his  cognitive  problems  he  would  need  full  neuropsychological
    investigations:

         "I formed the opinion that his difficulties were genuine  and  that
         they were likely to have been caused by the head injury he suffered
         as a young man.  However, without further detailed  testing,  I  do
         not think it is possible to know  the  nature  and  degree  of  the
         problem, to what degree his problems are more pronounced because of
         concomitant depressive illness and PTSD,  and  to  what  extent  he
         might be exaggerating."

 4. Dr Sagovsky was asked by  the  appellant's  lawyers  to  opine  on  the
    appellant's capacity to take  a  meaningful  part  in  the  asylum  and
    appeals process.  In  her  opinion,  the  appellant  had  a  reasonable
    understanding of the asylum process:

         "He says that he forgets what his lawyer tells him but agreed  that
         he mostly understands what she says at the time  and  can  remember
         things for long enough to weigh them up and make decisions, even if
         he later doesn't remember the details.  In my opinion  he  has  the
         capacity to take a  meaningful  part  in  the  asylum  and  appeals
         process with the support of his lawyer."

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. As set out in the refusal letter, the appellant's core claim  was  that
    he had  suffered  past  persecution  in  Pakistan  on  account  of  his
    homosexuality.  He was born  on  6  August  1979,  and  he  had  had  a
    relationship with Ahmed from about 1995 to 2004, when he was aged 16 to
    25 years old.  He had also had a sexual relationship  with  his  cousin
    Imran from 2005 until 2011.  When he was aged 23,  his  family  accused
    him of being gay and he admitted it, as his family had  seen  him  with
    Ahmed.  Alternatively, he tried to keep his sexuality a secret, but his
    family had found out because he had begun dressing as a  girl  when  he
    was over 25.  Alternatively, in 2005 when he was  aged  25  his  family
    realised he was gay and threw him out of the family home.  After  being
    thrown out of the family home, he had gone to live with  Imran  in  the
    same room as his mother's home.  Imran's mother, the appellant's  aunt,
    did  not  know  he  was  gay  and  did  not   accept   his   sexuality.
    Alternatively, she agreed that she and Imran loved each  other  because
    they had been close as children, and so she allowed them both to  share
    a room together.  In 2006 his family tried to kill him and injured  him
    severely.  He had medical reports  from  hospital,  but  he  could  not
    provide these.  While  living  at  his  aunt's  home,  his  family  had
    attacked him there five times.  He did not move from  his  aunt's  home
    despite these attacks because he could not afford to go anywhere  else,
    and he wanted to remain with Imran.

 6. He had not initially claimed asylum on  the  basis  of  his  sexuality,
    because his solicitor had told him that  if  he  did  so  he  would  be
    deported back to Pakistan.  He also did not initially express  his  gay
    identity in the UK because he did not know where gay clubs and  centres
    were, and he  felt  embarrassed.   He  had  not  been  in  an  intimate
    relationship with Caroline.  He had begun a gay relationship with Qasim
    at Harmondsworth Immigration Detention Centre.  He could  not  remember
    exactly when the relationship began, but it was around 15 June 2014.

 7. Judge Rowlands' decision contains a detailed account of the proceedings
    at paragraphs 7 to 11.  As the arguable  error  of  law  identified  by
    Judge Baker is that of procedural unfairness  I  set  out  the  judge's
    record of the proceedings in full:

         "7.  He said that he had left some of the evidence at home this was
             because he had a problem with his memory.   He  couldn't  even
             remember when he came to the UK when I was going  through  his
             immigration history with him.  He said that everything that he
             had said regarding his previous asylum claim was lies.  He had
             a problem with his memory.  He handed to  me  an  untranslated
             affidavit which I had to return to him because I couldn't read
             it.  He said that [Ahmed] was in Saudi Arabia.  He  handed  me
             what appeared to be a copy of an email, he said  that  he  had
             received it by email.  When I put it to him that it  had  been
             signed he said then that it had been sent to his  address...He
             confirmed that they appeared to have put his email address  or
             at least their email address on the  documentation.   He  said
             that his partner in the detention centre [Qasim] had  had  his
             appeal refused and had been returned to Pakistan.

         8.   In cross-examination he said that he had got the letters  from
             [Imran] and [Ahmed] last month while he was in detention.   He
             said he hadn't had  contact  with  anyone  whilst  he  was  in
             detention and didn't know how they knew where to send it.   He
             used to speak to Imran  before  he  had  gone  into  detention
             sometimes weekly sometimes monthly but he didn't speak to  him
             after detention.  He was asked whether he had had any  contact
             with Imran's mother after detention and he said he thought  so
             but he couldn't remember.  He then said he had contact  before
             detention but not in detention he  couldn't  remember  contact
             during detention.  He was asked how he had got  the  documents
             then and he said there was a possibility that  he  might  have
             had contact with him but simply forgot.  He said  he  had  not
             read the letter.

         9.   It was put to him that in interview he had said that Imran was
             a cousin and he was asked again whether he was and he said  he
             didn't remember saying that Imran was a cousin.   He  said  he
             was a cousin but not a real one  he  just  called  his  mother
             auntie.  They were not related by blood at all.   He  said  he
             had called him a cousin in interview because he considered him
             as one because he called his mother auntie.  It was put to him
             that he had written the documents and signed them and he  said
             he couldn't do that he didn't have the  ability  to  do  those
             things.

         10.  He was then asked about the letter from [Ahmed] and whether or
             not he had contacted him since  he  had  come  to  the  United
             Kingdom and he said he spoke to him on the  telephone  and  on
             Facebook and email.  He said that was before he was  detained.
             He was asked why that had not been produced before and he said
             that he had a problem and forgets half the things.  He said he
             had no contact with him in detention only a relationship  with
             Qasim.  He said he had lost all contact numbers when  he  came
             out of detention.  He said he got a letter about a  month  ago
             after he came out of detention.  They appeared to have his  UK
             address.  I asked him how they had known his  address  and  he
             said that Stratford Avenue was not his address he  was  living
             with friends in an address in Second Avenue in Manor Park.  It
             was put to  him  that  in  the  medical  report  he  told  the
             Psychiatrist that he had lost Ahmed's number so how  could  he
             have had contact with him and then he said  that  he  had  had
             contact with him before he went into detention but it was true
             that he had lost his number.  He was asked whether he had lied
             about losing the number and he said he didn't remember that he
             said he had lost his number.  It was put to him  that  he  had
             made no mention of contact with Ahmed and he said he  couldn't
             remember he said the  letter  had  come  with  a  document  in
             another language he had not produced that.

         11.  In answer to a question from me he said that  he  had  current
             relationship with someone  but  they  cannot  show  themselves
             because they were here illegally...That was  the  end  of  his
             evidence."

 8. The judge's findings are set out at paragraph 24 onwards.  At paragraph
    27, the judge noted that, during the first appeal  process,  the  judge
    found him to be lucid and articulate with no indication  of  difficulty
    of recollection.  Despite what was said in the  medical  report,  Judge
    Rowlands was satisfied that even now there was no firm evidence of  his
    lack of  recollection  and  it  was  only  when  he  found  himself  in
    difficulties in explaining matters that he turned  to  "I  have  memory
    problems" for assistance.  The judge continued in paragraph 29:

         "The two documents  provided  by  former  boyfriends  caused  great
         concern, particularly as he  has  previously  provided  a  marriage
         certificate and false business documents in relation to  his  visit
         visa application.  Clearly he  has  the  ability  to  access  false
         documents.  He says that they were both sent to  him  by  the  main
         concern.  At first he claimed  that  they  were  emailed  but  when
         challenged about the fact that  they  had  signatures  on  them  he
         changed that to them being posted.  He said  he  had  lost  contact
         with his  people  before  detention  and  could  give  no  credible
         explanation as to how the  documents  turned  up  at  his  address.
         Taking into account the principle in the case of Tanveer Ahmed I am
         not satisfied they can be relied upon as credible evidence  of  the
         facts contained therein and they can  be  relied  upon  to  provide
         support to his claim to be gay."

 9. At paragraph 30 the judge returned to the claim that the appellant  had
    memory problems which accounted for some discrepancies in his  account.
    The judge referred to the medical notes from detention which  suggested
    that it was not until he had visited the medic on a number of occasions
    that he first claimed that he had these memory issues.

10. The judge went on to find the appellant had not shown to  the  required
    standard that he was a gay person and consequently that he would be  at
    risk on return.  He was not satisfied he was telling  the  truth  about
    his sexuality, and he was most certainly not a  credible  witness.   It
    had already been decided by at least one judge that there were no other
    risk factors for him on return, and his claimed fear  from  his  uncles
    had previously been determined as being unfounded.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

11. At the hearing before me, the appellant produced a number of documents,
    some of which I arranged to have photocopied.  The  documents  which  I
    did not arrange to be photocopied related to his  ongoing  medical  and
    therapeutic treatment for, or arising out of, his mental health issues,
    such as depression for which he continues to take medication.

12. The documents which I did have photocopied comprised what is in  effect
    a skeleton argument in support of the appeal which builds on the  grant
    of permission by Judge Baker; a photocopy of the affidavit tendered  by
    the appellant  at  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  a
    translation of that affidavit apparently made by the appellant himself.
     The appellant informed me that the application for permission, and the
    skeleton  argument,  were  both  prepared  by  his  roommate   at   the
    accommodation where he presently lives.

13. I asked the appellant about the provenance of the affidavit.   He  said
    that it had been made by his father on 22 February 2012 (as  stated  on
    both the original and the translation) and that a copy had been sent to
    him by his father shortly after this date.

14. According to the translation, his father declared in the affidavit that
    he had already paid 2,000,000 Pakistan rupees to the appellant as  part
    of his inheritance; but was withholding the remainder of  his  promised
    inheritance (another 2,000,000 Pakistan rupees)  because  his  son  was
    very disobedient and rude, and he was  in  relation  with  bad  people.
    According to the appellant's translation, the  affidavit  ends  with  a
    declaration that his father has no more relations  with  his  son,  and
    disclaims responsibility for any of his son's words or actions  in  the
    future.

15. The appellant confirmed that the message of  the  affidavit  was  true.
    His  father  had  gin  him  2,000,000  Pakistani  rupees  towards   his
    inheritance, and had declared in the affidavit that he was  withholding
    the remainder of his promised inheritance.

16. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Duffy submitted the  judge  had
    given adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's  claim,  and  that
    the judge's failure to  establish  what  the  affidavit  said  did  not
    translate into material error of law.  There was no indication that the
    appellant had sought an adjournment, and in any  event,  taken  at  its
    highest, the affidavit did  not  salvage  or  enhance  the  appellant's
    general credibility.  The document added little to the  case.   It  did
    not contain a threat against the appellant's life  or  person,  and  it
    made no reference to the appellant's asserted homosexuality.

Discussion

17. While the appellant had lawyers acting for him, he provided  them  with
    documents in support of his claim which they included in one of the two
    bundles prepared  for  the  appeal  hearing.   Although  the  appellant
    claimed to have received the affidavit from his father in 2012, he  did
    not apparently produce it to his lawyers when they were  assisting  him
    in preparing his appeal.

18. As the appellant  was  unrepresented  at  the  hearing  itself,  it  is
    arguable that the judge should  have  established  the  import  of  the
    document, by, for  example,  asking  the  appellant  to  give  evidence
    through the court interpreter as to what the document said.

19. But the difficulty for  the  judge  was  that,  in  the  absence  of  a
    certified translation, he could not be  confident  that  he  was  being
    provided with  an  accurate  translation.   Moreover,  the  affidavit's
    provenance  and  inherent  reliability  were  inevitably  called   into
    question by two material factors which the judge is likely to have  had
    in mind:

      a) the fact that the document had not been included in the bundles  of
         documents prepared  for  the  appeal  hearing  by  the  appellant's
         solicitors, even though the  document  had  purportedly  come  into
         existence over two and a half years previously; and

      b) the appellant's track record of producing false  documents,  as  he
         did for his visit visa appeal.

20. So, on the particular facts of this case, I do not consider that  there
    was procedural impropriety or unfairness in the judge  not  seeking  to
    establish what the affidavit actually said.  If its contents materially
    assisted the  appellant's  claim,  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to have communicated this fact to his lawyers, and  for  them
    to have arranged for the document and a  certified  translation  to  be
    included in the main  or  supplementary  bundle.   Although  there  was
    evidence that the appellant suffered from mental health problems, these
    were not so severe as to prevent the appellant from  understanding  the
    asylum process and giving adequate instructions to his lawyers.

21. There are cases where, even though the  judge  is  not  at  fault,  the
    evidence which has not been taken into account is of  such  materiality
    as to render the proceedings procedurally unfair in  retrospect.   This
    is plainly not such a case.  Taken at its highest, the  affidavit  does
    not materially support the appellant's core claim.  His father does not
    allege that the appellant is gay, and  he  does  not  make  any  threat
    against his life or person.  Indeed, it is strongly arguable  that  the
    contents of the affidavit are not consistent with the core  claim,  and
    thus undermine it.  If it were true that the appellant had been ejected
    from the family home in 2005 on account of  his  homosexuality,  it  is
    difficult to see how it would come about that  the  appellant's  father
    would delay for seven years before making a  declaration  that  he  was
    withholding the remainder of his son's inheritance.

22. In conclusion, and for the reasons that I have given, I find  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was not vitiated  by  an  error  of
    law, and the decision stands.  This appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

