
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06581/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 February 2016                           |On 29 March 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                     H N
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rutherford, Counsel instructed by Migrant Law
                    Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of  Sri  Lanka,  date  of  birth  [  ]  1984,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision to make  removal  directions
    on 15 August 2014.  That notice was supported by a Reasons for  Refusal
    Letter of the same date.  The appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Beach who on 6 April 2015 dismissed the  appeal.   Permission  to
    appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford  on  16  June  2015.
    The Respondent made a Rule 24 response on 25 June 2015.

2.   The first complaint that is made  is  that  the  judge  was  unfair  in
    proceeding with the hearing in the light of the fact that  a  telephone
    call had been made at some point, not known,  on  27  February  to  the
    customer services number of the IAC informing that the  Appellant  then
    in Plymouth was unable to attend the hearing or would not be  attending
    the hearing.  It does not appear that whenever that call was  made  the
    telephone  call  was  brought  to  the  attention   of   Judge   Beach.
    Nevertheless, as the judge carefully recites at  paragraph  18  of  her
    determination, she subsequently received a GP letter and a letter  from
    the Appellant which the Appellant said on 2 March 2015 he was unable to
    attend the  hearing  due  to  his  medical  conditions.   "The  medical
    certificate is enclosed I would be  grateful  if  you  could  put  this
    medical certificate before the Immigration Judge".  I note  in  passing
    that the medical certificate does not appear to be a  standard  medical
    certificate but rather what appears to be a copy letter  from  a  Dr  P
    Sahadevan dated 5 March 2015.  That letter, written on a To Whom It May
    Concern basis, says this after introduction

         "... [HN] is one of our registered patients and I have seen him  on
         27/2/15 with difficulty in walking due to severe pain on the  right
         foot  due  to  gout  and  depression.   He  has   been   prescribed
         allopurinol and mitrazepine for  the  above  mentioned  conditions.
         Yours sincerely"


    and then a signature which purports to be from  Dr  Sahadevan.   Unless
    there is another document, which I do not  think  there  is,  which  is
    called a medical certificate, that is the  medical  evidence  that  was
    provided to the judge who noted its contents and took the view in brief
    that the documentation was insufficient to show that the Appellant  was
    not able to attend the hearing of his appeal  on  the  grounds  of  ill
    health.  As Miss Rutherford submits with reference to  a  recent  Upper
    Tribunal case of Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418
    (IAC) the issue is whether or not there  had  been  unfairness  in  the
    judge's decision to refuse to adjourn the  matter  or,  in  this  sense
    given there was no-one present at  the  hearing,  to  further  consider
    whether or not the matter should be relisted for further hearing before
    any decision was made in respect of the appeal.

3.   The  case  file  shows  that  as  long  ago  as  in  October  2014  the
    Appellant's then representatives S Satha & Co Solicitors wrote  seeking
    an adjournment of the  hearing  then  and  made  passing  reference  to
    possible ill health which might require  a  report  from  a  consultant
    psychiatrist to confirm fitness to instruct and whether or not  he  was
    fit to give evidence and be cross-examined.  It  appears  that  nothing
    was actually done about that and no issue was  raised  between  October
    and 2015 concerning the Appellant's mental health, be it  by  reference
    to depression or any other considerations was such as  to  prevent  him
    giving evidence.

4.   In a letter dated 16 February 2015 the case  file  shows  that  another
    request was made for an adjournment of 27 February 2015  but  that  was
    not done by reference to either any ill health issues or  by  reference
    to mental health problems, nor was the issue raised as to any inability
    of the Appellant to give instructions or to give evidence at a hearing.
     It was perhaps fortunate that after the notice  of  hearing  had  been
    given to the Appellant and S Satha & Co they found  themselves  without
    instructions and did not notify the Tribunal that they were  no  longer
    representing the Appellant.

5.   In those circumstances the question is having regard to  the  principal
    issue of fairness is whether or not the Appellant had been or fallen to
    be dealt with unfairly by the judge  who  for  the  reasons  she  gave,
    refused to consider any further hearing of the matter  or  any  further
    hearing of the appeal by another judge.   Having  carefully  considered
    the judge's reasoning as set out in paragraph 18 of  her  decision,  it
    seemed to me the judge was entitled in exercising the  discretion  that
    she had to consider the nature of the material that  had  been  brought
    forward and whether or not the absence of the Appellant ultimately made
    any difference to the determination of  the  grounds  of  appeal.   The
    judge went on to consider both the adjournment  issue  and  the  merits
    overall of the appeal  itself.   The  grounds  of  appeal  perhaps  for
    reasons that do not need to  be  stated  only  make  reference  to  the
    adjournment issue and not to any attack  on  the  judge's  decision  in
    relation to the merits of the decision as a whole in terms of  risk  on
    return Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.  I am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    properly considered this matter on the evidence  that  was  before  the
    judge and in the circumstances was entitled to and did fairly  consider
    the issue of the Appellant's absence  and  the  subsequent  explanation
    being given.  It does not seem to me in the light of the evidence as  a
    whole that the fact that there was a telephone call from the  Appellant
    at some stage on 27 February 2015 makes any material difference to  the
    fact that for whatever may have been the real reasons he did not intend
    to attend the hearing  on  that  date.   I  also  note  that  when  the
    Appellant subsequently  acquired  representation  from  the  Devon  and
    Cornwall Refugee Support Organisation that the issue was not raised  as
    to the  Appellant's  mental  health  or  lack  of  fitness  to  provide
    instructions or to attend  a  hearing  and  give  evidence.   In  those
    circumstances  therefore  the  appeal  is  dismissed.    The   original
    Tribunal's decision stands.

ANONYMITY ORDER

6.   An anonymity order was made by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Beach  on  27
    February 2015 and that anonymity order should continue.

Signed                                  Date: 29.03.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD
I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date: 29.03.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
