
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06572/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination sent           |
|on 23 April 2014                              |On 6 May 2014                |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                            MUSTAPHA HAMAD RASUL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr B Criggie, of Hamilton Burns & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant identifies himself as a Kurdish citizen of  Iraq,  born  on
   either 7 January or 1 July 1953.  He appeals against a  determination  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Dennis, dismissing his appeal  against  refusal
   of recognition as a refugee.

2) The appellant applied  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
   appeal to the Upper Tribunal, on the grounds that the judge was asked  to
   consider whether the level of violence in Iraq was high enough to  engage
   Articles 2(e) and 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, but focused  only
   upon the Refugee Convention and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR, and "... in
   failing to consider the issue of indiscriminate violence ... erred in law
   by failing to take into account evidence on a material matter."

3) On 30 September 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge Kamara refused  permission
   to appeal, observing that while the judge made  no  specific  mention  of
   those provisions of the Qualification Directive, it was apparent from the
   overall decision that the claim to humanitarian protection had also  been
   considered  and  rejected.   The  representative's  submission  had  been
   recorded, although no skeleton argument had been provided.  There was  no
   material error.  Given the findings of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  HM  and
   Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409,  which  the  judge  was
   obliged to follow, specific mention would have made no difference.

4) The appellant sought permission to appeal from  the  Upper  Tribunal,  on
   somewhat different grounds, referring to authority that country  guidance
   can be departed from where new evidence indicates  a  change  of  country
   situation:

    The evidence before the FtT judge indicated a spike  in  the  level  of
    indiscriminate violence within Iraq to levels not experienced since the
    height  of  sectarian  tensions  in  2008.   The  Country   of   Origin
    Information Reports and HM and Others were  based  upon  evidence  pre-
    2012.  The judge was  obliged  to  consider  the  updated  evidence  as
    against the country guidance case.


5) On 23 October 2013 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker  granted  permission  to
   appeal.

6) The handwritten note of proceedings kept by Judge Dennis shows  that  the
   final submission for the appellant was that HM was "dated" and  that  the
   situation was presently deteriorating  in  Iraq,  reaching  the  required
   level of indiscriminate violence.  The judge  notes:  "page  438  of  the
   appellant's bundle, a UN article on an upsurge in violence of March,  and
   pages 439, 442, 443 and 457, evidence of rates of violence".

7) Mr Mullen submitted that a judge was not under  a  "negative  obligation"
   to explain why he was not following binding country guidance.  However, I
   prefer the argument for the appellant that once the point was raised  the
   judge had to resolve it.  It might not need to be dealt with at any great
   length, but some reason had to be given, and that was not to be found  in
   the determination.  That was an error of law which would have to  be  put
   right.

8) As to remaking the decision, Mr Criggie said that  the  appellant  relied
   on the submission made in the First-tier Tribunal.  He had there provided
   a 670 page bundle, most of which was background evidence.

9) I observed that I would not find any duty on the First-tier  Tribunal  or
   on the Upper Tribunal to comb through such voluminous material to see  if
   there was anything to support the (quite far reaching)  proposition  that
   country guidance should not longer stand.   The  basic  obligation  on  a
   tribunal must be to resolve the point  based  on  the  specific  material
   relied upon.

10) Mr Criggie said that the necessary references were those  identified  in
   the handwritten note by Judge  Dennis.   These  consist  of  a  US  State
   Department report and of news  articles  all  dealing  with  a  spike  in
   violence, commonly agreed to reach the worst levels since 2008.  He  said
   that was enough to depart from HM and Others, and to allow the appeal  on
   Article 15(c) grounds.

11) Mr Mullen in response relied on Elgafaji,  CJEU  C-465/07,  17  February
   2009.  The Court made  it  clear  at  paragraph  38  that  Article  15(c)
   required "a clear degree of individualisation", and went on at  paragraph
   39:

    ... the more the applicant is able to  show  that  he  is  specifically
    affected by reason of factors particular to his personal circumstances,
    the lower the level of indiscriminate violence required for him  to  be
    eligible for subsidiary protection.


12) Mr Mullen pointed out that the appellant was found to  be  a  thoroughly
   unreliable witness.  He was at the bottom end of the scale of  those  who
   might be considered for protection under Article 15(c).  The evidence  of
   the spike in violence in April to May 2013 was not that it was  pervasive
   throughout the country, but that it pertained in certain areas.  Evidence
   that the level of violence at that period reached the highest since  2008
   was not a basis for reaching conclusions  different  from  those  in  HM.
   Paragraph 45 of Elgafaji also showed the high  level  generally  required
   before it could be shown that a civilian  would  be  at  risk  solely  on
   account of his presence in his country.  There was no case law  to  date,
   either in the UK or in any other EU state, holding that such a  level  in
   Iraq had been established.

13) Mr Criggie in response  acknowledged  that  there  is  no  UK  authority
   tending to supersede HM, and that  he  is  not  aware  of  any  authority
   elsewhere.

14) I reserved my determination.

15) The appellant has not shown that there is evidence to justify  departure
   from the general conclusions in HM.  Given the findings in his individual
   case, the appellant falls at the lowest level  of  potential  requirement
   for protection under the Qualification Directive. Simply as a citizen  of
   Iraq, applying Elgafaji and HM, he does not qualify.

16) The determination has been set aside on  a  limited  point  only.   That
   having been resolved, the appeal is dismissed on all  available  grounds,
   including those arising under the Qualification Directive.




                               [pic]
                                28 April 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
