
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06911/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 February 2016                  |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                    [M S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:
For the respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a national of Morocco who brought an appeal  against
       the decision of the Respondent on 30 March 2015 to refuse him asylum.
       His representatives were  given  as  Halliday  Reeves.  At  the  case
       management hearing of his appeal  fixed  for  a  date  in  May  2015,
       neither the appellant nor his solicitors appeared. The same  happened
       when the case was relisted to be heard by  Judge  Walker  on  2  June
       2015. In a decision sent on 9 June 2015 Judge  Walker  dismissed  the
       appellant's appeal on all grounds, including asylum and human  rights
       grounds.

    2. It is very unclear why Halliday Reeves did not respond to  either  of
       the appeal hearing notices, but the file shows that by at the  latest
       11 August 2015 the appellant had instructed The Passage and that this
       organisation then contacted the Tribunal in  November  asking  for  a
       copy of the appeal determination.

    3. In the grounds of appeal subsequently lodged by The  Passage  it  was
       noted that the appellant had mental heath difficulties and could  not
       remember the names of his previous solicitors. The grounds of  appeal
       also attached medical evidence strongly indicating that at  the  time
       of the hearing in June 2015 the appellant was suffering mental health
       difficulties which resulted in his being admitted to a secure  mental
       health facility on 2 July under s.2 of the Mental Health Act and  not
       discharged until 1 October 2015. He was said to be now under the care
       of a statutory mental health team, although unfortunately he  remains
       street homeless.

    4. The first ground of appeal is that, even though not the fault of  the
       tribunal judge, there had been a clear failure of procedural fairness
       in that the decision by the judge to proceed in the  absence  of  the
       appellant or  his  representative  was  taken  in  ignorance  of  the
       appellant's mental health difficulties.

    5. Given that the judge was aware that those helping  the  appellant  at
       the original appeal stage had sought to  obtain  a  report  from  the
       Helen Bamber Association, one would have expected the  judge,  before
       deciding to proceed with the hearing with only a  Presenting  Officer
       present, to have done more than simply note that  notice  of  hearing
       had been sent to  the  appellant  and  those  representing  him.  But
       irrespective of whether that is right, there occurred a  clear  error
       of process making it necessary to set aside the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal and remit the appeal to be  heard  by  the  First  tier
       Tribunal (other than Judge Walker). It cannot be said that there were
       no valid reasons for the failure of the appellant to  attend  and  it
       would be unsafe to assume that Halliday Reeves considered  themselves
       to be still acting or if they  did  that  they  acted  diligently  in
       relation to his pending appeal.

    6. For the above  reasons  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
       proceeding with the appeal and its decision is set aside. The case is
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt with by another judge
       other than Judge Walker.

  Directions

    7. Within 14 days the appellant's solicitors (The Passage) are to  write
       to Halliday Reeves (1) to confirm  that  the  latter  are  no  longer
       acting; (2) to request that Halliday  Reeves  hand  on  any  relevant
       files to The Passage.  Within  a  further  14  days  the  appellant's
       solicitors (The Passage) are to inform the First-tier Tribunal of the
       results of these actions.

    8. Within 28 days the appellant's solicitors (The Passage) are to submit
       a detailed witness statement from  the  appellant  covering  (a)  the
       basis on which he maintains he would face a real risk of serious harm
       on return to Morocco; (b) the basis on which he maintains  that   his
       removal to Morocco would breach his human rights. If the appellant is
       for whatever reason unable to give  evidence  at  the  fresh  hearing
       before the First-tier Tribunal, this witness statement is to stand in
       lieu of oral evidence. There should not be any further adjournment of
       this case.

    9. Subject to further First tier Tribunal directions, both  parties  are
       to produce background country information relating to  the  issue  of
       the extent of risk to male homosexuals in Morocco (this is  an  issue
       which appears to be in dispute between the parties).




                               Signed
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
