

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06323/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 3 February 2016                            |On 16 February 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     OG
                         (Anonymity DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz
For the Respondent:    Mr Hachimi

                                             DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal against
a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Robson) to allow the appeal of
OG against the Secretary of State's decision of 19 November 2015  refusing
to  grant  him  asylum  but  granting  him   limited   leave   outside   the
Immigration Rules in accordance with a Home Office policy on discretionary
leave for minors.

2.    OG, who  has  been  granted  anonymity  in  these  proceedings,  is  a
national of Vietnam.  He was born on 25 November 1998 and he has  been  at
all material times, and remains, a minor.  I am not clear  as  to  precisely
when he entered the UK but he was encountered  by  immigration officers  on
1 September 2014 and told them that he had arrived only a few days prior to
that.   He  was  then  provided  with  assistance  by  a   social   services
department,  in  view  of  his  young  age,  and  he   claimed   asylum   on
9 October 2014.

3.    In claiming asylum OG said that his family had owned some farmland  in
Vietnam which the Vietnamese Government had wished to have developed.   The
Government had decided that this would be achieved through  the  land  being
purchased by a development company and  that  compensation  would  be  paid.
Other Vietnamese persons in the area were also to have their land  purchased
and developed in the same way.  It was proposed that they too would  receive
compensation but a dispute arose between the land owners and the  Government
as to the level of compensation payable.   This  resulted  in  a  number  of
farmers affected by these proposals staging an  anti-Government  protest  in
Hanoi on 12 June 2012.  The appellant says that he handed out leaflets  at
the protest, that he was arrested, and that he was subsequently released  by
the authorities after five days.  He claims, though, that he continued  with
his leafleting and that, in early 2013, he  was  arrested  once  again.   On
this  occasion,  though,  rather  than  being   simply   released   by   the
authorities, he claims to have escaped. He says, in this context,  that  his
grandfather had a friend in the Vietnamese Police Force.  That  friend,  as
part of the escape plan, gave him a tablet to take which  he  did  take  and
which lowered his blood pressure and resulted in his  losing  consciousness.
This was done deliberately with a view to his being taken  to  hospital  for
treatment.  Once he had arrived at the hospital, still unconscious,  he  was
taken out of the hospital  and  driven  to  a  mountainous  area.   He  then
travelled out of Vietnam to China, Spain and France prior  to  entering  the
UK.  He says that he will be at risk at the hands of  the  authorities  upon
return, in particular, because of his status as an escapee.

4.    The Secretary of State, in considering  the  application  for  asylum,
accepted most of what the appellant had to say but disbelieved  the  account
of the escape.  That being so, the Secretary of State took the view that  OG
would have simply been released by the authorities and so would  not  be  of
any ongoing interest. The respondent did, though, as indicated, in  view  of
OG's young age, grant discretionary leave  as  a  minor  until  he  attained
17� years of age which he is due to do on 25 May 2016.

5.    OG appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  refusal  of  his
asylum claim and, in fact, his appeal was  allowed  by  Judge Robson  in  a
determination promulgated on 11 December 2015. However, I set that decision
aside on the basis that it contained a  material  error  of  law.   My  full
reasons for doing so  are  set  out  in  a  document  headed  "Decision  and
Directions" which was sent to the parties on 11 December 2015.  In  short,
though, I did so because I  thought  the  judge  had  erred  in  failing  to
resolve inconsistency in the evidence OG had given about his escape  and  in
failing to explain why  he  accepted  the  account  of  the  escape  despite
rejecting a key element of it being that OG had been given a pill,  as  part
of the escape plan, in order to cause  him  to  lose  consciousness.   While
setting the decision aside, though, I did  preserve  most  of  the  findings
such that the respondent's concessions  about  the  other  aspects  of  OG's
account, which had been adopted  by  the  judge,  remained.   Thus,  at  the
subsequent "continuance hearing", attention focused upon the escape.

6.    At the continuance hearing representation was as indicated  above.   I
am grateful to each representative.  I heard oral evidence from OG who  gave
his evidence with the assistance of a Vietnamese speaking  interpreter  whom
he appeared to understand throughout the course of the proceedings.  At  the
end  of  the  hearing   I   received   oral   submissions   from   the   two
representatives.  As to documentation, I had all of the documents which  had
been before the First-tier Tribunal and the  further  documents  which  had
come into being as a result of the appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal.   There
were no additional documents.

7.    OG, in his evidence in chief, said it was true, as  he  had  indicated
in an asylum interview of  19 January 2015  and  a  witness  statement  of
20 November 2014 that he had been given a tablet, whilst in prison,  which
had caused him to lose consciousness.  He explained that when  he  woke  up,
he saw his grandfather and asked where he was.   His  grandfather  told  him
that they were in Lang Son Province in Vietnam which is  in  a  mountainous
area of the country close to the border with China.  He was told  that  they
would have to wait for someone to come and take him  over  the  border.   OG
said he asked his grandfather how he had been taken out of  prison  and  his
grandfather  had  explained  to  him  about  the   tablet,   the   loss   of
consciousness and his having been taken to the hospital.

8.    In cross-examination OG was reminded of what he  had  had  to  say  in
answer to question 40 of his asylum interview and it was pointed out to him
that he had not specifically said, in reply to that question,  that  he  had
lost consciousness.  OG said that these events were  a  long  time  ago  and
that he only knew what he had been told by his grandfather.  It was  put  to
him that he had not mentioned losing consciousness in an  earlier  interview
with an immigration officer or in his screening interview.   OG  said  that
there might have been  a  time  when  he  had  not  mentioned  the  loss  of
consciousness because he had not  been  asked  about  it.   However  he  had
mentioned it at an interview and in his statement.  He  was  pressed  as  to
where he had been when he woke up,  being  given  possible  options  of  his
being in a vehicle, in a house or in the open air.  He  said  he  could  not
say exactly because these events were  four  years  ago  and  he  could  not
remember every little detail.

9.    I asked some questions of OG for clarification purposes.  In  response
to those questions he said it was "someone in uniform"  who  had  given  him
the tablet and  that  person  had  told  him  it  would  help  him  to  lose
consciousness so that he would have to be taken to hospital.   He  was  told
that that was part of an escape plan.  I reminded him of what  he  had  said
in answer to  question 41  of  his  asylum  interview,  his  answer  having
indicated that the escape had been achieved whilst he  was  on  the  way  to
hospital as opposed to while he was at  the  hospital.   He  said  that  the
story had been told back to him by his grandfather, that he was  unconscious
at the time and that he did not remember "step by step" how  everything  had
happened.

10.   In re-examination OG said that when he had woken up he  had  seen  his
grandfather and had asked where they were and had been  told  they  were  in
Lang Son Province.  He had been waiting a long time before someone had come
to take him out of Vietnam.

11.   Mr Diwnycz, in submissions, indicated he would rely upon the  content
of the "reasons for refusal letter" of 19 March 2015.  Whilst OG is a minor
he is not a small child.  He had been asked direct questions  regarding  his
escape but had given three or four different versions of what had  happened.
 He had not provided any more detail as to where he was when he awoke  other
than that he was in a mountainous area.  Had he been telling  the  truth  he
would have been able to provide more detail.  I should find that  his  claim
to have been given a tablet and to have escaped is  an  embellishment.   The
account of the escape is not credible.

12.   Mr Hachimi indicated he would rely upon the concessions contained  in
the reasons for refusal letter.  OG could not be criticised for  failing  to
mention the tablet and his  lapse  into  unconsciousness  at  the  screening
interview because the provision of a full account  is  not  the  purpose  of
such an interview.  As to inconsistency, there is always a margin  of  error
where an interpreter is used.  OG's young age also has to be borne in  mind.
 Further, if he was unconscious then it has to be  remembered  that  he  was
not a direct witness to events himself but can only recount  what  has  been
told to him. As to his failure to give information  about  his  surroundings
upon waking up, he would have been "very groggy" and barely aware  of  those
surroundings.  The accepted parts of the account relate to the core of  that
account and the escape issue is merely marginal.  In any event, he would  be
at risk on  return  on  the  basis  that  he  did  have  problems  with  the
authorities and has been arrested in the past.

13.   It is, then, on the above basis, that I must now remake the  decision.
 In so doing I remind myself that where an individual claims entitlement  to
international protection, be that  on  the  basis  of  asylum,  humanitarian
protection or under Article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human Rights
(ECHR) the burden of proof rests upon that person but the standard of  proof
is that of a "real risk" as opposed to any higher standard.  Matters are  to
be assessed as at the date  of  hearing  which  means,  in  this  case,  the
hearing before me of 3 February 2016.

14.   I have decided it is necessary  for  me  to  consider,  to  the  lower
standard identified above, whether or not I can accept OG as being a  wholly
credible witness.  In this context I have borne in mind his young  age  both
at the time of his giving evidence to me  and  at  the  time  of  his  being
interviewed and providing statements.

15.   The Secretary of State, in part in reliance  upon  background  country
material, has accepted much of OG's account as noted  above.   There  is  no
reason why I should revisit that and I do not do so.   The  acceptance  that
much of the account he offers is true, therefore, is a matter  which  weighs
in his favour and which I regard as tending to  suggest  that  he  might  be
telling the truth regarding the disputed part of his  account.   That  said,
though, there are some concerns about the account  he  has  offered  of  the
escape which do merit some careful consideration.

16.   In this context, OG's oral evidence before me was to the  effect  that
the escape had been affected after he had been taken to  a  hospital.   That
is  consistent  with  what  he  had  to  say  in  a  witness  statement   of
20 November 2014.  In particular, at paragraph 23 of that statement he said
this:

      "During my time in prison my grandfather had a friend  in  the  police
      and he helped me get released into a hospital.  The friend got a  pill
      to me which lowered my blood pressure and led to me  passing  out.   I
      was taken to hospital  for  treatment  and  my  grandfather's  friends
      helped me get out from hospital and to escape."

17.   However, during his asylum interview of 19 January 2015 the following
exchange is recorded:

      "     Question   -     Can you tell me how did you  manage  to  escape
                       from the hospital?

            Answer     -     My grandmother  has  a  friend  in  the  police
                       force and that man helped me to escape.  He gave me a
                       tablet and it affected my blood pressure and  it  was
                       going down.  The police officer had to  take  me  to
                       hospital and on the way  to  hospital  my  granddad's
                       friend helped me to escape.

            Question   -     What happened on your way to the hospital?

            Answer     -     That friend of my granddad he  was  working  in
                       the police force and he took me to the hospital  and
                       on the way  he  let  me  escape.   My  grand-dad  was
                       waiting for me and took me to LANG SON."

18.   Mr Diwnycz said he would not take any point about the reference to  a
"grandmother" as opposed to a grandfather so I will  not  either.   However,
the obvious concern is that in answering both of those questions, which  are
questions 40 and 41 in the interview record, OG indicated that  the  escape
had been affected whilst he was on the way to hospital as opposed to  whilst
he was at the hospital.  That does seem to me to be an  inconsistency  about
a rather simple and straightforward matter.

19.   It is said that OG is very young and was very young  at  the  time  he
was recounting these events.  I accept that  but,  nevertheless,  that  does
not seem to me, of itself, to explain that particular inconsistency.  It  is
said that there is always a margin for error when an  interpreter  is  used.
However, there was a Vietnamese speaking interpreter at  the  interview  and
it is recorded that OG indicated that  he  understood  the  interpreter  and
that, at the end of the interview, he confirmed that he had  understood  all
of the questions put to him.  It is said that OG did  not  witness  the  key
events regarding his escape and can only rely upon the account given to  him
by his grandfather.  However, even if  that  is  right,  one  would  expect,
ordinarily, that he  would  be  consistent  as  to  what  it  was  that  his
grandfather had told  him  regarding  the  manner  of  the  claimed  escape.
Although it was not specifically drawn to my attention I do  note  that  OG,
in a further statement of 3 June 2015, said that he did not think there was
a significant difference in the accounts he  had  given  about  the  escape,
that he was only 16 when interviewed, that the events had happened  a  long
time ago and that he was frightened.  I take that into account  but  do  not
think  it  amounts  to  a  credible  explanation   for   the   inconsistency
highlighted.

20.   OG did not, in answering questions 40 and 41, actually state that  he
had lapsed into unconsciousness.  This is despite his saying that he had  in
oral evidence before me and in his witness statement of  20 November 2014.
I accept, as Mr Hachimi points out, that in answering  question 40  he  did
refer to his blood pressure lowering as a consequence of  his  having  taken
the tablet.  Nevertheless, as Mr Diwnycz, points out, the  claimed  lapsing
into unconsciousness as a result of the taking  of  the  tablet  was  a  key
component of the account regarding the escape.  It is  surprising  therefore
that OG did not actually make specific mention of that when  recounting  the
escape in interview.  That is, in my view, something which amounts to or  is
akin to an inconsistency.

21.   OG was, in my judgment, very vague regarding  the  circumstances  when
he awoke from the claimed loss of  consciousness.   He  was  pressed  as  to
where he was when he regained consciousness and, as noted above, Mr Diwnycz
put to him a number  of  options.   He  was  not  able  to  give  any  clear
indication as to, for example, whether he came round  in  a  vehicle,  in  a
house or in the open air.  I do take the dual points that he was very  young
at  the  time  and  that  all  of  this  was  said  to  have  occurred  some
considerable time ago.  I take Mr Hachimi's point made at the  hearing  that
he would be somewhat "groggy" when coming round.  Nevertheless,  the  escape
was not a trivial incident.  If  it  happened  it  was  a  very  significant
incident in OG's life.  In the circumstances  I  would  have  expected  him,
notwithstanding the  various  points  made,  to  have  had  some  degree  of
recollection as to his surroundings when he regained  consciousness.   I  do
consider, therefore, that his obvious vagueness as to this causes  a  degree
of damage to his credibility.

22.   OG's oral evidence to me, as indicated, was that he  come  round  from
his bout of unconsciousness in Lang Son Province. However, at paragraph 24
of his witness statement of 28 November 2014 he said:

      "After leaving the hospital I met with my grandfather  and  was  taken
      to Lang Son."

23.   That wording does seem to suggest that  he  was  saying  he  had  come
round from the bout of unconsciousness prior to being  taken  to  Lang  Son.
That is inconsistent with what he said to me.  The  statement  was  prepared
by his solicitors with the assistance of a  Vietnamese  interpreter.   There
is nothing to suggest that that interpreter was not competent  and,  indeed,
one would not have expected his solicitors to use  an  interpreter  who  was
not.  Again, therefore, I regard this as an inconsistency which  does  cause
some damage to OG's credibility.

24.   In light of the above concerns, notwithstanding  OG's  young  age  and
the various other points which have been taken on his behalf and  which  are
referred to above, I do conclude that, whilst he has, as is  accepted,  told
the truth about a number of matters, he has not told  the  truth  about  the
claimed escape.  I find that, in fact, that escape did not  occur  and  that
it is offered as an embellishment  in  order  to  artificially  enhance  his
prospects of success with respect to  his  international  protection  claim.
Thus, I find that if he is to return to Vietnam he will not be returning  as
an escapee and that, in fact, he would have been simply  released  from  the
second detention as had been the case, as he accepts, with  respect  to  his
initial detention.

25.   The claimed escape was  a  very  important,  indeed  it  seems  to  me
pivotal, aspect of the account OG was relying  upon.   Although  Mr Hachimi
sought to argue, in the alternative, that he would be at  risk  upon  return
in any event, finding to the effect  that  he  has,  in  fact,  simply  been
released by the authorities  does  not  suggest  that  that  is  so.  It  is
difficult to see why, if he was of ongoing interest, he would  be  released.
Further, Mr Hachimi does not direct me to any  background  country  material
indicating  that  the  Vietnamese  authorities  would   seek   to   penalise
individuals for leaving the country or for seeking international  protection
elsewhere.  Any claim that he would  be  at  risk  upon  return,  therefore,
absent the escape part of the account, is not made out.

26.   In light of the above I remake the decision to the effect that OG  has
not demonstrated that he is a  person  entitled  to  refugee  status  or  to
humanitarian protection.  Any Article 3 risk does not seem to me  to  arise
bearing in mind his current discretionary leave but, if that was  an  issue,
I would have resolved it against him for the reasons already set out above.





Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has already  been  set  aside.   In
remaking the decision I  allow  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal and conclude the  claimant  is  not  a  refugee  nor  is  he
entitled to humanitarian protection.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  order.  I  continue  that  order
pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
Therefore, the claimant and members of  his  family  are  granted  anonymity
throughout these proceedings.  No report of these  proceedings  in  whatever
form shall directly or indirectly identify the claimant  or  any  member  of
his family. Failure to comply with this order could lead to  a  contempt  of
court.



Signed                                 Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is paid or payable there can be no fee award.

Signed                            Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
