
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06351/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1st February 2016                     |On 15th March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                    mr aa
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Neville (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham  ("the
    Judge") in a decision promulgated on 15th August 2015.   The  appellant
    claimed to be at risk on return to Pakistan.  Part of the  evidence  he
    relied upon was a medical report prepared by Dr A Lohawala, in which an
    assessment of the scars on the appellant's body and the  state  of  his
    mental health was made.

2.   The  Judge  found  that  no  weight  could  be  given  at  all  to  the
    conclusions in the medical report regarding the scars or in relation to
    any support the report might give  to  the  appellant's  account.   She
    found material inconsistencies which could  not  be  explained  by  the
    appellant's mental ill-health.  The Judge went  on  to  find  that  the
    appellant could return to Pakistan safely and that his  ill-health  did
    not reach the threshold required to show a real risk  of  ill-treatment
    in breach of Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.   No  Article  8
    case was advanced on the appellant's behalf.

3.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended  that  the
    Judge erred in relation  to  her  assessment  of  the  medical  report.
    Although she expressly referred to KV  (scarring  -  medical  evidence)
    [2014] UKUT 230 (IAC) she failed to correctly apply the guidance  given
    in that case and, in particular, erred in finding that no weight  could
    be given to the medical expert's findings in the light of  the  age  of
    the scars on the  appellant's  body.   Secondly,  the  Judge  erred  in
    rejecting the appellant's factual account, as her  assessment  in  this
    context was flawed by her finding that little or no weight fell  to  be
    given to the medical report.

4.   Permission to appeal was given by a Judge of the Upper Tribunal on  4th
    November 2015.  In a Rule 24 response made by the  Secretary  of  State
    shortly thereafter, the appeal was opposed on the basis that the  Judge
    directed herself  appropriately.   Dr  Lohawala's  medical  report  was
    properly considered in the light of KV and the grounds  amounted  to  a
    disagreement with the outcome of the appeal.  No material error of  law
    was shown.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Mr Neville said that paragraph 229 of the judgment in KV contained  all
    that was said in that case about assessing the age of scarring.  Having
    heard substantial evidence, the Upper Tribunal concluded that there  is
    no scientific consensus as to the precise date beyond which it  becomes
    impossible to tell how old scarring is but there is agreement  that  in
    the  context  of  injuries  caused  by  torture  it  is  only  possible
    ordinarily to assess the age of scarring within the first six to twelve
    months.  One of the experts gave evidence  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    indicating that it may sometimes be possible  to  give  a  likely  date
    where scarring is up to two  years  old  depending  on  the  particular
    medical context.

6.   The Judge heard a  submission  from  the  Presenting  Officer  that  no
    weight should be given to any report  on  scarring,  as  supporting  an
    appellant's account, where the scars were over two years old.  However,
    that submission was simply wrong and wholly unsupported  by  KV.   This
    may have contributed to the error made by the Judge at paragraph 43  of
    the decision, where no weight was given to the report in this  context.



7.   The Judge's self-direction  was,  apart  from  that,  correct  but  the
    finding that the medical report  returned  a  probative  value  of  nil
    fatally undermined the Judge's conclusions.

8.   The Judge found inconsistencies in the appellant's claims  but  it  was
    axiomatic that a claimant might, nonetheless, make out his or her  case
    to the necessary lower standard of proof.  An important question to  be
    asked was whether the Judge  would  have  been  bound  to  dismiss  the
    appeal, even if she had given the medical report due weight.  The clear
    answer was  "no".   It  was  not  possible  to  say  that,  absent  the
    misdirection regarding the medical report, the Judge  would  inevitably
    have found the appellant's account incredible.

9.   The importance of medical reports of this type was clearly  highlighted
    by the Upper Tribunal in KV, at paragraph 224 of  the  judgment.   Home
    Office Policy Instructions state at 3.3 that reports which document and
    evaluate a claim of torture for asylum proceedings need only provide  a
    relatively low level of proof of torture or serious harm and ought  not
    to be dismissed  as  having  little  or  no  weight  when  the  overall
    assessment of the credibility of a claim is made.  Annex 3, attached to
    the judgment in KV, shows that clinicians who prepare reports  for  the
    Medical Foundation can be assumed to have considered the possibility of
    a "false allegation" of torture in forming a clinical view, as this  is
    required by the  Istanbul  Protocol.   The  expert  instructed  in  the
    present appeal had the necessary experience and expertise and could  be
    assumed to have considered this possibility.

10.  The second ground concerned the  Judge's  finding  that  little  weight
    should be given to the report in any event because the expert  had  not
    considered the alternative explanations for the  appellant's  injuries.
    In fact, looking at the report, it was clear from  paragraphs  1.2  and
    2.1 that Dr Lohawala expressly referred to the  appellant's  claims  as
    precisely that and to his "allegedly" having been beaten.  He  did  not
    take the appellant's account at face value.  The body  of  the  report,
    for example at paragraph 6.15.1 to  6.15.5,  showed  that  Dr  Lohawala
    considered in some detail alternative explanations  for  the  injuries.
    The cogency of the report could not  be  reconciled  with  the  Judge's
    brief assessment at paragraph 43 of the decision.  The  medical  expert
    did not accept the account without question.   Dr  Lohawala's  findings
    that some of the scars were "highly consistent"  with  the  appellant's
    account fell to be given due weight.

11.  Moreover, the appellant's demeanour during  his  examination  was  also
    significant evidence.  Dr Lohawala noted that he became extremely upset
    in describing some of his injuries.  The Judge was invited to take this
    aspect into account in submissions but that there was  nothing  in  the
    decision to show that she had done so.

12.  So far as venue is concerned, Mr Neville said that if a material  error
    of law were found, in relation to the weight due to  be  given  to  the
    medical report,  the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal because the Judge's other findings, regarding the  credibility
    of the account, would  be  undermined.   Proper  consideration  of  the
    medical report was essential to an assessment of the whole account.

13.  The appellant's grounds of appeal might require amendment as there  has
    been a rapprochement  with his partner and a renewed relationship  with
    his young daughter, such that an Article 8 assessment would  inevitably
    have to take into account section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

14.  Mr Tarlow said that the decision was sustainable.  He relied  upon  the
    Rule 24 response from the Secretary of State.  At paragraph 43  of  the
    decision the Judge came to conclusions on the medical evidence that she
    was entitled to reach.  It was not for the medical expert  to  question
    the appellant's account or conclude whether it was incredible  or  not.
    That was the Judge's task.  At paragraph 44 of the decision, the  Judge
    found that there were inconsistencies which could not be  explained  by
    the state of the appellant's mental health.  She dismissed the  account
    in its entirety.

15.  If, on the other hand, an error of law were found, in the light of  the
    submission regarding changed family  circumstances,  the  Secretary  of
    State would not object if  the  appeal  were  sent  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be remade.

16.  In a brief reply, Mr Neville said that  the  inconsistencies  found  by
    the Judge were undermined by her finding that the medical report had no
    value.  If it were given due weight, a different conclusion might  have
    been reached on the overall credibility of the appellant's claims.

Conclusion on Error of Law

17.  The Judge accepted Dr Lohawala as an expert witness,  at  paragraph  37
    of the decision.  It is clear that she  carefully  avoided  reaching  a
    conclusion on the credibility of the appellant's  core  claims  without
    first taking into account, as part of  the  assessment,  Dr  Lohawala's
    report.  She was satisfied that discrepancies relating to the timing of
    threats claimed to have been made by the Taliban could not be explained
    by reference to the appellant's mental health.  At paragraph 43 of  the
    decision, she focused on the scarring on the appellant's body.

18.  As Mr Neville submitted, the Judge's finding that no  weight  could  be
    given to Dr Lohawala's conclusions regarding the scars is  inextricably
    linked to their age.  The appellant claimed that he was detained by the
    Taliban in 2007 or 2008, so that the scarring on his body must be seven
    or eight years old.  The Judge drew attention to the  Upper  Tribunal's
    finding in KV that there is some basis for considering, in relation  to
    certain types of case, that the age of scarring can be determined up to
    two years.  There is, however, nothing at all  in  KV  suggesting  that
    little or no weight can be given to a medical report in  a  case  where
    scars are considerably older than that.  The Upper  Tribunal's  comment
    is confined narrowly to medical opinion regarding the age of scars.

19.  It is readily apparent that the medical report, prepared by an  expert,
    was relied upon as evidence showing  that  the  scars  themselves  were
    capable of supporting the appellant's  claims  regarding  the  injuries
    that gave rise to them.  That particular role is not undermined at  all
    by the mere fact that the scars are  seven  or  eight  years  old.   Dr
    Lohawala was entitled to find, as a medical expert, that some at  least
    of the scars were "highly consistent" with the appellant's  account  of
    the injuries he suffered.  As such, the report was  capable  of  having
    weight, perhaps substantial weight, in support of the appellant's case.
     The Judge's finding that the age of the scars has the consequence that
    no weight may be given to the conclusions  in  the  medical  report  is
    unsupported by KV or any other authority  and  amounts  to  a  material
    error of law.

20.  Similarly, in finding that Dr Lohawala failed to consider  whether  the
    appellant's injuries could have been caused by playing cricket  or  his
    work in restaurants, the Judge  has  apparently  failed  to  take  into
    account the medical expert's assessment at paragraphs 6.15.1 to 6.15.5.
      In  that  part  of  the  report,  Dr  Lohawala  expressly  considered
    alternative explanations  for  the  injuries.   He  was  aware  of  the
    appellant's leisure activities and his work in restaurants,  took  into
    account the appellant's denial that he suffered injuries in the  course
    of these activities and, having found alternative explanations  of  the
    injuries unlikely, Dr Lohawala drew a broad conclusion that there was a
    high degree of consistency between  the  appellant's  account  and  the
    scars on his body.

21.  Some criticism might well be made of the report, as it  is  not  always
    apparent whether Dr  Lohawala  is  reciting  part  of  the  appellant's
    account or making a finding of his own.  An  example  is  at  paragraph
    6.15.1, where the finding that  it  was  likely  that  the  appellant's
    injuries were caused by torture  is  followed  by  the  words  "by  the
    Taliban and, thereafter by the Pakistani army  officers".   Mr  Neville
    correctly pointed to Dr Lohawala's introduction, in which  he  referred
    to the appellant's "claims" but the inclusion  in  the  report  of  the
    apparent identity of the agents of ill-treatment ought to give rise  to
    some caution.  Overall, however, I accept Mr Neville's submission  that
    paragraph 43 of the decision contains an error of law in this  context,
    as Dr  Lohawala  did  in  fact  consider  alternative  causes  for  the
    injuries.

22.  I have considered whether the decision might be sustained in the  light
    of the inconsistencies found by the Judge but I conclude that  this  is
    not possible.  The medical report was a salient part  of  the  evidence
    and an assessment  in  the  round,  of  all  the  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal, required the report to be given due weight,  rather  than  no
    weight.

23.  I conclude that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  a
    material error of law, in relation to the  assessment  of  the  medical
    report, and that it  must  set  aside  and  remade  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I find that the First-tier Tribunal is the appropriate venue
    in the light of the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  and  the
    extent of the fact-finding that will be required on  remaking.   As  Mr
    Tarlow said, there is the  additional  factor  of  the  changed  family
    circumstances.  Mr Neville suggested that  the  grounds  might  require
    amendment, which will require  an  application  (there  were  no  draft
    amended grounds before me).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It  shall  be  remade
in the First-tier Tribunal, at Birmingham, before a Judge other than  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Graham.

Anonymity

I maintain and continue the anonymity direction made by the Judge.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

