


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06251/2008


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Sent           |
|On 16 July 2013                               |On 24 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     AN
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mark Henderson, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Peter Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1.    The appellant is an Afghan citizen. He was born on 1 January 1962.

 2.      The appellant brings this appeal as he maintains that he will face
    a real risk of serious mistreatment if returned to Afghanistan  because
    of his history as a commander in Hisbi-i-Islami.

 3. This appeal comes before us as a remittal from the Court of Appeal. The
    terms of the remittal are set out in a Statement of Reasons attached to
    a Consent Order dated 28  March  2012.  The  Statement  of  Reasons  is
    comprehensive regarding the appellant's background  and the history  of
    the appeal and it is expedient to set it out here in full:

             "1.  The Appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, was  born  on  1
                 January 1962 and clandestinely entered the UK on 1 December
                 2006 and claimed asylum on the same day.


             2. The Appellant claimed, inter alia, that he  joined  Hizb-i-
                 Islam at sometime around 1982 and was selected as a leader.
                 He was in charge of up to 500 people until around 1996 when
                 the Taliban came into power.  The  Appellant  claimed  that
                 between 1992 and 1996 he was responsible  for  security  in
                 the district of Z, as well as in Cherasiab, however that he
                 spent most of his time in Z. He stated that on one occasion
                 he was sent to defend the area know as Arzam Qemat.

             3.   The Appellant  claimed  to  have  been  detained  by  the
                 Taliban in 1997, interrogated and tortured for  information
                 about Hizb-I-Islam and  kept  in  prison  for  six  months.
                 Between 1997 and 2006 the Appellant  was  a  Malak  of  his
                 village and used bodyguards. In October  2006  he  received
                 information that Jamiat I Islami were going to kill him. He
                 fled from his home and later from  Afghanistan.  His  house
                 was repeatedly attacked. He fled to the UK via Pakistan.


             4.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's  asylum  claim  in
                 (sic) 24 July 2008 and on 28 July 2008 made a  decision  to
                 remove the appellant from the UK. In particular, given  his
                 senior role in Hizb-I-Islam and that he admitted giving his
                 men rocket launchers and having a personal  involvement  in
                 the bombardment of Kabul, it was  considered  that  he  was
                 both directly and indirectly complicit in war  crimes.  For
                 this reason he was refused protection under the 1951 United
                 Nations Convention relating to the Status of Refugees ("the
                 Refugee Convention") by operation of Article 1F(a). Article
                 1F(a) states that the Convention shall  not  apply  to  any
                 person  to  (sic)  whom  there  are  serious  reasons   for
                 considering has "committed a crime  against  peace,  a  war
                 crime, or a  crime  against  humanity  as  defined  in  the
                 international instruments drawn up  to  make  provision  in
                 respect of such crimes".


             5.   The Secretary of State  further  considered  whether  the
                 Appellant's return to Afghanistan would breach  Articles  2
                 and/or 3 ECHR.  Consideration  was  given  to  the  country
                 guidance case of  PM  and  Others  (Kabul  -  Hizb-I-Islam)
                 Afghanistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00089, on the basis of which it
                 was considered that the Appellant's past  association  with
                 Hizb-I-Islam would not result in him experiencing treatment
                 amounting to persecution if he was returned to Kabul.


             6. It was not disputed that the Appellant had been targeted in
                his home area, but it was considered that it  was  open  to
                him to relocate to Kabul, whether (sic) it  was  considered
                that  there  was  not  a  reasonable  likelihood  of  being
                considered an opposition member by  the  authorities  there
                (on the basis of PM and Others).


             7. The Secretary of State further considered and dismissed the
                Appellant's claim that his removal from the UK would breach
                Article 8 ECHR as he had a brother in the UK.

             8. The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  (then)  AIT  and,  in  a
                Determination promulgated on 22 October  2008,  Immigration
                Judge Aziz allowed the Appellant's appeal under  Article  3
                ECHR, but upheld the Secretary of State's decision that  he
                was excluded from the protection of the Refugee  Convention
                by operation of Article 1(F)(a).

             9. The Secretary of State applied for reconsideration  of  the
                decision to allow the appeal under  Article  3  and  on  11
                November 2008, Senior  Immigration  Judge  Nichols  ordered
                reconsideration. He  found  it  arguable  that  Immigration
                Judge Aziz had failed adequately to reason  his  conclusion
                that the Appellant had been targeted and found further that
                the Immigration Judge had not dealt with the  Secretary  of
                State's position  in  relation  to  this  evidence.  Senior
                Immigration Judge Nichols additionally  found  it  arguable
                that the Immigration Judge had failed to have regard to the
                current country guidance case of PM and Others.

            10. The Appellant lodged a reply on 15 December 2008 contending
                that Immigration Judge Aziz's decision was sound and adding
                a new issue, namely that the  Immigration  Judge  had  been
                wrong to find that the  Appellant  was  excluded  from  the
                Refugee Convention.

            11. Before Designated Immigration Judge Wilson in the AIT on  9
                February 2010,  the  issue  of  Article  1F  exclusion  was
                adjourned until the outcome of the case of JS  (Sri  Lanka)
                [2010] UKSC 15. In relation to  the  Secretary  of  State's
                grounds  for  appeal  against  Immigration   Judge   Aziz's
                decision to allow the Appellant's appeal  under  Article  3
                ECHR, Designated Immigration Judge  Wilson  found  material
                errors of law in the Immigration Judge's  determination  of
                those issues.

            12. Subsequently, following the decision of the  Supreme  Court
                in JS (Sri  Lanka),  Designated  Immigration  Judge  Barton
                heard the adjourned hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal  on  30
                July 2010 and found there had been no error of law  in  the
                reasoning and findings of Immigration Judge Aziz in  regard
                to exclusion of the Appellant from the  protection  of  the
                Refugee Convention by operation of Article 1F.

            13. The hearing therefore proceeded exclusively  in  regard  to
                Article 3 ECHR and  was  heard  by  Designated  Immigration
                Judge Barton in the Upper Tribunal on 8 December  2010.  In
                his  Determination  promulgated   on   9   February   2011,
                Designated Immigration Judge Barton held that the Appellant
                "fits within  the  same  category  of  returnees  as  those
                appellants whom the Tribunal considered in PM and who  were
                found to be able to re-settle in Kabul"  and  so  dismissed
                the Appellant's appeal on the Article 3 ground.

            14. The Upper Tribunal  subsequently  refused  the  Appellant's
                application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal
                (Senior Immigration Judge Spencer, dated  16  March  2011).
                The grounds of appeal were:

                   1) That there was an error of approach  with  respect  to
                      Designated Immigration Judge Barton's reliance on  the
                      apparent failure of Immigration Judge Aziz's (sic)  to
                      consider PM and Others


                   2) That there was an error of approach  with  respect  to
                      Designated Immigration Judge Barton (sic) finding that
                      the only risk to the Appellant was from those who took
                      his property. Under this  ground  the  Appellant  also
                      challenged the Designated Immigration Judge's  finding
                      that he was only a middle ranking officer  in  Hizb-I-
                      Islam and so would not fit the profile of  a  suspect;
                      and

                   3) That there was an error of approach  with  respect  to
                      Article 1F.

            15. The Appellant then made an application  for  permission  to
                appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  4  April  2011   on
                essentially  the   same   grounds.   These   grounds   were
                subsequently amended on 3 June 2011 and, following  refusal
                of permission to appeal by Sedley LJ on 11 July 2011  in  a
                further skeleton argument prepared for the hearing  of  the
                Appellant's renewed application for permission to appeal on
                25 October 2011. In an order dated 31  October  2011,  Lady
                Justice Arden granted permission on the  grounds  1  and  2
                which were as follows:

                   1)   The   Upper   Tribunal   erred   in   law   in   its
                      consideration(��35-36) of the  Appellant's  case  that
                      there are substantial grounds for considering that  he
                      faces a real  risk  of  serious  ill-treatment  and/or
                      torture if removed to Afghanistan in failing  properly
                      to consider A's case and, in particular:
                      a. failing to have any regard to the  finding  of  IJ
                         Aziz that Jamiat-e-Islami had  attacked  A's  home
                         twice in 2006 intending to kill him because of his
                         position as the commander  of  forces  of  Hizb-i-
                         Islami 'Hizb') before 1996;
                      b. failing to consider whether  the  security  forces
                         would ill-treat or torture A  to  seek  to  obtain
                         information from him about Hizb.
                   2) If, which is denied, the Upper Tribunal's findings  on
                      the risk in Kabul  are  independent  of  the  findings
                      referred to in ground 1, then the Tribunal  also  made
                      material errors in law in those  findings  in  failing
                      properly to consider  A's  case  and,  in  particular,
                      making a finding for  which  there  was  no  evidence,
                      namely that very many former Hizb commanders who  have
                      not denounced Hizb are living safely  in  Afghanistan.
                      [D]esignated Immigration Judge Barton failed  to  have
                      regard to the finding of Immigration Judge  Aziz  that
                      the Appellant's home had been attacked twice by Jamiat-
                      e-Islami in 2006 because of the  appellant's  position
                      as a commander of Hizb-I-Islami forces prior to  1996.
                      Under this ground the Appellant  also  challenged  the
                      failure  of  the  Designated  Immigration   Judge   to
                      consider whether the Appellant would  be  tortured  or
                      detained  by  security  forces  in  order  to   obtain
                      information  about  Hizb-I-Islami.  Accordingly,   the
                      Upper Tribunal failed to properly assess whether there
                      were substantial  grounds  for  considering  that  the
                      Appellant faced a real risk upon return to Afghanistan
                      and accordingly, erred in law.


            16. The Respondent is of the view that the Upper Tribunal erred
                in  its  decision  as  when  considering  the  question  of
                relocation,  the  Designated  Immigration  Judge  seemingly
                ignored a concession by the Secretary  of  State  that  the
                Appellant's factual account should stand and  there  was  a
                risk on return of  the  Appellant  to  his  home  area.  In
                particular, the Determination seems to ignore the fact that
                the Appellant's home had been attacked twice  by  Jamiat-e-
                Islami in 2006.

            17.  In  the  circumstances,  the  parties  agreed   that   the
                Determination  of  Designated  Immigration   Judge   Barton
                promulgated on 9 February 2011, should be quashed, and  the
                matter should be  remitted  to  a  differently  constituted
                Upper Tribunal  for  the  determination  of  the  issue  of
                whether the Appellant would  be  at  risk  upon  return  to
                Afghanistan on the facts found by  Immigration  Judge  Aziz
                and the concession by the Respondent that A is at  risk  in
                his home area on the basis of those facts."

 4. Paragraph 17 the Statement of Reasons contains the task set for  us  by
    the Court of Appeal. We must  assess  whether,  in  the  light  of  the
    concession that the appellant is at risk of mistreatment  in  his  home
    area and on the facts as found by Immigration Judge Aziz, the appellant
    can relocate within Afghanistan in order to avoid adverse interest.

Internal Relocation

 5. Mr Deller confirmed that the respondent accepts a  great  deal  of  the
    appellant's account, certainly the facts in paragraphs 2 and 3  of  the
    Statement of Reasons. For completeness sake we should clarify that  the
    appellant's home was attacked twice in 2006 rather  than  "repeatedly",
    one of his bodyguards being killed in the second  attack  and  that  he
    left his home prior to the second attack  after  receiving  information
    that Jamiat-i-Islami (JI) intended to kill him.

 6. Mr Deller also confirmed that the accepted  facts  of  the  appellant's
    status in Hisbi-i-Islami (HI) and the attacks in 2006  were  sufficient
    to show a reasonable likelihood that the appellant is at  risk  in  his
    home area now.

 7. It remained the respondent's position, however, that  seven  years  had
    passed since the appellant left Afghanistan and  that  the  passage  of
    time and changes within the country meant that he would no longer be at
    risk if he relocated to Kabul. The attacks on him in his home  area  in
    2006 were not sufficient to show a risk in Kabul  if  he  returned  now
    from either:

             a. the security services acting alone on the basis his profile
             in HI, or


             b. the security services influenced or informed  by  JI  about
             the appellant because of the JI animosity towards  HI  members
             and the appellant in particular, or


             c. the JI faction in his home area who had attempted  to  kill
             him in 2006 seeking to harm him in Kabul.

 8. Mr Henderson queried  whether  the  risk  to  the  appellant  could  be
    assessed against the discrete categories put forward by Mr Deller given
    the complexities on  the  ground  in  Afghanistan.  In  any  event,  Mr
    Henderson also submitted that interest in the appellant from any of the
    sources identified by  the  respondent  would  be  likely  to  lead  to
    mistreatment  comprising,  at  the  least,  detention  accompanied   by
    physical abuse. This was shown  to  be  so  not  only  by  the  country
    evidence on Afghanistan from the usual sources but also by the evidence
    of the country expert, Dr Antonio Giustozzi and  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's brother-in-law who lives in Kabul.

 9. We had  the  benefit  of  three  reports  and  oral  evidence  from  Dr
    Giustozzi. Mr Deller did not seek to suggest that he was anything other
    than a reliable country expert, having given evidence  in  the  country
    guidance cases  of  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT
    00163(IAC), AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT  00016
    (IAC) and HK and others (minors  -  indiscriminate  violence  -  forced
    recruitment by Taliban - contact with family  members)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2010] UKUT 378 (IAC), amongst others.

10. The first report from Dr Giustozzi is dated 29 August 2008. Paragraph 6
    states that HI commanders such as the appellant were:

         "... particularly likely to be targeted by the  security  services,
         now controlled by their former enemies of Jamiat-i Islami, who  can
         rely on the information supplied by many former members  of  Hizb-i
         Islami who have now joined the government side to track them  down.
         However, the concerns of the Jamiats in targeting former members of
         Hizb-I Islami is primarily not due to security, but rather  to  the
         potential emergence of competitors  in  the  political  arena,  who
         could endanger the monopoly enjoyed  by  Jamiat  and  its  splinter
         factions (like Shura-i  Nezar)  in  a  number  of  regions  of  the
         country."

11. Paragraph 13 of the report identifies that as  the  appellant  has  not
    formally distance himself from HI, he would be assumed to have retained
    links with them. Paragraph 24 indicates that even if the appellant  was
    able  to  pass  through  security  on  return,  any  attempt  to   find
    accommodation or work would require him to  provide  information  about
    his place of origin and family, and, although it might take weeks,  his
    HI background would become known.

12. Dr Giustozzi's second  report  is  dated  18  June  2010.  Paragraph  4
    indicates that by 2010 HI had become more of a force and remained in an
    "uneasy" alliance with the Taliban. It continues:

         "As a result, in practice, the security forces do  not  distinguish
         very much between Hizb-i Islami and Taliban. The return of  an  old
         activist of the party like [the appellant] would certainly  trigger
         a reaction from the security services, which would at  least  place
         him under observation. If  they  believed  he  was  re-establishing
         contact with Hisb-i Islami, an arrest would be likely, [t]his could
         be triggered by a meeting with some friend from the days of  jihad,
         for example. Hizb-i Islami itself is likely to try to recruit  back
         [the appellant], as they have a shortage of experienced cadres  and
         of locally respected personalities.  While  [the  appellant]  could
         reject the invitation,  a  contact  like  this  could  trigger  the
         security services into action... ."

13. At paragraph 6, Dr Giustozzi considers that the  manner  in  which  the
    police obtain information about newcomers meant that if  the  appellant
    relocated to Kabul he "certainly would not go unnoticed and  would  get
    reported". At paragraph 10 he concluded that:


         "In sum, the intensification of the conflict means that the risk to
         [the appellant] has increased since 2008, rather  than  diminished.
         The fact that he has spent time abroad would not mean in  the  eyes
         of the security services that he has not been  active  during  this
         period. There are circles of  Hizb-i  Islami  members  in  the  UK,
         including at least two members of the Central Council of the party.
         Therefore, the  security  services  might  well  assume  that  [the
         appellant] is sent back by the party leadership for  some  specific
         purpose."

14. At paragraph 11, referring to the attacks on the  appellant's  home  by
    local JI enemies, Dr Giustozzi comments:

         "... [w]hile this per se does not demonstrate an  interest  of  the
         security services, it does suggest that [the appellant] indeed  was
         seen as a figure still linked to Hekmatyar. Moreover, there is much
         overlap between Jamiat and the security services (NDS),  whose  top
         officials are mostly from Jamiat. The NDS certainly keeps  file  of
         suspects; its district level informers (several of whom I meet) are
         usually former mujadhidin from Jamiat or other groups aligned  with
         it and have detailed knowledge of who is who in  their  area;  they
         then report to Kabul."

15. Dr Giustozzi's third report is dated 16 May 2013.  At  paragraph  4  he
    refers to the intelligence services becoming more effective during 2010
    to 2013, in part as a result of an improved "informer  network  in  and
    around Kabul". HI remained a minority group but "its role is slowly and
    steadily growing while the growth  of  the  Taliban  has  stalled."  At
    paragraph 5, Dr Giustozzi considers that

         "... one of the most common ways to obtain information is to detain
         people suspected of holding useful information and subject them  to
         psychological and physical pressure, including torture.   For  this
         reason they tend to arrest large numbers  of  people  in  order  to
         interrogate them. The growth in the informer network  in  the  last
         three years and plugging gaps in that network has assisted in this.
         The Afghan security organisations continue rounding  up  increasing
         numbers of suspected insurgents, numbering in the thousands... ."

16. At paragraph 8, Dr Giustozzi states that it is "particularly  detainees
    linked or allegedly linked to the insurgency who face the worst abuse."
    Paragraph 9 comments that "Jamiat people remain very influential in the
    intelligence service."  It goes on to state that:

         "There is a strong core of Jamiat people in the service,  including
         many of the heads of departments below that level. Several  of  the
         top figures in the Ministry of Interior are also linked to  Jamiat.
         Jamiat people have personal animosities  against  the  Taliban  and
         Hizb-i Islami from the history of fighting them and therefore would
         be particularly strongly motivated against [the  appellant]  (which
         is reflected by the fact that they were targeting him in 2006  when
         he left Afghanistan). It would  not  be  necessary  for  Jamiat  to
         pursue him separately to the security service. It would  be  enough
         when enquiries were made from Kabul to Z to simply confirm that  he
         has an adverse  profile,  in  order  to  have  him  imprisoned  and
         tortured. There would anyway be  an  institutional  risk  from  the
         security services in view of the relatively low level of  suspicion
         that will now lead to interrogation about the  insurgency  and  his
         past role as a commander."


17. Paragraph 10 continues:

         "As a Hizb-i Islami cadre, [the  appellant]  would  still  be  well
         known and remembered to people in his home areas and throughout the
         district of Z; to the informers of the security services in  Kabul,
         he would stand out as a  single  man,  arriving  in  Kabul  without
         family,  of  mature  age  (so  the  absence  of  family  would   be
         particularly noticeable), of Pashtun origins with  a  south-eastern
         accent. The south-east, as indicated above, is where  most  attacks
         against Kabul are originated ... . The security services  are  very
         likely to consider him at least worth a check; the  informer  would
         collate basic information about  [the  appellant]  from  employers,
         landlords, neighbours, and then the intelligence services would ask
         the Z office to check out about his background. His past in Hizb-i-
         Islami would immediately come up, especially  since  he  was  being
         targeted as a result of it just before leaving Afghanistan."


18. In cross-examination, Dr Giustozzi was asked  whether  the  passage  of
    time would have reduced the threat to the appellant.  He  thought  not.
    The appellant would  be  returning  from  the  UK  where  there  is  an
    organised HI presence, known to the Afghan authorities. In the eyes  of
    the Afghan security service, return from the UK was compatible with the
    appellant having been  an  active  member  of  HI  here.  The  security
    services would assume that the appellant  had  information  about  fund
    raising, transfer of funds to Afghanistan, flow of  HI  cadres  to  and
    from the UK, knowledge of issues and discussions within HI and  so  on.
    The same would be so if he were presumed to have been in Pakistan. Even
    if the appellant was able to show that he had been present  in  the  UK
    since 2006, the evidence showing this might not remain with him  or  in
    his file after his return and the assumption made that he had  been  in
    Pakistan. This would aggravate his situation as Pakistan was considered
    to be a centre for insurgency forces  including  HI.  It  was  also  Dr
    Giustozzi's view that the appellant now being an older  man  would  not
    reduce the risk as former  commanders  remained  important  within  the
    organisation and were within in the leadership.

19. Dr Giustozzi went on to suggest that the  attacks  on  the  appellant's
    home in 2006 could well have been out of personal revenge as  he  would
    be considered personally responsible  for  specific  assassinations  or
    deaths of JI members. Such killings had been a feature of the  conflict
    in the 1990s between the two parties.  The  appellant's  profile  as  a
    former commander would also attract revenge  attacks  as  he  would  be
    viewed as responsible for acts of subordinates even if he had not  been
    personally involved. In Dr Giustozzi's opinion, JI was  now  relatively
    weak in the appellant's area but he  remained  at  risk  of  a  revenge
    attack in Kabul. The ability to track him  to  Kabul  and  organise  an
    attack against him there would depend, to some extent, on the resources
    of the particular family concerned. Given that those in the appellant's
    home area who still wished him harm came from JI, however, and would be
    likely to continue to have some contact with  former  colleagues,  they
    could merely inform their JI associates  in  Kabul  in  order  to  draw
    adverse attention to him.

20. Dr Giustozzi went on to indicate that the presence in Kabul of  someone
    with this appellant's profile would be taken seriously and arrest would
    be likely. Interest in  someone  like  the  appellant  would  routinely
    involve arrest and mistreatment under interrogation. That would be  the
    likely outcome whether the arrest followed interest from  the  security
    services acting alone or from the security services influenced by their
    internal JI affiliates or outside information. The historical animosity
    of JI towards the appellant could  only  but  increase  the  chance  of
    adverse attention from the security services which  were  comprised  in
    significant part of JI.

21. In addition to the evidence of Dr Giustozzi, we were  provided  with  a
    statement dated 16 May  2013  from  Mr  Z.  Mr  Z  is  married  to  the
    appellant's sister and is therefore his brother-in-law. Mr Z's evidence
    is that since 2011 the security services  have  been  to  his  home  on
    several occasions to ask him  and  the  appellant's  sister  about  the
    appellant and on one occasion he was taken away  for  questioning.  The
    security services indicated that they knew that the appellant had  gone
    abroad but wanted to know if he had returned. They threatened to punish
    Mr Z if it was found that the appellant had returned and  that  he  had
    been untruthful about this.

22. The evidence of the appellant's brother-in-law was  not  challenged  by
    the respondent but we bore in mind that it was  untested  and  that  he
    could be said to have an interest in the outcome of the  appeal.   That
    being so, however, we also noted that credibility of witnesses was  not
    a feature of this appeal; the  appellant  was  found  credible  in  the
    important aspects of his evidence, as were his two  brothers  who  gave
    evidence in support of his appeal before Judge Aziz. We concluded  that
    some weight could be placed on the evidence of the appellant's brother-
    in-law, particularly where the level  of  continuing  interest  in  the
    appellant  shown  therein  was  consistent  with  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Giustozzi.

23. Without meaning any  disrespect  to  Mr  Deller,  who  represented  the
    respondent with his  usual  acuity,  the  Secretary  of  State  had  no
    sensible response to the inferences arising from the evidence  provided
    by Dr Giustozzi of a continuing risk of harm if the  appellant  returns
    to Kabul or the evidence of the appellant's brother-in-law.

24. We accept that enquiries will be made about the appellant on  returning
    to Afghanistan, either immediately  upon  arrival  or  reasonably  soon
    thereafter, as he attempted to re-integrate in Kabul. At whatever point
    those enquiries take place, a  risk  of  mistreatment  will  arise.  As
    pointed out by Mr Henderson,  the  personal  revenge  attacks  of  2006
    occurred 10 years after the appellant had been active for  HI  so  that
    extended period of time did not act in his favour to reduce  risk.  The
    information networks in Afghanistan  are  such  that  adverse  interest
    could come from those in his local area who tried to harm him  in  2006
    or their agents in Kabul, JI or otherwise, from JI  affiliates  in  the
    security  services  or  the  security  services  on  learning  of   the
    appellant's HI profile. There was no dispute  before  us  that  adverse
    interest in this appellant would comprise mistreatment amounting  to  a
    breach of his rights under Article 3 of the ECHR. We allow  the  appeal
    on that basis.

Article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention


25. We now turn to a second argument put forward by  the  appellant  before
    us.

26. On 31 January 2013 there was a directions hearing held at  Field  House
    conducted by Upper Tribunal  Judge Lane about case  management  of  the
    remittal from the Court of Appeal. A document was issued the  following
    day headed "Agreed basis on which the Upper  Tribunal  will  deal  with
    remitted appeal and directions to parties'. Paragraph 6 states:

          "It is agreed that if the appellant would otherwise be entitled to
          the grant of humanitarian protection, the Tribunal needs to
          consider the issue of  the appellant's possible exclusion from
          such protection under paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules  and
          the corresponding  provisions of the Qualification Directive  (The
          issue of humanitarian  protection may also lead to a need to
          consider if the appellant is entitled  to refugee status  by
          reference to the QD)."

27. We were puzzled how this agreement came to be made and what  it  meant.
    It seems to us that humanitarian protection has never been an issue  in
    this appeal.

28. How the appeal comes before us is explained in the Statement of Reasons
    from the Court of Appeal, set  out  above.   Our  understanding  is  as
    follows:-

          i) The Claimant appealed the refusal of asylum dated 24 July 2008
             and claimed entitlement to both refugee status and Article 3
             protection.


         ii) Judge Aziz on 22 October 2008 concluded that he was excluded
             from refugee protection by reason of the Article 1F(a)
             exclusion clause but was entitled to Article 3 protection.


        iii) The Article 3 protection was not a right to humanitarian
             protection status under the Immigration Rules or the
             Qualification Directive. The appellant only failed as a refugee
             because of the exclusion clause and the same exclusion clause
             applied to humanitarian protection. If the appellant was not
             excluded from humanitarian protection he would be a refugee on
             Judge Aziz's findings of fact.


         iv) The Secretary of State sought and obtained an order for
             reconsideration of the Article 3 issue and the appellant served
             a respondent's notice on the Article 1F(a) exclusion clause
             issue.


          v) The reconsideration decision was adjourned on 9 February 2010
             to await the decision of the Supreme Court of the Secretary of
             State's appeal from the Court of Appeal in the case of in JS
             (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 364, that had disapproved the
             decision of the AIT in Gurung (Nepal) v SSHD [2002] UKAIT 4870;
             [2003] Imm AR 115 on which the Secretary of State had relied
             and is cited in Judge Aziz's decision.


         vi) On 30 July 2010 DIJ Barton decided that there was no error of
             law in Judge Aziz's decision on exclusion having regard to the
             test laid down in the Supreme Court in R (JS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD
             [2010] UKSC 15, [2011] 1 AC 184  handed down on  17 March 2010.
             He gave his reasons for that when he reached his decision on
             the Article 3 issue, where he decided Judge Aziz had erred in
             not considering relevant country guidance.


        vii)  On 9 February 2011 DIJ Barton gave his decision reconsidering
             and dismissing the appellant's appeal on the Article 3 issue
             and explaining the earlier decision that the exclusion aspect
             of the appeal would not be reconsidered.


       viii) Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was refused by the
             Upper Tribunal on 16 March 2011. Upper Tribunal  Judge Spencer
             noted that DIJ Judge Barton had considered JS (Sri Lanka) and
             concluded that Judge Aziz's reasoning and conclusions were
             consistent with it.


         ix) The appellant renewed this application before the Court of
             Appeal and the application was refused on the papers by Sedley
             LJ. This decision only refers to the Article 3 issue. It may be
             that the appellant had by then not raised an issue as to the
             exclusion clause in the notice of appeal.


          x) On 31 October 2011 Arden LJ granted permission on the Article 3
             issue but refused permission on the Article 1F(a) exclusion
             clause issue that had, at least by then, been added to the
             appellant's grounds on an amendment drafted by Mr Henderson.


         xi) On 28 March 2012 the Court of Appeal made the consent order and
             Statement of Reasons, as above. As we indicate in [4], the
             terms of the remittal were set out in paragraph 17 of the
             Statement of Reasons and were limited to whether the appellant
             could relocate in order to avoid Article 3 mistreatment.

29. In the light of that procedural history it seemed to us,  whatever  the
    parties had agreed between themselves, that  the  issue  and  the  only
    issue to be re determined in this appeal was that set out in  paragraph
    17 of the Statement of Reasons.

30. We were clear that exclusion as a refugee  had  been  dismissed  as  an
    arguable issue by the Upper Tribunal  in March 2011 and by Lady Justice
    Arden in the Court of Appeal on 31 October 2011. There was no  evidence
    of an application to re-open  the  issue  before  the  full  court  and
    nothing in the Statement of Reasons to indicate that there was anything
    about exclusion the Upper Tribunal needed to look at.

31. In any event we were satisfied that there is no issue at all before  us
    of humanitarian protection status or exclusion from that status. If the
    appellant now accepts that  irrespective  of  the  application  of  the
    exclusion clause he is not a refugee but nevertheless contends that  he
    is entitled to humanitarian protection status he  can  always  seek  it
    from the Secretary of  State.  He  has  not  done  so  hitherto  and  a
    previously unventilated issue cannot simply emerge  at  this  stage  as
    something we have to decide.

32. Mr Henderson submitted that as the Court of  Appeal  had  remitted  the
    appeal to us, it was open to us to vary the issues in the  appeal  from
    those directed by the Court of Appeal consent  order.  We  will  assume
    without deciding that there is statutory jurisdiction to do so, but  in
    our judgment, subject to what we say at [35] and following, it would be
    an abuse of process to permit the claimant to re-open an issue  decided
    against him by Judges Aziz, Barton and Spencer and on which  the  Court
    of Appeal had refused permission to appeal. The scheme of the  Tribunal
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2008, as amplified by the  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in R (on the application of Cart v Upper Tribunal  [2011]
    UKSC 28, envisages that the decision of the Upper Tribunal on appeal or
    permission to appeal is  final  save  where  the  Court  of  Appeal  is
    satisfied that an arguable error  of  law  meeting  the  second  appeal
    criteria has been identified. The application of that test is largely a
    matter for the Court of Appeal and not the Upper Tribunal.   Not  every
    arguable error of law will meet that test even in a refugee appeal.

33. It was common ground that we are not bound by the parties' agreement as
    to the issues in the case, and, for the reasons given in  the  previous
    paragraphs, we do not accept that the  Article  1F(a)  exclusion  issue
    formed part of the remitted appeal before us.

34. Mr Henderson then submitted that the law had  changed  since  the  case
    passed from the Upper Tribunal and indeed since  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal. The change relied on was the decision of  the  Supreme
    Court in Al-Sirri [2012] UKSC 54, [2012] 3 WLR 1263,  delivered  on  21
    November 2012.

35. We were prepared to accept that if the law had changed since the  final
    disposal of the appeal by ourselves and the Court of Appeal,  it  would
    not be an abuse to permit the issue of whether  there  was  a  material
    error of law in the previous decisions by reason of the new declaration
    of the law.

36. There is an analogy here with rule 45 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

           Upper Tribunal's consideration of application for permission  to
           appeal


           45. (1) On receiving an application for permission to appeal the
           Upper Tribunal may review the decision in accordance with rule
           46 (review of a decision), but may only do so if-


               (a) when making the decision the Upper Tribunal overlooked a
               legislative provision or binding authority which could have
               had a material effect on the decision; or


               (b) since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made a
               decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and which,
               had it been made before the Upper Tribunal's decision, could
               have had a material effect on the decision.


           (2) If the Upper Tribunal decides not to review the decision, or
           reviews the decision and decides to take no action in relation
           to the decision or part of it, the Upper Tribunal must consider
           whether to give permission to appeal in relation to the decision
           or that part of it.

37. If the Upper Tribunal can review a final decision when a  decision  has
    been made by a higher court binding on the Upper Tribunal, then in  our
    judgment, it would be appropriate to consider whether the issues in  an
    appeal of which the Tribunal is seized by a remittal  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal should be amended by including a ground  based  on  the
    change of the law.

38. Even if such a ground was arguable there is no obligation on the  Upper
    Tribunal to grant permission to re-argue it. In some circumstances  the
    newly arguable ground might so affect the decision-making process below
    that a fresh application should be made to the Secretary  of  State  so
    the new state of the law can be applied by the original decision  maker
    and re-examined on appeal.

39. We then adjourned the appeal to permit the parties to  reflect  on  the
    matter and prepare submissions about the effect of Al-Sirri.

40. When we returned,  Mr  Henderson,  with  his  customary  and  exemplary
    energy, had re-formulated his submissions and supplied us with the  new
    authorities.

41. He submitted that the case of Gurung, relied upon by Judge Aziz at ]53]
    and following, whose finding on exclusion had been upheld by the  Court
    of Appeal, was  not  merely  concerned  with  the  application  of  the
    exclusion clause by operation of the membership doctrine, it  also  had
    something to say on the standard of proof.

42. In Gurung, the AIT had said as follows:

           95. As regards the standard of proof, we find ourselves entirely
           in agreement with Mrs Grey`s submissions. In isolation one could
           state, as did the Canadian Federal Court in Ramirez v Canada
           [1992] 2 FC 306 at 311-313, that the phrase implied something
           less than proof on either a criminal standard of beyond
           reasonable doubt or a civil standard of balance of
           probabilities. However, in accordance with the approach of the
           Court of Appeal in Karanakan [2002] 3 All ER 449, rigid
           application of the civil approach to "standard of proof" has to
           give way in any event to a more rounded approach taking into
           account the possibility that doubtful events may have taken
           place. Thus there is no need to go beyond the words of Art 1F,
           i.e. "...serious reasons for considering..."

43. This passage was quoted by Judge Aziz at [58] of his determination.

44. The AIT in Gurung went on to summarise its conclusions


           "151.  Summary of Conclusions.


           In order to resolve some of the issues in this case it has been
           necessary to go into detail. Now that we have done that,
           however, we consider that guidance can be given in relatively
           short form:


           1.  Bearing in mind the need to adopt a purposive approach to
           the interpretation of the Exclusion Clauses, they are to be
           applied restrictively. In contrast to the focus under Art 1A(2)
           on current risk, the focus under Art 1F is on past crimes or
           acts.


           2.  In any case in which an adjudicator intends to apply the
           Exclusion Clauses, he should avoid equating Art 1F with a simple
           anti-terrorism provision. He should make findings about the
           serious crime or act committed by the claimant and then explain
           how that fits within a particular sub-category (or particular
           sub-categories) of Art 1F  - 1F(a), IF (b) or 1F(c). As the
           Tribunal held in Thayabaran (12250), he should treat the
           evidential burden of proving that a claimant is excluded by Art
           1F as resting on the Secretary of State. The test specified in
           Art 1F of "serious reasons for considering" that a barred act
           had been committed was one requiring a lower standard of proof
           than either beyond reasonable doubt or the balance of
           probabilities. No other wording than "serious reasons for
           considering" should be introduced (our emphasis)."

45. Mr Henderson pointed out  that  in  Al-Sirri  the  Supreme  Court  said
    something very different:
           "75.  We are, it is clear, attempting to discern the autonomous
           meaning of the words "serious reasons for considering". We do so
           in the light of the UNHCR view, with which we agree, that the
           exclusion clauses in the Refugee Convention must be
           restrictively interpreted and cautiously applied. This leads us
           to draw the following conclusions:
                 (1) "Serious reasons" is stronger than "reasonable
                 grounds".
                 (2) The evidence from which those reasons are derived must
                 be "clear and credible" or "strong".
                 (3) "Considering" is stronger than "suspecting". In our
                 view it is also stronger than "believing". It requires the
                 considered judgment of the decision-maker.
                 (4) The decision-maker need not be satisfied beyond
                 reasonable doubt or to the standard required in criminal
                 law.
                 (5) It is unnecessary to import our domestic standards of
                 proof into the question. The circumstances of refugee
                 claims, and the nature of the evidence available, are so
                 variable. However, if the decision-maker is satisfied that
                 it is more likely than not that the applicant has not
                 committed the crimes in question or has not been guilty of
                 acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United
                 Nations, it is difficult to see how there could be serious
                 reasons for considering that he had done so. The reality is
                 that there are unlikely to be sufficiently serious reasons
                 for considering the applicant to be guilty unless the
                 decision-maker can be satisfied on the balance of
                 probabilities that he is. But the task of the decision-
                 maker is to apply the words of the Convention (and the
                 Directive) in the particular case."
46. Earlier the Court had noted that

           "70. In JS (Sri Lanka), at para 39, Lord Brown was "inclined to
           agree" with this passage, having also pointed out that
                 ". . . 'serious reasons for considering' obviously imports
                 a higher test for exclusion than would, say, an expression
                 like 'reasonable grounds for suspecting'. 'Considering'
                 approximates rather to 'believing' than to 'suspecting'."
47. Thus, approximating "considering" to "believing" weakened "considering"
    even though Lord Brown was seeking to strengthen it by comparison  with
    "suspecting".

48. It is unfortunate that in its search for the true international meaning
    of the Refugee Convention the Supreme Court had  not  referred  to  the
    French text, equally authentic in clarifying  its  meaning,  where  (as
    Sedley LJ had pointed out in JS Sri  Lanka)  considering  is  given  as
    "penser".

49. Pausing here,  we  note  that  throughout  the  three  decisions  under
    consideration,   Gurung,  JS  (Sri  Lanka)  and  Al-Sirri,  the  judges
    concerned were stating that the language of the Refugee  Convention  or
    indeed the EU Qualification  Directive  must  be  respected  where  the
    question is whether there are serious  reasons  for  considering.   The
    proper international meaning of the instrument cannot be ascertained if
    the text of the instrument is substituted for purely national  concepts
    of  evidentiary  law  such  as  proof  on  balance  of   probabilities.
    Nevertheless, national courts can give guidance to inferior courts  and
    tribunals as to the kind of analysis that is required to give effect to
    the proper international meaning.

50. We agree with Mr Henderson's  submission  that  national  guidance  has
    shifted from the "serious possibility" approach  indicated  in  Gurung.
    The test is whether there are serious  reasons  to  consider  than  the
    claimant is excluded because of relevant conduct; the test will be  met
    where it is "more likely" that this is  the  case   as  stated  by  the
    Supreme Court in Al-Sirri.

51. What remains clear is that  a  judge  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber is not conducting a trial  of  the  claimant  for  war  crimes,
    crimes against humanity or serious non-political crime  either  on  the
    criminal or civil standard,  and  in  reality  would  rarely  be  in  a
    position to do so, as the respondent will not have access  to  all  the
    evidence and more usually in overseas cases there  will  have  been  no
    relevant investigation in the first place.

52. As it happens there had been an investigation and  prosecution  in  Al-
    Sirri and the fruits of that investigation were before  the  courts  as
    the prosecution had been conducted in the Central Criminal  Court.  The
    trial judge had concluded that the  evidence  was  as  consistent  with
    innocence as  guilt  and  therefore  neither  the  criminal  nor  civil
    standard had been met.  The  Supreme  Court  rejected  the  appellant's
    contentions that the criminal standard applied but made the observation
    that the application of the serious grounds for considering test  meant
    that in practice it was unlikely  that  the  test  could  be  made  out
    without the civil standard being satisfied.

53. The Supreme Court was not stating that this  standard  must  always  be
    met; it would have said as much if that was intended: but in  doing  so
    it would  have  subordinated  the  true  meaning  of  an  international
    instrument that has to be  applied  in  a  variety  of  contexts  to  a
    principle of  British law of evidence and  procedure.

54. The core principle we take from the Al-Sirri decision is that  we  must
    consider  whether  there  are  serious  grounds,  rather  than   merely
    "suspecting" or "believing" that such  grounds  exist;  and  we  should
    endeavour if possible to  reach  a  conclusion  that  meets  the  "more
    likely" or "more probable" standard.  Where  that  standard  cannot  be
    met, there must be  doubt  whether  the  grounds  for  considering  are
    serious enough to meet exclusion.

55. When addressing the issue of exclusion, Judge Aziz concluded at [80]:

           "I find that not only was the appellant most likely aware of the
           human rights abuses and war crimes being committed on the front
           line by Hizb-e-Islami troops, he was complicit in such
           atrocities. It was because individuals such as the appellant
           were ensuring that security in Hizb-i-Islami areas were
           maintained that enabled  his colleagues on the front live to
           divert their attention to taking control of Kabul in the
           inhumane and callous manner that they did."

56. Mr Henderson submits that the reference to "most  likely"  (reflecting,
    in our view, a balance of probabilities approach) in the first sentence
    of [80] is limited to whether the appellant had knowledge  of  the  war
    crimes. He maintained that Judge Aziz's finding that the appellant  was
    complicit in those war crimes must be read as a finding  based  on  the
    reasonable possibility or degree of likelihood test drawn from Gurung.

57. We rather doubt this is the case. It makes a rather strange exegesis of
    the sentence if  a  finding  of  fact  was  reached  by  two  different
    criteria. In our judgement, a proper reading is that Judge  Aziz  found
    that it was "most likely" that  the  appellant  was  complicit  in  war
    crimes as he knew that he knew that his  activities  behind  the  lines
    were  intended  to  enable  the  frontline  artillery  units  in  their
    indiscriminate shelling of civilians. It was  therefore  not  our  view
    that as regards this key finding on exclusion, Judge Aziz  applied  the
    incorrect Gurung test in his assessment of complicity.

58.  Further, even if we were to be less certain in that  regard,  stepping
    back to the basis for  the  original  exclusion  decision,  we  do  not
    consider that it depends  on  the  fine  nuances  discussed  above.  As
    indicated by Judge Aziz at [80],  the  evidence  in  this  case  was  a
    combination of the background data of war crimes being committed by  HI
    (and others) in the  battle  for  Kabul  from  1992  to  1996  and  the
    appellant's account of his role as a commander  of  500  troops  of  HI
    during this time, securing the areas behind front line troops in  order
    for them to act unhindered and an account that admittedly included some
    visits to the front line by either appellant or his troops.  There  was
    little reason to doubt the primary data or the inferences  rising  from
    it. It is not disputed for  the  appellant  that  the  bombardments  of
    civilian areas of Kabul amounted to war crimes.

59. Cumulatively, the evidence in this case amounted to  the  existence  of
    "serious reason to consider" that the claimant had participated in  war
    crimes rather than mere suspicion or speculation or belief that he  had
    done so. In those circumstances, we conclude that  the  refinements  to
    the standard requirement to apply Article 1(F)  expressed  in  Al-Sirri
    make no material difference to Judge  Aziz's  conclusions.  Accordingly
    they are not a sufficient basis to find that his conclusion  should  be
    set aside and remade because of a material error of law.

60. In our judgment this conclusion disposes of this head of challenge.  It
    was not argued that we should also re-open the findings of  Judge  Aziz
    as a result of a change in the law on participation in acts capable  of
    leading to exclusion under Article 1(F). Al-Sirri has not  changed  the
    law in this respect, and there was nothing in the  order  of  reference
    from the Court of Appeal indicating  that  this  issue  should  be  re-
    examined. It is open to the appellant to make any  further  application
    to the respondent for humanitarian protection when it will be  open  to
    him to develop any issue he  considers  may  still  arise  for  further
    examination.

Decision

61. We accordingly:

           (i)    remake the Article 3 appeal by allowing it;

           (ii)   find that there was no material error  of  law  in  Judge
               Aziz's consideration of the decision relating  to  exclusion
               from refugee status and  dismiss  the  appeal  against  that
               aspect of the decision;

           (iii) consider that there is no  issue  before  us  relating  to
               exclusion from humanitarian protection status.

62. Both members of the panel have contributed to the preparation  of  this
    determination.

Anonymity

    Under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  we
    make an order for non-disclosure of the identity of the  appellant  and
    his brother-in-law in order to avoid the likelihood of serious harm  to
    them or other relatives of the appellant arising from the  contents  of
    this determination.


Signed: [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt                        Date: 24 September 2013
