
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06634/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 4 January 2016                    |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home depARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     WM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr  S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Althea Radford, Counsel instructed by Fadiga and
Co.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant  is  a  young
    asylum seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 1. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  James)  allowing   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 8 April 2015 to  refuse
    the respondent's asylum claim and to remove the respondent from the UK.

Introduction

 2. The respondent is a citizen of Afghanistan born in 1994. He  claims  he
    was born into an Islamic family and brought up as a Muslim.  About  two
    years before coming to the UK and  whilst  studying  at  university  in
    Kabul the respondent became disillusioned with Islam after reading  the
    Koran in full. At question 53 of the  asylum  interview  the  appellant
    also stated that before he started reading the  Koran  he  was  "always
    confronted by so  many  questions".  The  respondent  was  particularly
    concerned about the treatment of women and enemies of Islam.

 3.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality and that if a person converts from Islam to Christianity he
    would be regarded as an apostate and would be at risk  upon  return  to
    Afghanistan. However, it was  not  accepted  that  the  respondent  had
    decided to convert  -  he  had  simply  attended  some  Bible  classes.
    Although the respondent had demonstrated a reasonable knowledge of  the
    Bible in the asylum interview he  had  limited  knowledge  of  the  Old
    Testament. It was not plausible that  the  respondent  had  obtained  a
    passport in March/April 2014, many months before his father  found  his
    Bible or that he would have left the Bible unhidden in his  room  where
    his father could find it.

The Appeals

 4. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Harmondsworth on 20 April 2015. He  was  represented  by  Ms
    Radford. The First-tier Tribunal  found  that  the  respondent  was  an
    educated young man and there was nothing about him  reading  the  Bible
    which established that he  had  decided  to  become  a  Christian.  The
    respondent  relied  upon  an  e-mail  from  Reverend   Patrick   Wright
    (incorrectly described as "Mr White" in the decision)  dated  17  April
    2015  but  he  did  not  offer  any  opinion  about  the   respondent's
    convictions. The judge also found that it was  not  credible  that  the
    respondent decided to become a Christian within a relatively short time
    after starting to read the Bible without any critical  questioning,  it
    was not credible that he would be so willing to trust  the  friend  who
    gave him the Bible, there was no reason for  the  respondent  to  leave
    Afghanistan in such haste and it was not credible that the respondent's
    uncle would make arrangements for his departure without  knowing  where
    he was to be taken.

 5. The appeal was dismissed and  the  respondent  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. On 5 June 2015, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  allowed  the
    appeal on the basis that the respondent had said in interview  that  he
    was  always  confronted  with  so  many  questions  (about  Islam)  and
    therefore it was not right for the  judge  to  find  that  it  was  not
    credible that the  respondent  did  not  have  doubts  much  sooner.  A
    rehearing was ordered and that took place at Harmondsworth on  21  July
    2015. In the meantime, the respondent was released from detention on 19
    June 2015. The judge decided to determine the appeal on  the  basis  of
    submissions  only.  This  time,  the  judge  found  that  the  evidence
    overwhelmingly supported the respondent's claim to have converted  from
    Islam to Christianity in his religious beliefs. He was a Christian. The
    appeal was allowed.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding that the respondent was a  genuine  convert  when  he  was  not
    tendered to give evidence and without engaging  with  the  reasons  for
    refusal. The letters and e-mails from  the  catholic  priest  were  not
    convincing independent evidence of conversion  and  no  member  of  the
    church was  called  to  give  evidence  in  support.  The  respondent's
    evidence was not tested and should have been treated with caution.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes on
    17 September 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that  the  decision
    did not adequately address the series of credibility  issues  cited  in
    the refusal letter.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Mr Staunton submitted that the judge  failed  to  address  any  of  the
    credibility issues raised in paragraphs 36-53 of  the  refusal  letter.
    The issue was narrow but the judge should still have engaged  with  the
    credibility issues raised. The appeal should be remitted for a  further
    de novo hearing.

10. Ms Radford submitted that there was only one issue of fact  in  dispute
    i.e. conversion to Christianity. Risk on return  was  accepted  between
    the parties. It was a matter for the judge whether  oral  evidence  was
    required. What remains is a reasons challenge; the judge's key passages
    are at paragraphs 9-11 of the decision and then paragraph 22 refers  to
    the refusal letter. This was a perfectly reasonable decision. The judge
    did not need to identify and go through the  individual  factors  which
    the Secretary of State said took away  credibility.  Every  credibility
    point was addressed by the respondent in his witness statement and none
    of those points  constrained  the  judge  to  reject  the  respondent's
    evidence. There is no  basis  for  criticising  the  finding  that  the
    catholic priest was independent  and  credible.  Pastors  in  detention
    centres are not permitted to have  involvement  in  appeal  beyond  one
    letters of support. Evidence was provided to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    It is surprising for the Secretary of  State  to  argue  that  material
    evidence had to be excluded because she frustrated  the  attendance  of
    witnesses at the hearing. There is no support in the decision  for  the
    submission that the judge failed to treat the evidence with  sufficient
    caution.

11. Ms Radford confirmed that it was the judge's suggestion to  proceed  on
    submissions only and there was no formal consent  from  the  presenting
    officer. The respondent decided not to give evidence in  light  of  the
    judge's suggestion. Neither party was able to cite any authority as  to
    when the First-tier Tribunal should proceed on submissions only. In the
    absence of any binding authority I find that it was open to  the  judge
    to suggest that the appeal could be heard on the basis  of  submissions
    only. It is evident  that  the  judge  considered  the  refusal  letter
    because it is referred to in paragraph 22 of the decision and the judge
    stated that the  reasons  for  refusal  were  weighed  in  the  matter.
    However, the judge also considered the documentary evidence in  support
    of the respondent's claim to be a Christian  at  paragraph  24  of  the
    decision and found that evidence to be compelling.

12. I have considered R (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 in the context of
    the reasons challenge. The decision must enable the Upper  Tribunal  to
    understand why the judge made the decision including identification  of
    the vital issues but that does not mean that every factor that  weighed
    with the judge in the appraisal of the evidence has  to  be  identified
    and explained. The appellate courts  are  anxious  not  to  overturn  a
    judgment at first instance  unless  it  really  cannot  understand  the
    original judge's thought processes when making material findings. There
    should be no practice of bringing appeals because  the  judge  had  not
    made reasoned findings on matters of peripheral importance.

13. The judge considered the e-mail from Reverend  Wright  dated  17  April
    2015 and correctly identified that Reverend White was satisfied in  his
    assessment of the  respondent's  faith  (contrary  to  the  finding  at
    paragraph 5 above). Reverend Wright had requested a colleague to assess
    the respondent's account and he found that the respondent's  faith  was
    genuine. In addition, the judge considered  a  certificate  of  baptism
    dated 27 April 2015, two letters from Reverend Elias dated 24 May  2015
    and 15  June  2015  confirming  that  the  respondent  attended  weekly
    religious services at the detention centre and witness statements  from
    the respondent confirming that  his  belief  is  genuine  and  that  he
    attends church four days a week.

14. I am satisfied that it was open to the judge on that evidence  to  find
    that it was reasonably  likely  that  the  respondent's  conversion  to
    Christianity was genuine. I  agree  with  the  submission  that  it  is
    inappropriate for the Secretary of State to complain about the  absence
    of oral evidence from the pastors when it is plainly the  Secretary  of
    State's own policy that prevented them from  giving  oral  evidence  in
    support of the respondent. In those circumstances, it was open  to  the
    judge to find that their written evidence was sufficient. I  find  that
    the credibility issues raised in the refusal  letter  can  properly  be
    described as peripheral given that the judge accepted the evidence  set
    out at paragraph 14 above.

15. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal did not involve the making of an error of law and  its  decision
    stands.

Decision

16. Consequently, I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.


Signed   [pic]    Date 5 February 2016

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

