
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06874/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th December 2014                            |On 19th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    p l l
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Lane of Counsel instructed by Pickup Scott
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a determination of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Freer promulgated on 22nd October 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a Sri Lankan national born 6th March 1946  who  on  8th
    April 2014 claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  of  his  imputed  political
    opinion.  In the alternative,  he  claimed  that  he  was  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection, and that to remove him from the United Kingdom
    would breach Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the  1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 4. The application was refused by letter dated 4th September 2014, and the
    Secretary of State issued a Notice of Immigration  Decision  dated  5th
    September 2014 to remove the Claimant from the United Kingdom.

 5. The appeal was heard by Judge Freer (the judge) on 16th  October  2014.
    The judge dismissed the asylum claim finding that the Claimant did  not
    fall within the risk categories set out in GJ  (Sri  Lanka)  CG  [2013]
    UKUT 319 (IAC).  The judge did not find that the Claimant was  entitled
    to humanitarian protection, and did not find  that  there  would  be  a
    breach of Articles 2 or 8 of the 1950 Convention if  the  Claimant  was
    returned to Sri Lanka.  The judge did however find that to  remove  the
    Claimant  from  this  country  would  breach  Article  3  of  the  1950
    Convention, and therefore allowed the appeal on that basis.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal contending that the judge  had  made  perverse  or  irrational
    findings on a matter or matters that were material to  the  outcome  of
    the  appeal.   I  set  out  below  the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal;

      a) It  is  respectfully  submitted  that  the  Immigration  Judge  has
         materially erred in law  by  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
         Article 3 grounds, yet dismissing it  on  asylum  grounds.   It  is
         respectfully submitted that the reasons provided at paragraphs  79-
         81 of the determination for allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  are
         those which would be covered by the Refugee Convention  (fear  from
         the Sri Lankan Government and State actors of persecution).

      b) It is  noted  that  the  Immigration  Judge  provides  reasons  for
         dismissing  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  at  paragraphs  70-74,
         finding that  the  Appellant  would  not  be  of  interest  to  the
         authorities and not fit into the risk categories outlined in  GJ  &
         Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  319
         (IAC).   However  at  paragraph  79-81  of  the  determination  the
         Immigration Judge finds that the Appellant  may  face  mistreatment
         from the Sri Lankan authorities.  It is respectfully submitted that
         the  Immigration  Judge  has  provided  contradictory  findings  in
         relation to the risk faced  from  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  on
         return.

      c) In addition the Immigration Judge states at paragraph 77,  "He  has
         not established a real risk of  torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment contrary to Article 15(b)" yet finds that the Appellant's
         Article 3 rights would be breached  in  paragraphs  79-81.   It  is
         therefore  respectfully  submitted  that  the  Immigration  Judge's
         findings are contradictory and therefore irrational.  As  a  result
         it is submitted that the Immigration Judge has materially erred  in
         law.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Chambers in the following terms;

      1) Permission is sought to appeal against the decision of the Judge of
         the First-tier Tribunal who in a decision promulgated on 22 October
         2014 allowed the appeal.

      2) The grounds seeking permission submit that in allowing the  Article
         3  appeal  and  dismissing  the  asylum  claim   the   judge   gave
         contradictory findings in relation to the risk faced.

      3) The judge dismissed the asylum claim finding the Appellant did  not
         fall within a risk category (paragraph 74) but allowed  the  appeal
         under Article 3 (paragraph 83) finding  the  Appellant  may  be  at
         significant risk of beatings (paragraph 81).

      4) The grounds are arguable.

      5) Permission to appeal is granted.

 8. Following the grant  of  permission  the  Claimant  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination  did  not
    contain a material error of law.

 9. It was submitted that the judge made a number of findings  of  fact  at
    paragraph 60 of his determination, including that it  was  more  likely
    than not that the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) were seeking a  member
    of the Claimant's family and that the Claimant was at risk of  violence
    due to intelligence gathering exercises in that regard.  The judge made
    clear findings of fact that the Appellant would face  persecution,  and
    those findings were consistent with the findings  made  in  respect  of
    Article 3 of the 1950 Convention in paragraphs 79-82.

10. The asylum appeal was refused because the Claimant did not  fit  within
    the defined categories established in GJ & Others, and therefore if the
    asylum appeal was only disallowed because the persecution was not for a
    Convention reason, then there was no error of law.

11. Alternatively, if it was found that the Appellant faced persecution  as
    a family member of a wanted man, and that this was a Convention reason,
    then the asylum appeal should have been granted as well as the  Article
    3 appeal, and if there was an error of law,  it  was  that  the  asylum
    appeal was dismissed.

12. In relation to  the  contradiction  between  the  judge's  findings  on
    Article 15(b)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  2004/83/EC,  and  his
    findings in relation to Article 3 of the 1950 Convention, if there  was
    an error of law, it was that the  appeal  was  not  allowed  under  the
    Qualification Directive.

13. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

14. I firstly heard submissions from Mr Nath on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State, who relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal.  Mr Nath pointed  out  that  there  was  a  clear
    conflict between the findings made by the judge in respect  of  Article
    15(b) of the Qualification Directive, in which he  had  found  no  real
    risk of torture or inhuman or degrading treatment, and his findings  in
    relation to Article 3 when  the  judge  found  a  real  risk  that  the
    Claimant would be subjected to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment or punishment.

15. Mr Lane relied upon his rule 24 response and pointed out that there had
    been no challenge made by the Secretary of State  to  the  findings  of
    fact made by the judge, nor  the  findings  made  in  relation  to  the
    Claimant's credibility.

16. Mr Lane pointed out that the  judge  had  dismissed  the  asylum  claim
    because the Claimant did not fit within the risk categories set out  in
    GJ & Others, and he indicated that this was accepted.

17. Mr Lane went on to submit that the judge had erred in  that  he  should
    have considered other risk  factors  relating  to  asylum  not  covered
    either by GJ & Others, or in the Court of Appeal decision MP &  Another
    [2014] EWCA Civ 829 in which Underhill LJ had stated  at  paragraph  50
    that there may untypically be cases where the evidence shows particular
    grounds for concluding that the GOSL  might  regard  an  individual  as
    posing a current threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single State
    even in the absence of evidence that he or she  has  been  involved  in
    diaspora activism.

18. Mr Lane submitted that the finding in relation to  Article  3  was  not
    incompatible with a dismissal of the asylum appeal, but  accepted  that
    it was more difficult to reconcile the findings made by  the  judge  in
    relation to Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive, and Article 3
    of the 1950 Convention.

19. However Mr Lane submitted that the judge had  made  clear  findings  of
    fact which had not been challenged  and  had  accepted  the  Claimant's
    daughter's evidence as corroborating in part the  Appellant's  account.
    Mr Lane submitted that in view of those findings, the judge had in fact
    erred, and should have allowed the appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.

20. Having heard oral submissions I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision.  I indicated that as I found there had been no  challenge  to
    the findings of fact and the credibility findings, if I  decided  there
    was an error of law I would re-make  the  decision  without  a  further
    hearing as in my view no further evidence or submissions were required.
     Neither representative disagreed.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. I do not find that the judge erred in concluding that the Claimant  was
    not entitled to asylum.  The  judge  considered  both  GJ  and  MP  and
    concluded on the facts as found, that the Claimant did not  fit  within
    any of the risk categories.

22. There has been no challenge to the findings made by the judge that  the
    appeal cannot succeed with reference to Articles 2 and 8  of  the  1950
    Convention.

23. There is a conflict when the findings  of  the  judge  in  relation  to
    Article 15(b) of the Qualification  Directive  are  compared  with  the
    findings in relation to Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.   Article  15
    is set out below;

    Serious harm consists of:

    (a)  death penalty or execution; or

    (b)  torture or inhuman or degrading  treatment  or  punishment  of  an
         applicant in the country of origin; or

    (c)  serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  or  person  by
         reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or
         internal armed conflict.

24. Article 3 of the 1950 Convention is set out below;

    No one shall be  subjected  to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment or punishment.

25. The judge at paragraph 77 stated that the Claimant "has not established
    a real risk of torture or inhuman or degrading  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 15(b)".  There was also no general level of violence that would
    engage Article  15(c).   The  Article  15(c)  findings  have  not  been
    challenged.  In relation to Article 3 the judge found that the Claimant
    had suffered recent  beatings,  which  had  been  corroborated  by  the
    evidence of his daughter who the judge found credible.

26. I therefore conclude that the judge has made contradictory  conclusions
    which cannot be reconciled and which amounts to an error of law.

27. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  In  re-
    making the decision I preserve the unchallenged findings of fact  which
    are set out in paragraph 60 of the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination
    and which I set out below;

    60.  I therefore make the following findings of fact:

          i) The Appellant himself is unreliable  in  his  evidence,  which
             means some of it may be untrue in whole or in part but this is
             not determinative of those matters.

         ii) His daughter IL does not know his whole life story  but  where
             she corroborates  aspects  of  it  they  should  be  taken  as
             reasonably likely  to  be  true,  since  her  credibility  was
             accepted by the Respondent when she claimed asylum granted  in
             2012 and she has been coherent and plausible when she appeared
             before me.

        iii) The authorities from at least  2011  have  not  suspected  the
             Appellant himself of being an LTTE activist because they  gave
             him a passport.  They had suspicions earlier, during the civil
             war, which is not in dispute.

         iv) There are consistent accounts from more than one  source  that
             the Appellant's wife and another daughter are living  together
             in hiding in Sri Lanka and they move often to avoid detection.

          v) Therefore it may reasonably be the case (although this was not
             put to me in terms) the wife and daughter are afraid to  apply
             for passports in their own names to leave Sri  Lanka  and  are
             internally displaced persons; were they  outside  the  country
             they could qualify as refugees in their own right.

         vi) It has been explained why the man and not the women  left  Sri
             Lanka.  However this does not sit well with the fact that  one
             of the Appellant's other daughters escaped  independently,  as
             we know.  That casts some doubt but  is  not  a  determinative
             point.

        vii) These accounts also make it more likely than not that there is
             a further family  member  or  members  actively  sought,  even
             recently, by GOSL on suspicion of continued  LTTE  activities.
             The  country  guidance  shows  that  such  investigations  are
             intelligence led activities; the gathering of intelligence may
             include questioning family members to discover the whereabouts
             of a missing relative of  interest  and  in  Sri  Lanka,  even
             today, that may provoke acts of violence to  obtain  a  forced
             confession.

       viii) The Appellant is not  one  of  those  family  members  who  is
             actively sought under a warrant or summons  because  there  is
             none and the Appellant has not even bothered to  enquire;  but
             he may be sought by the GOSL in the  hope  that  he  may  have
             location information for the person or persons in  his  family
             who  is  or  are  actually  of   real   interest,   based   on
             intelligence, to the GOSL.

         ix) I bear in mind that trauma is one possible reason  for  memory
             loss, although memory loss without more is not cogent proof of
             trauma and the proof of memory loss before me is not  of  high
             expert level.  It is  however  supported  by  the  Appellant's
             daughter IL, whose testimony I have found reliable.

          x) There is no rational reason to suppose that the GOSL  are  yet
             aware of the  Appellant's  failing  memory,  since  it  became
             noticeable only after his departure.  His memory does not  yet
             remove him from a list of potential informants.  Therefore  it
             does not remove the risk that he claims exists on return.  Its
             effect on his ability to respond to questions may be taken  to
             be a sign of failing to cooperate with GOSL, which  perception
             could give rise to harm.

         xi) The UK is  the  centre  of  Tamil  activism  in  the  diaspora
             (paragraph  303  of  the  Upper   Tribunal   decision).    The
             Appellant's passport on return would show he had been  in  the
             UK, for what that may be worth.  I have to balance that  point
             against  his  lack  of  activity  in  the  diaspora  and   the
             sophisticated knowledge of GOSL that not all in  the  diaspora
             are activists.   The  approach  of  the  GOSL  is  not  wholly
             rational, it may be argued, but it is intelligence led.

        xii) It is recorded in the COI report at 2.2.2 that the  report  of
             the Bar Human Rights Committee of  England  and  Wales  (March
             2014) shows that family connections continue to be of interest
             as  one  focus  of  intelligence  gathering,  which  fact   is
             consistent with the accounts I have heard in this appeal.

       xiii) In the same report section at 2.2.4 it is shown that  even  in
             2014 the GOSL are crushing actual attempts to revive the LTTE.



28. Further findings were made by the judge in paragraphs 62,  68,  69,  80
    and 81.  In summary the judge noted that the  Claimant's  daughter  was
    believed by the UK authorities and she was granted asylum, and she  had
    given evidence consistent with this.

29. The account of the  daughter  was  corroborative  of  some  significant
    points made by the Claimant, as pointed out by the judge  in  paragraph
    68.  This included the  fact  that  the  Claimant's  wife  and  another
    daughter were moving around Sri Lanka to avoid detection by  the  GOSL,
    which the judge found to be consistent with continuing  persecution  of
    the family.  The judge noted that the Secretary of State in the refusal
    letter had accepted that the Claimant had been of adverse  interest  to
    the GOSL in the 1990s.

30. The judge went on in paragraph 69 to find  that  there  had  been  past
    persecution of the family, and for a period in the 1990s this  included
    the Claimant, and that a beating of the Claimant had taken place fairly
    recently.

31. In paragraph 80 the judge found that at least one family member of  the
    Claimant was of genuine  recent  interest  to  the  GOSL,  and  if  the
    Claimant returned to Sri Lanka he would have to share the lifestyle  of
    his wife and daughter, which  would  mean  moving  from  one  temporary
    address to another to avoid the authorities, and in  paragraph  81  the
    judge found a significant risk of beatings if the Claimant returned  to
    Sri Lanka.

32. The judge did not accept the Claimant as a reliable witness, but  found
    some of his evidence was corroborated by background evidence, and to  a
    certain extent corroborated by the oral evidence given by his  daughter
    who had been granted asylum in the United Kingdom.

33. As previously stated, I found no realistic challenge had been  made  to
    the credibility findings and  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  judge.
    Therefore, based upon those findings, I conclude  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that the Claimant  was  not  at  risk  of  persecution
    because he did not fit within the risk categories set out  in  GJ,  but
    was entitled to conclude that the Claimant would be at risk of  torture
    or inhuman or degrading treatment  or  punishment,  and  therefore  the
    Claimant was entitled to be granted humanitarian protection pursuant to
    Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive,  and  the  appeal  should
    also be allowed under Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

The Claimant's appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

The Claimant's  appeal  is  allowed  pursuant  to  Article  3  of  the  1950
Convention.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed with reference to Articles  2  and  8  of
the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction.   That  order  is
continued pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the Claimant or any member of his family.  Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date: 12th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable and therefore there is no fee award.



Signed   Date: 12th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
