
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06777/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16th January 2017                     |On 7th February 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                 MOHAMAD [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin of Counsel instructed by Hasan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. On 15th November 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Grant-Hutchison
    gave permission to the appellant to  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Juss in which he dismissed the  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent to refuse  asylum,  humanitarian
    and human rights protection to the appellant, an adult male citizen  of
    Iran.

Grounds of Application

 2. The grounds argued that the judge had failed to set out conclusions  on
    the core issues of the appellant's account or, in the  alternative,  on
    the basis that the appellant's account was accepted by  the  judge,  he
    should have considered that the Iranian  authorities  would  inevitably
    treat as serious his actions as the  driver  of  a  car  carrying  PJAK
    supporters that failed to stop at a roadblock.

 3. Judge Grant-Hutchison  gave  permission  because  she  thought  it  was
    arguable that the judge had not explained why he did or did not  accept
    the appellant's account concerning the roadblock incident. It was  also
    arguable that the judge had not considered whether or not the appellant
    would be at risk on return for his  involvement  in  that  incident  in
    which the car had been shot at and someone injured and the parties were
    chased for some distance.

The Hearing

 4. At the hearing Mr Bates helpfully  conceded  that  the  judge  did  not
    appear to have considered whether or not the appellant would be at risk
    on return because of the roadblock incident.  He also  agreed  that  it
    was not clear that the judge had accepted or rejected  the  appellant's
    account of giving a lift to PJAK supporters.  He acknowledged that,  if
    the judge had accepted that the incident had  taken  place,  inadequate
    reasons had been given for the authorities not being interested in  the
    appellant.  He further agreed that the judge's emphasis on  information
    suggesting that lifts were often given on  the  road  in  question  was
    insufficient to justify rejection of the appellant's claims.

 5. Mr Martin made very  brief  submissions  contending  that  the  matters
    conceded by the Home Office were material and so the matter  should  be
    heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

 6. After hearing submissions I announced that I  was  satisfied  that  the
    decision showed errors on points of law such  that  it  should  be  set
    aside and heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal.  My reasons  for
    those conclusions follow.

 7. In paragraph 23 of the decision the experienced  judge  carefully  sets
    out the relevant  parts  of  the  appellant's  claim  relating  to  the
    checkpoint incident but it is not at  all  clear  what  conclusion  the
    judge reached about the credibility of that evidence.   In  particular,
    the judge examines the assertion by the appellant that people  commonly
    waited at a point on the road for a lift but suggests that it  was  not
    clear how the Iranian authorities would  assume  that  those  who  were
    given a lift would be  implicated  in  PJAK  activities.   However,  in
    making that suggestion,  the  judge  appears  to  have  overlooked  the
    appellant's claim that the authorities followed his car and shots  were
    fired.  Further, it was the appellant's claimed failure to  stop  at  a
    checkpoint rather than the fact that he was  giving  a  lift  to  other
    individuals that gave rise to the incident.

 8. I agree with Mr Martin's contention that the judge's failures to  reach
    clear and adequately reasoned findings on the checkpoint  incident  are
    material to the  whole  claim.   The  appellant  has  put  forward  the
    incident and the authority's interest in him  as  the  reason  for  him
    seeking international protection.  Thus, on the basis  that  the  judge
    erred in reaching his findings on that matter,  the  appeal  should  be
    heard  again  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  will  examine   the
    credibility of all the evidence.

 9. My conclusion that the matter should  be  re-heard  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal accords with the requirements of the  Practice  Statement  for
    the Tribunal  made  by  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals  on  25th
    September 2012 at paragraph 7.2.

Anonymity

10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction  nor  do  I
    consider one to be appropriate before the Upper Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

11. The appeal will be reheard by the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at  the
    Stoke Hearing Centre on a date to be specified by the Resident Judge.

12. The hearing should not be before Judge Juss.

13. The time estimate for the hearing is three hours.

14. Representatives have indicated that an interpreter will not be required
    for the hearing.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

