
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06540/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Date Sent                            |
|On 3 July 2015                       |on 13 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL KAMARA


                                   Between

                                    MR GA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E King, counsel instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge R L
       Walker (FTTJ) dismissing the appellant's appeal against  the  refusal
       of his claim for international protection.

   2. Permission was granted, and an error of law subsequently found on the
       basis that the FTTJ had failed to assess the reliability of  all  the
       documents relied upon by the appellant, made findings unsupported  by
       the background  material,  failed  to  consider  a  relevant  Country
       Guidance  decision  and  that  his  consideration  of  the   internal
       relocation issue was inadequate. The  reasons  are  annexed  to  this
       decision.

    3. The matter came before me for a rehearing to  re-make  the  decision,
       taking into account the evidence before the FTTJ.

    4. The background to this matter is that the appellant  arrived  in  the
       United Kingdom, with leave to enter as a student, on 8  August  2007.
       During 2010, the appellant brought  his  wife  and  children  to  the
       United Kingdom as his dependants. He returned to  Afghanistan  on  11
       December 2012 during a break from his studies.  His  last  period  of
       leave to remain as a Tier 4 migrant was due to expire  on  7  October
       2013. During the afore-mentioned break, the appellant  says  that  he
       was employed in Afghanistan by an NGO, namely Generation of Youth Co-
       ordination (GYCO). His role was to carry out a  survey  in  his  home
       village of Panjwayi of the views of young people  on  the  government
       and current affairs in Afghanistan. The appellant believed that local
       people were suspicious of him owing to his residence  in  the  United
       Kingdom and also because his brother, Dr SAA, had  left  Afghanistan.
       Dr SAA had been targeted by the Taliban owing to  treating  a  female
       patient and had been recognised as a refugee in the  United  Kingdom.
       On 5 January 2013, the appellant states that he found  a  threatening
       note from the Taliban on the windscreen of his  car  after  returning
       from lunch in a bazaar in  Panjwayi.  Thereafter  the  appellant  was
       advised by his manager at GYCO that it was too dangerous for  him  to
       continue working for the organisation. The appellant states  that  he
       went into hiding and returned to the United  Kingdom  on  12  January
       2013. He applied for asylum during March 2013.

   The Hearing

    5. I heard oral evidence from the appellant and his brother, Dr SAA,  as
       well as submissions from both representatives. I also had  regard  to
       both  parties'  skeleton  arguments,  the  appellant's   bundles   of
       documents submitted for this hearing, background  evidence  and  case
       law provided on behalf of the respondent.

    6. In  examination-in-chief,  the  appellant  relied  upon  his  undated
       witness statement and identified and discussed each of the  documents
       he had submitted in support of his asylum claim.  The  appellant  was
       asked for his opinion as to  why  the  threatening  letter  from  the
       Taliban was left during the day as opposed to the night.  He  replied
       that they found an opportunity as he was mainly  in  the  office  for
       work purposes. At night, he was staying with various friends whom  he
       had not seen for a long time. He added that night letters are usually
       delivered to a region or town but that if a letter  was  directed  to
       one person, a night letter was not used. The  appellant  stated  that
       his colleagues did not  receive  threatening  letters  while  he  was
       there. He reiterated that local people were suspicious of him because
       he had been in the United Kingdom  for  a  long  time,  he  had  been
       educated here and his brother  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom.  That
       brother had difficulties with the Taliban for  medically  treating  a
       woman. The appellant's father had been  a  soldier  and  two  of  the
       appellant's sisters lived in the United Kingdom. The appellant was of
       the view that his circumstances were different  from  NGO  colleagues
       who normally lived in Afghanistan. Furthermore, he believed that  the
       nature of the questions he was posing when undertaking the survey led
       people to believe that he was collecting  data  and  spying  for  the
       British government. The appellant explained that GYCO  were  involved
       in collecting primary data which could be  sold  to  other  NGO's  or
       bodies needing  secondary  data.  He  had  been  given  the  task  of
       collecting data in Panjwayi, as it was his home area. When asked  why
       he had  not  applied  for  asylum  immediately  on  his  return  from
       Afghanistan, the appellant explained that he needed  to  discuss  the
       situation with his  family,  which  includes  his  wife,  mother  and
       brother. He was not an independent person but responsible for others.
       In  addition,  the  appellant's  brother  was  working  as  a  GP  in
       Northampton at the time and he wanted to discuss the matter in person
       and not over the telephone.

    7. The appellant stated that it was his dream  to  be  educated  in  the
       United Kingdom and return to Afghanistan and work for  an  NGO  on  a
       good salary. Indeed, he had worked in that capacity  before  arriving
       in the United Kingdom in 2007. The appellant further  explained  that
       he had classes to attend and felt secure  when  he  returned  to  the
       United Kingdom as he still had a student visa.

    8. In response to questions posed in  cross-examination,  the  appellant
       explained that he had asked his former  boss  at  GYCO  to  write  an
       email. The appellant did not know why the first letter his boss  sent
       made no mention of a threat from the Taliban. The appellant  had  not
       requested the first letter,  which  was  concerned  mainly  with  his
       salary and practical matters. He denied  having  stayed  in  Panjwayi
       after he received the  letter  from  the  Taliban;  stating  that  he
       returned to GYCO's office in Kandahar city. The appellant stated that
       he called the former colleague who had seen  the  Taliban  letter  in
       order to ask him to be a witness. The appellant said that he was born
       in Panjwayi but lived in Kandahar city; returning to Panjwayi  during
       the summers. The appellant returned to Panjwayi after 2001  when  his
       brother fled. He has an uncle still living in Panwayi, some of  whose
       children still lived in the area. The appellant had not thought  that
       the villagers would be suspicious of outsiders and when he  had  been
       given the job with GYCO, he had been excited  to  work  in  his  home
       town. It was well-paid role. At this point, Mr Jarvis indicated  that
       he was now challenging the appellant's claim to have worked for  GYCO
       at all. The appellant stated that after receiving the threat he  went
       to Kandahar city and stayed with  a  sister  until  9  January  2013.
       Thereafter he went to Kabul  and  stayed  with  his  brother-in-law's
       brother until  a  flight  was  available  on  12  January  2013.  The
       appellant denied hearing reports from his family of any  interest  in
       him from the Taliban since his departure. When asked why the  Taliban
       had not killed him, the appellant stated that he  could  not  explain
       their thinking. The appellant stated that he would not need financial
       support from his brother  if  it  was  safe  for  him  to  return  to
       Afghanistan because he could earn a good salary. He had earned �3,000
       for the short time he had worked for GYCO.

   Dr SAA's evidence was that he was working  as  a  GP  in  a  Northampton
       surgery at the  time  the  appellant  returned  from  Afghanistan  in
       January 2013,  whereas  the  appellant  was  living  in  London.  The
       brothers had met in person one or two weeks after his return in order
       to discuss the threat from the Taliban. Dr SAA agreed to  financially
       support the appellant and his family. In response to questions  posed
       in cross-examination, Dr SAA accepted that  Kandahar  city  had  been
       increasingly infiltrated by the Taliban. He agreed that he  told  the
       appellant in  2010  (when  the  appellant  returned  to  collect  his
       children) that there would be a problem for him because  of  his  own
       profile. Dr SAA had advised the appellant not to go to Panjwayi  but,
       if possible, to stay in Kandahar or Kabul.


    9. Mr Jarvis relied upon his skeleton argument and further  argued  that
       the appellant's claim was not credible. Reliance was placed  on  Y  v
       SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223.  Alternatively,  even  if  his  claim  was
       accepted, he submitted that the appellant would not  be  at  risk  on
       return to Afghanistan because he could relocate within  the  country.
       He argued that it was incredible that the appellant would  decide  to
       work in Panjwayi,  a  small  district  referred  by  the  appellant's
       solicitors as the birthplace of the Taliban, where people  knew  what
       had happened to his brother, Dr SAA  and  any  suspicions  about  the
       appellant  might  be  compounded   by   his   western   education.The
       appellant's evidence that he was excited by the job  opportunity  was
       inconsistent with Dr SAA's evidence that he warned him about Panjwayi
       being too dangerous. It was  implausible  that  the  appellant  would
       deliberately return to a village under control of the  Taliban.  With
       regard to the Taliban letter, he submitted that these could  be  made
       to order and that even the Taliban have threatened those who  produce
       false Taliban documents.

   10. Mr Jarvis argued that it was implausible  that  the  appellant  could
       have avoided being detained  or  killed,  particularly  when  he  had
       missed the appointment made in the letter to report to  the  Taliban.
       With regard to the letter from GYOC, I was asked to note that it made
       no specific mention of a threat to the appellant's life. I was  asked
       to consider all the appellant's documentary evidence in the round and
       to place no weight on any it. Mr Jarvis asked  me  to  disregard  the
       evidence of the witnesses in Afghanistan who had provided  statements
       at the appellant's request. The brother's evidence did not amount  to
       corroboration as he only knew what he had been told. I was  asked  to
       note that no  other  members  of  the  appellant's  family  had  been
       approached or indicated that there was any further  investigation  by
       the Taliban.

   11. Mr Jarvis submitted that the appellant had not provided a  reasonable
       explanation regarding his failure to seek asylum straight  away  upon
       his return to the United Kingdom in January 2013. He referred  me  to
       passages from the Case of H and B v the UK,  the  Taliban  were  only
       able to concentrate on high profile targets. There was no evidence of
       ongoing  interest  in  the  appellant,  even  locally  and  thus  the
       appellant was not a refugee nor at risk of a violation of his  rights
       under the ECHR.

   12. With regard to  the  appellant's  alternative  case  in  relation  to
       Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive,  Mr  Jarvis  submitted
       that the evidence before me was insufficiently detailed  in  relation
       to the geography of attacks and the nature of the  civilian  victims.
       He asked me to note that this argument failed in AK  (Article  15(c))
       Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC). It was not unduly  harsh  for
       the appellant to relocate to Kabul and according to his own  evidence
       he would have no difficulty in supporting himself.  He  asked  me  to
       disregard the evidence from the Afghan ambassador regarding  removals
       to Afghanistan as this was  no  more  than  a  technical  barrier  to
       removal. Mr Jarvis also briefly addressed  Article  8  ECHR,  however
       this aspect was not pursued by the appellant.

   Ms King relied on her  own  skeleton  argument  and  submitted  that  Mr
       Jarvis' approach in relation to credibility was the opposite of  what
       was said in Y. She asked me to find that the appellant  had  provided
       credible documentary evidence to corroborate his case  and  that  his
       credibility was not damaged by the delay in him seeking  asylum.  She
       argued that the appellant was at risk  in  his  home  area  but  that
       internal relocation was not an option  owing  to  the  difficulty  of
       living anonymously with a  wife  and  three  children.  In  this  she
       referred to an  extract  from  PM  and  Others  (Kabul-Hizb-i-Islami)
       Afghanistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00089. She took me to evidence which, she
       argued, indicated that Taliban letters were not always  delivered  at
       night and that the Taliban's  methods  of  pursuit  varied.  Ms  King
       argued that the appellant would be viewed as a  western  collaborator
       and spy and that this heightened the risk to him. Reference was  made
       to  the  general  deterioration  in   the   security   situation   in
       Afghanistan, however she argued that the appellant would be  at  risk
       regardless and that this deterioration only heightened  the  risk  to
       him. In terms of the reasonableness of  relocation  under  15(c),  Ms
       King argued that the appellant's ability to support him self and  his
       family relied upon him obtaining a good job, which  would  raise  the
       risk of his whereabouts being disclosed. She considered that  he  was
       in a higher risk category in that he had a profile above  and  beyond
       others which would create a breach of article 15(c).


   13. I reserved my determination.

   Consideration and findings

   14. In assessing  the  appellant's  claims,  I  have  applied  the  lower
       standard of proof. I have also born in mind  the  relevant  case  law
       including the very detailed assessment of country  conditions  in  AK
       (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC).

   I begin with consideration of the appellant's subjective evidence. While
       Mr Jarvis argued  that  I  should  reject  the  appellant's  evidence
       relating to the employment with GYCO, I note that the respondent  had
       not criticised this evidence in the reasons for refusal letter.


   15. I find that the appellant has provided credible evidence to show that
       he was working  for  the  NGO  in  question.  From  the  outset,  the
       appellant provided his work identity document, a letter revoking  his
       contract which alluded to his contract not being completed  owing  to
       "security reasons," a summary of his  earnings,  photographs  of  the
       appellant in the field and supporting evidence from GYCO and a former
       colleague. I find these documents to  amount  to  good  corroborative
       evidence of the appellant's account of his  employment.  Furthermore,
       the appellant's  oral  and  written  account  of  his  employment  in
       Afghanistan has been detailed and consistent.  For  instance,  during
       his evidence before me I considered that he provided a fluent account
       regarding the purpose of the evidence gathering he was engaged in  on
       behalf of the NGO. I therefore accept that the appellant was employed
       as claimed between December 2012 and January 2013.

   16. Mr Jarvis argued that it was implausible  that  the  appellant  would
       have  worked  for  this  organisation  in  this  particular  area  of
       Panjwayi. I find that the evidence before me reliably shows  that  he
       did just that. While I accept that the  appellant  was  told  of  the
       risks by his brother, I find the appellant's explanation as to why he
       was keen to take up the position, to be  credible.  That  explanation
       included his understanding that he would be working for  a  reputable
       NGO in that area, that the project was already set  up,  that  others
       were already doing the work and that he would be working in his  home
       area, where he did not see himself as a stranger. I  also  take  into
       consideration that the appellant had previously worked for an NGO  in
       Afghanistan without adverse incident  and  that  his  plans  were  to
       undertake such work on  a  permanent  basis  once  he  completed  his
       studies in the United Kingdom. While the appellant's outlook may have
       been on the optimistic side, I see nothing implausible that he  would
       seek such work.

   17. I now turn to the reliability of the  letter  said  to  be  from  the
       Taliban. That item was  criticised  in  the  refusal  letter  as  the
       respondent was of the view it did not contain  a  stamp.  However,  I
       examined the original item and it appeared to me to  contain  a  blue
       smudged stamp. I have taken into consideration that  it  is  possible
       that such evidence can be falsified. However, there  are  aspects  of
       this letter which are  consistent  with  what  is  known  about  such
       letters. Both  parties  relied  upon  the  Canadian  Immigration  and
       Refugee Board report on night  letters  which  was  published  on  10
       February 2015. At page 5 of that report, it is  indicated  that  such
       letters can include the title "Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan," which
       the letter produced by the appellant does. The said report emphasises
       that there is no set layouts to these letters.  Accordingly,  I  find
       that the appearance of the letter is not inconsistent  with  what  is
       known about similar letters. The respondent strongly relies upon  the
       fact that the Taliban letter in question was not delivered at  night.
       While the IRB report refers to "most" night letters being distributed
       at night, the implication was that this was not always the  case  and
       that insurgent groups use a range of media to communicate.

   18. Ms King referred me to the Afghanistan Annual Report on Protection of
       Civilians in Armed Conflict:2013, which reported a number  of  night-
       letters being found in  public  buildings  including  on  a  district
       administrator's desk during a voter registration gathering,  which  I
       accept was unlikely to have been held under the  cover  of  darkness.
       The appellant's oral evidence was that  he  was  mainly  in  Kandahar
       city, staying  with  a  range  of  friends.  I  therefore  accept  as
       plausible that the Taliban may not have been able to track  him  down
       overnight in Panjwayi. I also find it plausible that the  letter  was
       placed on the vehicle driven by the appellant, which I heard was used
       by other family members in his absence, while he was having lunch  in
       Panjwayi.

   19. Mr Jarvis asked me to reject the appellant's  account  on  the  basis
       that the Taliban had no enduring interest in him,  evidenced  by  the
       fact that he was still alive and no reports of further  interest  had
       reached him via his family. I find that  it  is  to  the  appellant's
       credit that he has not claimed that the Taliban have  made  enquiries
       about him at the homes of his extended family. The IRB report  refers
       to a number of scenarios in relation to those  who  receive  a  night
       letter. Those include no warnings, multiple warnings or an invitation
       to defend oneself at a Taliban court. I therefore do not accept  that
       the appellant's non-compliance with  the  invitation  (which  in  any
       event was impossible as the  date  had  passed)  would  automatically
       result in his death. I have carefully considered the  fact  that  the
       Taliban letter was said to have been delivered  two  days  after  the
       deadline for the appellant to present himself.  I am not prepared  to
       accept that this alone  makes  the  document  unreliable.  Nor  do  I
       speculate as to why it was not delivered on time. It is not  possible
       to say why the Taliban did not harm the appellant or have not visited
       his extended family, without venturing into speculation.  However,  I
       would be cautious in concluding that those  facts  indicate  that  he
       would not be at risk if removed to Afghanistan now.

   20. I have no difficulty with the fact that the appellant invited his two
       witnesses in Afghanistan to produce additional letters in support  of
       his appeal. That he attempted  to  obtain  further  corroboration,  I
       find, enhances the credibility of  his  claim.  I  place  a  moderate
       amount of weight on those additional letters,  reduced  only  as  the
       witnesses could not attend to be cross-examined.

   21. The appellant delayed seeking asylum for approximately two months.  I
       accept his explanation, that he needed to discuss this  with  family,
       as a reasonable explanation. I also take into consideration the  fact
       that the appellant was lawfully present in  the  United  Kingdom  and
       that his leave to remain did not expire until  October  2013.  It  is
       also to his credit that he did  not  wait  until  his  leave  expired
       before making his claim.

   22. I accordingly accept that the appellant worked for the said NGO, that
       he received a threatening letter from the Taliban and  that  he  left
       Afghanistan prematurely owing to this  threat.  I  find  that  it  is
       reasonably likely that the appellant remains  at  risk  in  his  home
       area, which includes Panjwayi village and Kandahar city. The  Refugee
       Convention reason in this case is that he fears persecution owing  to
       his actual or imputed political opinion. I accept that the  appellant
       is perceived  by  the  Taliban  as  a  spy  for  the  United  Kingdom
       government on the basis of his  employment  with  GYCO  carrying  out
       surveys,  his  western   education   and   his   brother's   previous
       difficulties with the  Taliban.  A  report  by  the  European  Asylum
       Support Office (EASO) on Afghanistan dated 6 December 2012 refers  to
       the impossibility of reversing a label of being a spy. Therefore, the
       fact that the appellant immediately stopped  working  for  GYCO  upon
       receiving the letter is most unlikely to have reduced the risk to his
       life as the other risk factors remain.

   23. I now consider whether the appellant and his family could be expected
       to internally relocate. The EASO report concludes  that  "if  a  low-
       profile civilian accused of being a spy can flee and  resettle  in  a
       safer area, he can normally escape targeting  by  insurgents,  unless
       there are specific individual circumstances which would preclude this
       possibility." I  accept  that  it  is  likely  that  the  appellant's
       individual circumstances would prevent him being able  to  evade  the
       label of spy. Those circumstances being the fact that he has  resided
       in the United Kingdom for over 7  years,  that  he  has  received  an
       education here, that his brother also fled the Taliban and that  most
       of the appellant's immediate family all reside in the United Kingdom.

   There is also the fact that the appellant would not be  returning  as  a
       single man who could live anonymously. His children are of school age
       and he would need to make connections in the community in relation to
       their health and schooling. I accept Ms King's submission as  to  the
       relevance of Dr Giustozzi's evidence before the AIT in PM and  Others
       regarding the necessity of the appellant having to "reveal something"
       about himself  in  order  to  establish  trust  for  the  purpose  of
       obtaining employment or accommodation. I  find  that  the  nature  of
       Afghanistan society means that there is a risk that  the  appellant's
       whereabouts could be discovered by people in his home area. Therefore
       in order to remain safe in Kabul when  seeking  work,  the  appellant
       would he have to conceal his work for NGO's, not reveal his home area
       or that he had been educated in the United Kingdom. All factors which
       could assist him in obtaining a job with which to support his family.
       The  various  background  reports   before   me   reveal   a   recent
       deterioration in the security situation in general and  in  Kabul  in
       particular, with the Taliban infiltrating the city, most notably with
       the attack on the Afghan parliament. The Amnesty International report
       on Afghanistan for 2014/15 reports a year on year increase of 24 % in
       relation to civilian casualties. This deterioration does  not  create
       the risk for the appellant, but heightens  the  risk  to  his  safety
       which he has already established.


   24. I find that the appellant  has  established  that  it  is  reasonably
       likely that he would be persecuted for a  Refugee  Convention  reason
       were he to be removed to Afghanistan.

   25. As I have found that the appellant is a refugee, there is no need for
       me to consider any further his alternative argument that his  removal
       to Afghanistan would be contrary to the United Kingdom's  obligations
       under regulation 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

   Conclusions:

   The making of the decision of the First Tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law and is set aside.

   I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on asylum grounds.



Signed      Date: 11 July 2015

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

