
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06074/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th July, 2016, signed                    |On 9th August, 2016           |
|0n 4th August, 2016                           |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                    [F M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mair of Counsel, instructed by Greater Manchester
Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this appeal the appellant is a lady born on [ ] 1972, and a  citizen
    of Iran.  She appealed against the respondent's decision, taken on 20th
    March, 2015, to give direction for her removal from the United  Kingdom
    having refused her claim to asylum.  She  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ransley  heard  the  appeal  in
    Manchester on 9th December last.  In her determination, promulgated  on
    21st December, 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ransley  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeals on asylum and humanitarian  grounds  and  dismissed
    her human rights appeal.

2.   In support of the appellant's appeal she relied  on  a  medical  report
    prepared by Dr Charlotte Bryson of The Medical  Foundation  dated  19th
    November, 2015.  Whilst Judge Ransley makes it  abundantly  clear  that
    she has taken account of the medical report she has made  no  reference
    in her determination to the fact that Dr Bryson makes a diagnosis  that
    the appellant is suffering from post traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD).
    Whilst Dr Bryson is not a psychiatrist, she does explain that  she  has
    had training from The Medical Foundation and that psychiatric  training
    was part of her general medical training.

3.   There was no reason why  Judge  Ransley  should  not  have  taken  into
    account the diagnosis made by Dr Bryson and her failure to  do  so  may
    well have had an impact on  her  credibility  findings;  it  is  simply
    impossible to tell.

4.   I was urged by Mr Harrison  to  find  that  given  that  Judge  Ransley
    demonstrates that she engaged fully with the report and  refers  to  it
    extensively, it is unlikely to have made  any  impact  on  the  judge's
    credibility findings, but I do not believe it is possible for say that.
     I have concluded that she has erred in law.  In  the  circumstances  I
    have no alternative but to set the determination aside.

5.   In the interests of a fair and just disposal  of  this  appeal  I  have
    concluded that I must remit for hearing de novo by a Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal other than Judge Ransley. None  of  the  findings  stand.
    Were I to adjourn to hear the appeal afresh myself it may take  several
    months before the matter can be listed before me in Manchester.

6.   I respectfully suggest that 2 hours should be allowed for  the  hearing
    of the appeal. A Farsi interpreter will be required.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

