
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06355/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 November 2015                   |On 10 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                    N S O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Wood of Rochdale Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lambert promulgated on 28 July 2015 which dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a refusal of asylum on all grounds.

Background

 2. The Appellant was born on  9  September  1980  and  is  a  national  of
    Nigeria.

 3. The Appellant has a lengthy immigration history which  is  unchallenged
    and set out in detail at paragraph 1.2 of the decision. On  7  December
    2012 the Appellant applied  for  asylum  as  she  feared  that  if  she
    returned to Nigeria her daughter would be subjected to FGM as she was.

 4. On 13 March  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application and made directions for her  removal.  The  refusal  letter
    accepted that the Appellant had been  circumcised  but  challenged  the
    credibility of her account of a forcible marriage  and  her  consequent
    fears on return to  Nigeria.  Even  if  her  account  was  accepted  as
    credible the Respondent relied on recent legislative changes that would
    amount to effective protection against FGM in Nigeria and that internal
    relocation would not be unduly harsh.

The Judge's Decision

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Lambert  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found :

 6. She accepted in the light of all of the background  material  that  FGM
    was prevalent in particular amongst the Igbo people. She accepted  that
    the Appellant was forcibly circumcised.

 7. The Appellant's failure to  apply  for  asylum  promptly  significantly
    undermined  her   credibility.   The   Appellant   had   two   distinct
    opportunities to claim asylum after her fears of  the  consequences  of
    her forced marriage and the prospect of  FGM  for  her  daughter  first
    arose in October 2010 when she returned from Nigeria  and  August  2011
    after the birth of her daughter.

 8. The Appellant only  claimed  in  December  2012  several  months  after
    immigration enforcement action had been commenced and had  closed  down
    her and her husband's business.

 9. The Judge did not find the Appellant's explanation for her  failure  to
    claim asylum was credible against the  background  of  her  immigration
    history.

10. The account of a forced marriage and its breakdown was not credible and
    the Judge set out her reasons for that finding.

11. The Judge concluded that while she accepted the practice of  FGM  among
    the Igbo generally she did not accept that her fears for  her  daughter
    were genuinely held.The Judge found that the Appellant  could  use  her
    own education and resourcefulness to  protect  her  daughter  and  seek
    state protection.

12. She took into account the medical  evidence  and  concluded  that  even
    allowing for the  mental  health  issues  she  had  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated  the  ability  to  be   intellectually   and   financially
    productive and of caring for her children satisfactorily.

13. The Judge found no reason to allow the appeal outside the Rules.

14. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that :

      a) The Judge failed to take into account  the  report  of  Dr  Comfort
         Momoh.

      b) The Judge made unreasonable findings in relation to the Appellant's
         mental health issues by failing to  give  adequate  weight  to  the
         expert evidence.

15. On 19 August 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer gave  permission  to
    appeal on all grounds.

Submissions

16. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Wood  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that

      a) He relied on the grounds of appeal.

      b) He referred to H7 and 8 of the Respondent's bundle which  contained
         the conclusions of Dr  Momoh's  report  about  the  Appellant.  She
         concluded that the  Appellant's  child  was  at  risk  of  FGM  and
         abduction which stems from her tribal  background  and  that  there
         would  there  be  no  effective  state  protection   but   internal
         relocation  would  'be  very  difficult'  for   the   Appellant.The
         Respondent had accepted  that  weight  should  be  attached  to  Dr
         Momoh's report.

      c) It was insufficient to make one brief reference to  the  report  in
         the decsion but  not  take  it  into  account  in  the  credibility
         findings in relation to the risk to the Appellant and her daughter.
         This failure vitiated all of the conclusions.

      d) In relation to grounds 2 and 3 he relied on the report  of  Desiree
         Saddik a child and family clinical psychologist and her conclusions
         as to the likely effect of return on her mental health problems and
         her inability to relocate and feel safe anywhere in Nigeria.

      e) He referred to the report of Dr Kaur at I1-2 and his conclusions.

      f) The Appellant's mental health issues were relevant to the  findings
         on credibility and Article 8.

17. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Mc Vitie submitted that :

      a) While there was only one brief reference to the report of Dr  Momoh
         the issue was one of materiality. The expert concludes that FGM  is
         prevalent and therefore the Appellant is at risk. There  is  little
         in the report that is directly relevant to the Appellant.

      b) In relation to Ms Saddiks report if the Judge  concluded  that  she
         did not find that the Appellant had given a credible account of her
         history she was entitled to reach the conclusions that she did.

      c) In rejecting the medical evidence that suggested that the Appellant
         could not cope on her return to Nigeria and care for  her  children
         the report of Ms Saddik not  engage  with  the  issue  of  how  the
         Appellant had been able to cope with  her  mental  health  problems
         until her leave ran out. The  Judge  was  able  to  go  behind  the
         medical evidence if she gave reasons for doing so.

Finding on Material Error

18. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

19. In relation to the argument that the Judge failed to take into  account
    the expert report dated 22 August 2013 from Dr  Momoh  I  am  satisfied
    that there was no material error of law  in  the  Judges  approach.  Dr
    Momoh's report is found at pages H1-H8 of the Respondent's bundle.  The
    vast majority of the report, H1-H6 consists of  an  assessment  of  the
    practice of FGM  in  Nigeria  and  to  a  lesser  degree  her  physical
    examination of the Appellant as to whether she has been subject of that
    practice as she claimed. Indeed hers is  the  only  objective  evidence
    that confirms the Appellant was subject to FGM  and  therefore  I  find
    that the Judge must have taken it into account and given weight  to  it
    as she states both at 5.2 and 9.3 that she has taken into  account  all
    of the Appellant's documents and  accepts  that  FGM  is  prevalent  in
    Nigeria which was 'broadly supportive' of her fears on return  and  she
    found that the Appellant was subject to it a finding that can only have
    arisen out of Dr Momohs report.

20. I am satisfied however that the Judges task went beyond  a  finding  of
    whether the Appellant had been the subject of FGM but she was  required
    to consider whether the Appellant had given a credible  account  as  to
    why she was claiming asylum and the fact of her being  subject  to  FGM
    was but one part of the factual matrix underpinning her claim. Thus the
    majority of the report was not in  dispute  and  was  accepted  by  the
    Judge.

21. The only part of  Dr  Momoh's  report  that  directly  relates  to  the
    Appellant and her child specifically, and is disputed, is a very  brief
    paragraph, 44, at H7 in  which  Dr  Momoh  assesses  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant and her child based on  an  uncritical  acceptance  that  the
    Appellant has been truthful about the circumstances in which  she  came
    to make her asylum claim. The Judge was therefore entitled to reject Dr
    Momoh's conclusions about the risk to the Appellant and  her  child  on
    return as she gave detailed and cogent reasons  at  paragraphs  9.4-9.9
    why she did not find that the Appellant  was  a  credible  witness  and
    conclude that the  Appellant's  'stated  fears  for  her  daughter  are
    genuinely held.' Those reasons were rational and reasonably open to her
    and included that it was not credible  that  the  Appellant's  in  laws
    would tell her in October 2010 that they expected her  daughter  to  be
    circumcised given that she was not even aware she was pregnant or  that
    she was expecting a girl; the claim that her in laws  would  insist  on
    FGM for her daughter was inconsistent with them not maintaining contact
    with her; there are inconsistencies in relation to her accounts of  her
    husband's attitude  to  FGM  for  their  daughter  between  her  asylum
    interview and her witness statement; her account  of  her  violent  and
    abusive marriage  is  inconsistent  with  her  immigration  history  of
    supporting applications made by him; her account of  the  circumstances
    in  which  her  husband  left  her  were   inconsistent;   there   were
    inconsistencies in relation to her claim to have received a threatening
    text message from an 'uncle' from  an  unknown  number  when  the  text
    produced showed the number and came from a cousin.

22. In relation to the assessment of the Appellant's credibility  generally
    I am satisfied again that the Judge  made  clear  that  she  took  into
    accounts all of the evidence which perforce included  the  evidence  of
    her mental health problems. I can find nothing in  that  evidence  that
    would have resulted in a different view being taken  by  the  Judge  in
    relation to the assessment of credibility.

23. I have considered  the  challenge  that  the  Appellant  did  not  give
    sufficient weight to the conclusion of Ms  Saddik  that  the  Appellant
    could not cope if returned to Nigeria and thus return would not  be  in
    the best interests of her children. I am satisfied that the Judge  made
    clear that she had considered the evidence of both Ms  Saddik  and  the
    more cent evidence of Dr Kaur in her detailed analysis  at  9.13.   She
    was of course entitled to take into account that  the  evidence  of  Ms
    Saddik a clinical psychologist was now rather old dating back to  April
    2013 and her conclusions  were  in  contrast  to  those  of  the  other
    evidence  advanced  by  the  Appellant  from  Dr  Kaur   a   Consultant
    Psychiatrist dated 19 March 2014 whose conclusion the Judge quoted that
    the Appellant posed no risk to herself or her children and  there  were
    no safeguarding issues. This conclusion the Judge was entitled to  find
    was reinforced by the fact of everything that the  Appellant  had  been
    able to achieve inspite of her troubled history: coming to  the  United
    Kingdom to do post graduate study, helping her husband in his  business
    with a 'huge shop' surviving as a single mother  without  any  apparent
    means of financial support. It was  therefore  open  to  the  Judge  to
    conclude that there was no evidence  to  suggest  that  she  could  not
    continue to serve her children's best interests in her home country.

24. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

25. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

26. The appeal is dismissed.

27. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and due to the sensitive
    nature of this appeal I continue that order.




    Signed Date 9.11.2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
