
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06709/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 September 2015                 | On 18 September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     VQN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms H Gore instructed by Eagle Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The  appellant,  a  national  of  Vietnam,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against a decision made by the Secretary of State on  20  August
   2014 to refuse his application for asylum and to remove him from the  UK.
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Plumptre dismissed the appeal on asylum,
   humanitarian protection and  human  rights  grounds.  The  appellant  now
   appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

2. The appellant claims to be a minor with a date of birth of 10 June  1998.
   The respondent considers that his date of birth  is  10  June  1995.  The
   issue of the appellant's age was therefore before the First-tier Tribunal
   Judge. In the grounds  of  appeal  it  is  contended  on  behalf  of  the
   appellant that it was agreed between the representatives and the Judge at
   the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal that, as the  respondent  had  not
   yet considered the documentation submitted by the appellant going to  his
   age,  the  Judge  should  either   accept   the   appellant's   documents
   unchallenged or remit the matter to the respondent to consider the  issue
   of the appellant's age afresh in light  of  the  new  documents.  At  the
   hearing before me Mr Whitwell said that Mr Liddel,  who  represented  the
   respondent in the First-tier Tribunal, was external counsel instructed by
   the respondent and that there was  no  note  from  him  as  to  what  had
   transpired at that hearing. The Judge's record  of  proceedings  was  not
   clear on this issue. There was therefore a lack of  evidence  as  to  the
   contention that the Judge had gone beyond the agreed scope of the hearing
   and I cannot make a finding that the proceedings  were  unfair  for  that
   reason.

3. The appellant did not give oral evidence in the First-tier  Tribunal.  It
   is submitted that this is because there was no appropriate adult  to  sit
   with him and because the respondent's representative  indicated  that  he
   did not wish to cross-examine the appellant. This is noted by  the  Judge
   at paragraph 16. The Judge heard submissions only. It is not  clear  from
   the  determination  whether  the  respondent's  representative  made  any
   submissions. In any event it appeal that there was no specific  challenge
   recorded in relation to the documents provided by the appellant.

4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge decided that the appellant' date  of  birth
   is 10 June 1995. In reaching her decision as to the appellant's  age  the
   Judge considered the documents provided by the appellant at paragraphs 59-
   64. The Judge identified a number of  discrepancies  and  inconsistencies
   within  the  documents  and  concluded  that  they  were  incomplete  and
   inconsistent, she found that they were  unreliable  and  attached  little
   weight to them. The difficulty with the Judge's findings in  relation  to
   these documents is that none of the Judge's  concerns  were  put  to  the
   appellant. I accept Mr Whitwell's submission that it  appears  that  both
   parties may have been at fault in relation to how the  hearing  was  run.
   However I cannot escape the conclusion that the failure of the  Judge  to
   give the appellant an opportunity to respond to her  concerns  about  the
   documents amounts to procedural unfairness.

5. Having attached little weight to  the  appellant's  documents  the  Judge
   accepted the conclusions of the age assessment  carried  out  by  Croydon
   Social Services. The difficulty with this is that the full report was not
   before the Judge. Mr Whitwell pointed out that neither party applied  for
   an adjournment so that this report could be obtained and  I  accept  that
   the Judge did her best with the evidence she had on this  issue.  However
   it is difficult to see how the Judge could have been satisfied  that  the
   age assessment was Merton compliant without  seeing  the  age  assessment
   report.

6. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the  decision  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal contains an  error  of  law  in  that  it  is  infected  by
   procedural unfairness. The parties agreed that none of  the  findings  of
   fact in relation to the age assessment or the substantive  asylum  appeal
   could stand as the assessment of the asylum appeal is inevitably affected
   by the age assessment. I therefore set aside the decision of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal in its entirety.

7. I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  not  had  his  case  properly
   considered by the First-tier Tribunal. The parties were in agreement with
   my view that the nature and extent of the judicial fact finding which  is
   necessary in order for the decision to be remade  is  such  that  (having
   regard to the overriding objective  in  Rule  2  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
   Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


Signed      Date: 17 September 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

