
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06780/2015
                                                               AA/06784/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|                                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 27 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  [W H] + 1
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

                            Remaking the DECISION

 1. The appellant in this matter is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ("the Secretary of State").  [WH]  (the  Claimant)  was  the
    appellant in the First-tier  Tribunal  proceedings  which  allowed  her
    appeal on asylum grounds. She is a citizen of Sri  Lanka.  Following  a
    hearing on 5th January 2016 I found  a  material  error  of  law  in  a
    decision and reasons dated 19th January 2016.  I directed  that  within
    14 days of the  issue  of  that  decision  the  Claimant  file  written
    submissions on the issue of risk on return to Sri Lanka  following  the
    guidelines in GJ and or departure from the same.

 2. As at 21st March 2016 I  have  received  no  written  submissions  from
    either party and now I remake the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    having regard to the findings made by that Tribunal.  I  refer  to  the
    decision and reasons dated 19th January 2016 in  which  I  set  out  in
    detail the findings of fact made by the FtT. The  FtT  found  that  the
    claimant had no political involvement at all.  Her problems dated  back
    to 2011 and 2013 when she was detained and tortured on  both  occasions
    and she was released on payment of a bribe.  She left Sri  Lanka  using
    her own passport with a visa in 2013 and experienced no difficulties at
    the airport. The FtT concluded on  the  evidence  before  it  that  the
    appellant had no role in any renewal of hostilities in  Sri  Lanka.  It
    erred in law by limiting its consideration to past  persecution  as  an
    indication of future ill-treatment without giving reasons  in  support.
    It failed to consider the scope of GJ risk factors notwithstanding that
    it found her claim of arrest, detention and ill treatment in  2011  and
    2013 to be credible. Whilst I accept that she had been  arrested  on  a
    second occasion during the period following  the  end  of  hostilities,
    there was nevertheless no evidence before the  Tribunal  to  show  that
    there was a risk of repetition of the past ill treatment given the lack
    of profile and involvement by this appellant in any political activity.
    There was no evidence of any arrest warrant or factors that would place
    her at risk on appearing on a stop list, nor any evidence that she  was
    of a current interest to the authorities.  I have considered the  claim
    in the light of the risk factors identified in  GJ  and  conclude  that
    there  is  no  evidence  that  this  claimant  faces  a  real  risk  of
    persecution on return to Sri Lanka. This was acknowledged by Counsel on
    behalf of the Claimant at the error of law hearing and as stated  above
    I have received no further submissions pursuant to the directions  made
    and issued. In addition I found no evidence to show why  this  Claimant
    would be at risk for reasons outside of the scope of GJ.

Decision

 3. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.  I remake the decision
    of the FtT by substituting a decision to dismiss the appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

 4. The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Dated 21.3.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.


Signed                                  Dated 21.3.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

