
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06098/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th February 2018                 |On 21 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                    FRMR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Authi (Solicitor, Aman Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who claimed  asylum  in  August
    2013. The Appellant's claim was rejected and the Appellant appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal. Her appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Graham at Birmingham on the 6th of April 2017 and dismissed in  a
    decision promulgated on the 15th of May 2017.

 2. The Appellant's asylum claim was made on the basis of her  support  for
    the LTTE, the Appellant claimed to have purchased  SIM  cards  for  the
    group, housed LTTE members and  obtained  medicines,  this  started  in
    2005. The Appellant said she was detained in 2010 during which she  was
    tortured and released on payment of a bribe after which  she  left  the
    country. In 2014 her family were attacked, her  brother  shot  and  the
    family home burnt down.

 3. The decision summarised the Appellant's claim and the reasons given  in
    the Refusal Letter for rejecting the claim. The evidence in the hearing
    was set out at paragraphs 35 to 43 followed by paragraphs 44 to  68  in
    which the Judge's reasoning and findings were set out.  The  Judge  did
    not accept the Appellant's account of her detention and release or that
    there was any interest in  her  by  the  authorities.  The  psychiatric
    evidence was considered in paragraphs 61 and 62 and in the Judge's view
    it attracted little weight.

 4. The grounds of application after citing a  number  of  different  cases
    submitted in that the Judge's findings that on  the  link  between  the
    LTTE and Muslims was not based on any material in the hearing  bundles.
    The Judge had erred in the approach to the medical report and  the  age
    of  the  scars.  It  is  also  argued  that  the  Judge  erred  in  the
    consideration of the psychiatric report  and  the  diagnosis  of  PTSD.
    Regarding the Appellant's departure from Sri Lanka there  was  evidence
    of pervasive bribery at the airport and there was relevant evidence  on
    the Appellant's sur place  activities  for  the  TGTE.  Permission  was
    granted on the grounds that it was arguable that not all the points  in
    GJ and UB had been addressed.

 5. At the hearing Mr Authi  relied  on  the  grounds  of  application  and
    paragraphs 8 to 12 in particular and at that stage had nothing to  add.
    For the Home Office reliance was placed on the rule 24 response. It was
    submitted that the Judge had directed herself properly and  there  were
    good reasons for  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  not  credible  at
    paragraphs 45 and 46. The Judge had given reasons for the weight  given
    to the reports and her sur place activities and there would be no  risk
    to the Appellant on return.

 6. In response it was said that the medical evidence had  not  been  dealt
    with adequately. This was particularly so with  regard  to  the  report
    from Dr Al-Wakeel with clear findings that the scars were from torture.
    The psychiatric report showed that  the  Appellant  had  PTSD,  he  had
    interviewed the Appellant directly. Bribery was rife as  was  shown  in
    GJ.

 7. There is no set order in which a Judge has to approach consideration of
    an Appellant's credibility. What is important is that all matters  have
    been addressed. The fact that an Appellant  may  have  PTSD  which  may
    explain issues of memory and recall  does  not  itself  mean  that  the
    account has to be accepted, it may be rejected by  reference  to  other
    evidence or that there are features that are inherently  incredible  in
    any event leading to its being questioned.

 8. I also bear  in  mind  the  guidance  in  the  case  of  Re  M-W  (Care
    proceedings: Expert Evidence) [2010] EWCA Civ 12 in paragraph  39  Wall
    LJ stated:

         "I regard the following as trite propositions of law:  (1)  Experts
         do not decide cases Judges do. The expert's function is  to  advise
         the Judge; (2) The Judge is fully  entitled  to  accept  or  reject
         expert opinion; (3) If the Judge  decides  to  reject  an  expert's
         advice, he or she: a. Must have a sound basis on which  to  do  so;
         and b. Must explain why that advice is being rejected; (4)  Similar
         considerations arise when a Judge prefers one expert's evidence  to
         that of another. Judges must explain why they prefer  the  evidence
         of A to that of B."

 9. The complaint about the Judge's findings on  the  relationship  between
    the LTTE and Muslims  is  without  foundation.  The  Judge  gave  clear
    references for the evidence being relied on in paragraphs 46 and 47.

10. The Judge considered other aspects of the  Appellant's  case  including
    the delay in the claim being made, paragraph 45, her lack of detail and
    knowledge compared to that of the agent, paragraph 49, and the  failure
    of the police to look for her when she failed to report, paragraph 50.

11. The Judge considered the evidence of the Appellant's claim to have left
    through the airport. The fact that individuals have  left  through  the
    airport and that bribery exists there is clearly reported and commented
    on the case law. It does not follow that because a person left in  that
    manner they must have done so, most people  must  leave  Colombo  in  a
    routine fashion and that was  an  issue  for  the  Judge  to  consider.
    Leaving without incident could be explained by the payment of  a  bribe
    but would also be explained by an Appellant being of no interest to the
    authorities.

12. The claimed bombing of the Appellant's parents'  home  was  considered,
    that could be contrasted with the apparent  lack  of  interest  in  the
    Appellant when she failed to report.  The  Judge  considered  that  and
    discussed the claimed visits in paragraphs 52 to 54 and the  supporting
    letter from Mr Bandera was rejected as unreliable and no issue is taken
    with the findings made or the reasoning applied.

13. Although as noted above there is no set order for the consideration  of
    the facts and discussion it might  have  been  better  if  the  medical
    evidence had been considered at the start of  the  discussion  and  not
    towards the end. To have gone about it in the order of the decision  is
    not an error. The question is whether it was  considered  appropriately
    or not and whether sufficient reasons were given for the findings made.



14. With regard  to  the  Appellant's  injuries  these  were  addressed  in
    paragraphs 58 and 59. In doing so the Judge had regard to the  guidance
    for the consideration of such material in JL  (medical  reports)  China
    [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC). The Dr was not  an  expert  in  torture  but  in
    trauma and in assessing the cause of the injuries the Judge had  regard
    to more information that the Dr had been  privy  to.  The  age  of  the
    scars, being "many years of age" in the Judge's view took it no further
    as they were not linked to the Appellant's  account.  Given  the  other
    reasons in the decision and  the  objective  evidence  that  the  Judge
    referred to about the position with regard to Muslims and the LTTE  the
    decision was open to her.

15. The Judge  cited  the  case  of  HE  (DRC-credibility  and  psychiatric
    reports) [2004] UKAIT 321 at paragraph 60. The  reasons  for  attaching
    less weight to the report appear in paragraph 62. In the light  of  the
    observations in HE the Judge was entitled  to  treat  the  report  with
    caution. It may well be that a witness considers  an  Appellant  to  be
    credible but that is exclusively the province  of  the  Judge  and  the
    advice that the report amounted to was not accepted.

16. The grounds do not show that the Judge erred. The decision  shows  that
    all relevant aspects  of  the  Appellant's  case  were  considered  and
    addressed. The reasons given by the Judge for rejecting the claim  were
    open to the Judge. The decision has to be read as a whole  and  without
    taking matters out of context and bearing in mind  the  advantage  that
    the Judge has in the access to a wide range of materials.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
Dated: 13th February 2018
