
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06782/2014
                                                               AA/06781/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 February 2015                            |On 17 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                           MS TI (FIRST appellant)
                          MR AH (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T D H Hodson, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant Ms TI is a citizen of Iran  and  her  date  of  birth  is
    [date] 1960.  The second appellant is her son AH and his date of  birth
    is [date] 1995.  Like his mother he  is  a  citizen  of  Iran.   He  is
    dependent on his mother's appeal.

2.   The appellant made an application for asylum which was refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 21 August 2014.  The appellant's  claim  is  that
    she was a member of the  radiology  department  at  [university].   She
    talked with her students about social, legal and religious difficulties
    faced by women in Iran.  One  of  the  students  reported  her  to  the
    authorities. In April 2009  she  was  arrested  by  Etellat.   She  was
    detained for four days during which time  she  was  raped,  beaten  and
    questioned about religion and her interrogators quoted things that  she
    had said to the students.  The appellant lodged an  official  complaint
    at the request of her  husband.   She  was  examined  by  the  forensic
    medical department in order to substantiate her claim  about  what  had
    happened to her.

3.   A few months after her release the dean of the university informed  her
    that she was under surveillance by the authorities  that  it  would  be
    better for her to retire from  the  position.   In  February  2010  the
    appellant retired a month later came to the UK travelling  on  a  visa.
    She left the UK in September 2011 and travelled to  Canada.   She  came
    back to the UK in April 2012.  In June 2012 the appellant  returned  to
    Iran because her husband underwent heart surgery.  She returned to  the
    UK in August 2012 and again returned to Iran  in  December  2012.   She
    returned to the UK for the last time in February 2013.

4.   In  June  2013  the  appellant's  husband  was  taken  by  Etellat  and
    questioned about why she had returned to Iran.  The appellant  and  her
    husband decided that for his protection they should divorce.

5.   The appellant's evidence is that in January 2013 whilst  the  appellant
    was in Iran she made an application for a  new  birth  certificate  (in
    order to replace her old one) and  she  attended  the  registry  office
    where she was given a form to complete.  She was asked to indicate  her
    religion and she left this part of the form blank.  The official  asked
    her why this was the case and she shrugged her shoulders.  He then  put
    the application with her photograph into an envelope and  told  her  to
    take it to the police for approval.  The appellant attended the  police
    station and was told to return the next day.  When  she  returned  home
    her husband told her that she should not go to the police  station  and
    it would be better if she did not stay there with him.  She went to her
    father's house in K.  She returned to the family home twice in order to
    collect  her  belongings.   Her  husband  told  her  that  Etellat  had
    telephoned  the  family  home  on  four  occasions  asking  about   her
    whereabouts. She left Iran in February 2013.

6.   The appellant submitted a number of  documents  with  her  application.
    Her application was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision  of
    21 August 2014 on  asylum  grounds  and  also  under  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

7.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and her appeal was dismissed on all grounds by Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Napthine in a decision that was  promulgated  on  13  November
    2014 following a hearing on 28 October 2014.  Permission to appeal  was
    granted by Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Baird  in  a
    decision of 10 December 2014.  Thus the matter came before me.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

8.   The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  find  the  appellant  credible  and
    rejected her account for the following reasons:-

    (1)  It was not  credible  that  the  appellant  who  is  educated  and
         intelligent would express subversive ideas to students.

    (2)  It is not credible that the appellant  having  been  arrested  and
         detained for apostasy would be released after four days having  not
         signed a confession.  This is not in  accordance  with  reports  on
         Iran.

    (3)  It is not credible that the dean having forced her to retire would
         allow her to maintain an office at the university for research.

    (4)  It is not credible that when the appellant was asked why  she  had
         not ticked the box in her application form concerning her  religion
         she shrugged her shoulders.

    (5)  It is not credible  that  the  appellant  and  her  husband  would
         divorce because they were so concerned  about  the  attention  from
         Etellat and yet  she  would  return  to  Iran  in  order  to  spend
         Christmas with him.

    (6)  It is not credible that the appellant  would  bring  attention  to
         herself by not completing the form  considering  that  she  has  no
         qualms about describing herself as a Muslim.

    (7)  The documentary  evidence  (a  summons  dated  February  2013  and
         another of February 2013 and  a  medical  report  relating  to  the
         appellant of May 2009) is not reliable evidence.

    (8)  It is not credible that the appellant's daughter would  rip  up  a
         summons as the appellant claims.

    (9)  It is not credible that the appellant would be able to leave  Iran
         should the authorities be interested in her.

    (10) Neither summons refers to the reason  why  the  appellant  was  to
         attend court and the second summons refers to a "second phase"  but
         there was no, first phase.


The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

9.   The first grounds of appeal argues that the Judge  did  not  take  into
    account a second appellant's bundle that was before the Tribunal with a
    covering letter of 27 October 2014 which  contained  letters  from  the
    appellant's husband, her daughter and son-in-law and medical  documents
    relating to the appellant's  husband  having  heart  surgery  in  Iran.
    These documents were  material  to  the  appellant's  appeal.   It  was
    confirmed at the start of the hearing that the bundle  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal but it does  not  seem  to  have  been  taken  into
    account by the Judge.

10.  The second and third grounds argue that the Judge made a finding  based
    on "reports on Iran" but did not specify what those reports are.  There
    was medical evidence relating to  the  appellant  having  been  injured
    after her detention in 2009 which the Judge did not take into  account.
    The Judge did not take into account background evidence produced by the
    appellant, specifically the US State Department Report of 2013.

11.  Ground 5 (there was no ground 4) argues that  the  Judge's  credibility
    findings  are  expressions  of  what  he  found  to   be   subjectively
    implausible.  In addition the Judge considered the appellant's evidence
    that she was able to flee Iran without coming to the attention  of  the
    authorities on the basis that a summons had been issued.   However  the
    summons is dated the same day that the appellant fled, namely  February
    2013.

12.  Both parties made oral submissions.  Mr Hodson made submissions in  the
    context of the grounds of appeal, and Mr Duffy made submissions in  the
    context of the Rule 24 response of 23 December 2014.  The  key  finding
    was that the Judge did not believe that it was credible that she  would
    behave in the way that she asserted which would have brought her to the
    attention of the authorities.  The argument  that  the  Judge  did  not
    consider the evidence in the round  does  not  have  merit.   It  is  a
    stylistic argument and the Judge must start somewhere.

13.  The medical report in relation to the appellant's injuries is weak  and
    simply establishes that she had bruising.  Mr Duffy  conceded  that  it
    does not appear that the Judge took into account the  evidence  in  the
    supplementary bundle but it is neither here nor  there.   The  evidence
    was not material.

14.  There was no specific  finding  in  relation  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant was detained, however the Judge did not accept  the  core  of
    the appellant's account.

15.  Paragraphs 56 and 57 of the determination echoes  the  refusal  letter.
    Mr Duffy conceded that the findings were badly  worded.   The  evidence
    highlighted in the Reasons for Refusal Letter  seems  to  suggest  that
    rape is used in order to obtain confessions.

Error of Law

16.  I find that the Judge made a material error of law and the  three  main
    reasons for finding this are as follows:-

    (1)  It is clear that the Judge did not take into account  all  of  the
         evidence before him.  He did not take  into  account  the  evidence
         contained in the appellant's bundle.  It is clear in my  view  that
         the Judge was using standard paragraphs at paragraph 45 and  46  of
         his determination and despite having stated that he had  looked  at
         all of the evidence, it is clear  that  he  did  not.   I  note  at
         paragraph  46  the  Judge  raises  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004.   This  is  a
         standard paragraph that  bears  no  relevance  to  the  appellant's
         appeal.


    (2)  The Judge did not take into  consideration  the  evidence  in  the
         round.  He found that the core of the appellant's account  was  not
         credible (for largely subjective reasons).   He  then  went  on  to
         consider in isolation the documentary evidence at [69], namely  the
         evidence of court  summons  and  the  forensic  medical  report  in
         relation to the appellant.  He found that the documentary  evidence
         was not reliable, but in my view he did not consider this  evidence
         in the round.


    (3)  Paragraphs 56 and 57 of the determination read as follows:-


             "56. It is not credible that if  she  had  been  arrested  and
                  detained for apostasy, beaten and raped  during  her  four
                  days' detention,  that  she  would  be  released  with  no
                  charges and no confession after only four days.


             57.  That is not in accordance with the evidence  supplied  in
                  the reports on Iran.  Although Etellat detain  people  for
                  apostasy, they force signed confessions from them  -  that
                  is the purpose of beating and rape of detainees".


17.  It appears to me that the Judge relied on [29] of the  decision  letter
    in reaching conclusions at [56] and [57] of the decision.  The  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter makes assertions at {29} but the background evidence
    which is at [30] (the Country of Origin Report for Iran dated September
    2013) does not support the assertion at  [29].   It  follows  that  the
    findings at paragraph 56  and  57  are  misconceived  and  inadequately
    reasoned.

18.  The Judge did not accept that the appellant  would  be  able  to  leave
    Iran if she was of interest and one of the reasons for this is that the
    summons had been issued in February 2013.  In my view the Judge did not
    take into account that the appellant fled on  the  same  day  that  the
    summons was issued.

19.  Taking into account the cumulative impact of the above  errors  of  law
    in my view the decision of the Judge to dismiss the appellant's  appeal
    should be set aside.

20.  I set aside the decision  of  the  Judge  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal pursuant to  Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2002.

21.  The parties agreed that the matter should be  remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.  It is obvious that  none  of  the
    findings of the Judge should be maintained.

22.  I have considered the Practice Statement of  the  Senior  President  of
    the Tribunals of 13 November 2014 at paragraph 7.2 and in my view it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal because of the
    nature and extent of judicial fact finding which is necessary.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 16 February 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam



