
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06425/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT Birmingham                     |Decision and Reasons           |
|On 25 January 2016                         |Promulgated                    |
|                                           |On 16 September 2016           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                MINOUCHE [M]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T Royston of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer

                                  Decision

1. The appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic of the  Congo  who
   claims to have been born on 4 January 1996 but was assessed as being-year-
   older and her date of birth was recorded as 4 January 1995.  She  appeals
   to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of first-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   VA Osborne dated 18 February  2015  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
   decision  of  the  respondent  refusing  her  asylum   and   humanitarian
   protection in the United Kingdom.


2. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   V.A. Levin on 22 April 2015. The Judge  was  of  the  view  that  it  was
   arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge may have erred  in  paragraph
   64 of his decision when he stated that the appellant may  have  been  the
   victim of sexual abuse and in a different setting other  than  whilst  in
   detention. This is illogical  as  it  is  inconsistent  with  the  Judges
   earlier finding at paragraph 52 when  the  Judge  found  the  appellant's
   account to be credible. Further the Judge, misinterpreted Dr  Turnville's
   medical report  at  paragraph  57  which  may  arguably  have  materially
   affected the outcome of this case. The Judge stated that It  was  further
   arguable that the Judge erred in law in failing to consider the risk that
   the appellant may face on return to the DRC having regard  to  acceptance
   at paragraph 37 of decision that the appellant's father was  a  political
   activist and that she had  given  a  credible  account  of  how  she  was
   detained and treated whilst in detention. Therefore, it is arguable  that
   the Judge's consideration on the issue of risk on return  was  materially
   flawed.


   The First-tier Tribunal's findings


3. The  first-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  her  decision  made  the  following
   findings which I summarise. At paragraph  26  of  the  decision,  it  was
   stated that the common area of concern in  this  appeal  relates  to  the
   credibility of the appellant. The Judge  set  out  at  paragraph  29  the
   claimed political  activities  of  the  appellant's  father  and  stated,
   "against this background, I find  that  if  the  appellant's  father  had
   genuinely been active in support  of  the  party  his  chances  of  being
   detained would have remained high throughout the period in question". She
   stated that the appellant in her oral evidence at the hearing was  cross-
   examined and was able  to  satisfy  her  that  the  appellant's  father's
   meetings did take place and that the appellant's father was  a  political
   activist. He stated, "I find that the appellant's father did arrange  for
   meetings of party members to take place at his home and on that basis,  I
   am satisfied that he was an activist on behalf of the party".


4. The Judge accepted the appellant's evidence that she  did  not  have  any
   interest in political life because she was only 16 or 17 years old at the
   time. In respect of the appellant's father claimed  ill-treatment  whilst
   in detention he said that there was no corroborative  evidence  nor,  was
   there any  indication  that  any  such  evidence  has  been  sought.  The
   appellant could have brought  documentary  evidence  about  her  father's
   hospitalisation which happened on three  separate  occasions.  Similarly,
   the  appellant  appears  to  have  made  no  attempts  to   contact   the
   headquarters of Democratie Chretienne, although their address is given in
   Dr Seddons report, who could  have  confirmed  the  appellant's  father's
   credentials as far as the  party  was  concerned.  The  Judge  took  into
   account that the appellant has been represented throughout and  enquiries
   could have been made on her behalf. The Judge found that failure to do so
   reflects adversely upon the appellant's overall credibility  particularly
   insofar as it relates to her personal fear of persecution. He  emphasised
   that this relates most particularly to the appellant's account of how she
   was detained, treated and raped whilst in detention.


5. The Judge did not  find  the  appellant's  evidence  credible  given  the
   inconsistencies in the evidence as to how she went about making enquiries
   with Milka as to her father's  whereabouts.  The  Judge  found  that  the
   appellant has given no explanation  as  to  why  they  should  have  gone
   directly to the Court in the absence of being advised of the hearing, and
   not first made enquiries with the local party headquarters or  sought  to
   find out about their father's whereabouts from the security  forces.  The
   Judge stated that the appellant in her evidence  stated  that  Milka  was
   told to return for a  "further  hearing"  in  April  2013.  There  is  no
   indication as to how this information related to their  father's  claimed
   disappearance and reviewing the overall circumstances of this claim as to
   the appellant's visit to the courthouse, the Judge found  that  it  lacks
   sufficient credibility for him to find that the event actually  happened.
   The Judge also did not find credible that the appellant and the visit  to
   the courthouse happened in November 2012 and they were not arrested until
   three months later in March 2013 as their arrest was linked back  to  the
   claimed visit to the courthouse. The Judge stated that the appellant said
   that the were looking for Milka and she  made  some  reference  that  the
   sisters were accused of being troublemakers. The Judge found  that  there
   was no explanation for this long gap especially given her  evidence  that
   at that time, her father was still held.


6. The Judge considered Dr Seddon's report in  which  she  states  that  the
   appellant's evidence of how she was detained in a big house is consistent
   with how people are detained in the Congo. The Judge found that Dr Seddon
   had also confirmed the  widespread  use  of  torture  and  rape  in  such
   circumstances. At paragraph 51 the Judge  stated  that  "the  appellant's
   claim to have been  raped  on  numerous  occasions  whilst  in  detention
   demands careful assessment on the basis that sufficient proof of  such  a
   claim would indicate that she had been treated in a persecutory  manner".
   The Judge said that the only piece of evidence of the appellant's claimed
   rape is contained within Dr Turville's report were at paragraph 13 to 22,
   she sets out the version of events as described to her by the  appellant.
   The Judge found Dr Turvill's conclusions of particular significance.  The
   Judge stated that the appellant confided to the doctor that she had  been
   sexually active with a boyfriend prior to  the  events  described  in  Dr
   Turville report at paragraph 44 and that she was not a virgin. The  Judge
   noted that Dr Turvill stated that internal examination was not  necessary
   as rape frequently leaves no scars and is not proof  that  rape  did  not
   occur. Therefore, there is no physical evidence that can be  relied  upon
   to demonstrate that the appellant had been consistently raped as claimed.
   The Judge noted Dr Turville's conclusions that  the  appellant  has  PTSD
   which could have been caused by the appellant separation from her  family
   and her continuing immigration uncertainty but that these  factors  could
   have made her symptoms worse, they were unlikely  to  explain  "hard-core
   PTSD symptoms". The Judge stated "I cannot escape the possible conclusion
   that the appellant may have experienced sexual abuse in the setting other
   than the one she described".


7. The Judge had regard to  the  respondent's  background  evidence  in  the
   Guardian,  produced  at  the  hearing,  describing  the  extremely   high
   prevalence of rape in all areas of the Congo and that at least 12% of the
   country's women have been raped at least once and that this is  occurring
   not  only  in  conflict  areas.  The  Judge  considered  this  to  be  an
   underestimation of the figure. The Judge then asked himself the  question
   whether the appellant has been raped as  claimed  in  the  conditions  as
   described by her.


8. The Judge the appellant's account of  how  she  managed  to  escape  from
   detention, causes him concern. He relied  on  Dr  Seddon's  report  which
   confirms that escape from custody  are  fairly  commonplace  particularly
   with the use of bribes but said that the appellant does not describe  her
   escape in  those  terms.  The  Judge  noted  that  the  appellant  stated
   throughout that she was approached herself by one of  the  prison  guards
   who offered to help and that all he asked for was  a  contact  name.  The
   appellant claims to have given details of her uncle and  the  guard  then
   contacted her uncle and arrangements were made for the  appellant  to  be
   released. There was a contradiction as to which  guard  escorted  out  of
   detention. In Dr Turnvill's report, it is stated that  it  was  the  same
   guard took a bribe and in her evidence at the hearing she said it  was  a
   different  guard.  The  Judge  found  that  the  inconsistency   had   no
   explanation. The Judge found that it lacks credibility that she was  able
   to give the guard contact details of her uncle and that arrangements  for
   her release would be made within a matter of days and the appellant would
   not have any knowledge of any financial transaction which took place. The
   Judge stated that his "overall conclusion therefore is that I find I  can
   be satisfied that the appellant may have been the victim of sexual  abuse
   but not in the setting that she has described. The Judge stated  that  he
   cannot  make  a  finding  that  the  appellant  had  been  treated  in  a
   persecutory manner or that she had taken any  steps  to  protect  herself
   which might  have  been  available  to  her.  The  Judge  considered  the
   background information where it is reported the sexual abuses are endemic
   in the Congo and that such abuse may occur in domestic situations as well
   as a form of torture. The Judge found that  the  appellant  had  provided
   insufficient evidence to allow him to find,  even  to  the  low  standard
   necessary, that she had  experienced  behaviour  which  would  amount  to
   torture at the hands of captors as opposed to in any other situation.


9. The Judge said "however bearing in mind my  findings  about  the  overall
   circumstances of the appellant as described by her  in  relation  to  her
   claim detention and subsequent escape, I am not satisfied  again  to  the
   low standard necessary, that the appellant has given a  truthful  account
   in this regard".


10. The Judge did not find credible the appellant's description  as  to  how
   she last spoke to her uncle in December 2013  but  did  not  contact  him
   again on his instructions. In reaching this conclusion,  the  Judge  said
   that the appellant left behind her family  in  DRC  including  her  older
   sister  and  younger  siblings.  He  found  that  the   appellant   would
   understandably be concerned about their welfare and he was not  satisfied
   that if the appellant's account of events  had  been  truthful  that  her
   uncle would not have, at the very  least,  made  enquiries  as  to  their
   whereabouts in order to provide the appellant with such information.


11. The Judge took into account the country guidance case  of  the  DRC  and
   said that there is no other country guidance case upon which he can  rely
   and therefore has paid close  attention  to  the  background  information
   particularly as set out within the appellant's bundle. He  accepted  that
   there continues to be violence in the east of the country but the capital
   Kinshasa is in the westernmost part of the DRC. The appellant  claims  to
   have lived all her life prior to her departure in Kinsasha and  therefore
   she would be returned there if she is removed from  the  United  Kingdom.
   The Judge considered whether as a returnee from the United Kingdom  as  a
   field asylum seeker would put the appellant at risk. He stated that it is
   not accepted that simply returning as a failed asylum seeker per se would
   be an unacceptable risk and said that in any event the COI report on  the
   DRC states that women are at no risk when they pass through immigration.


12. The Judge found that the appellant would have to support of  her  family
   on her return to the Congo who would help her to reintegrate.  The  Judge
   concluded that there was insufficient evidence that he can  be  satisfied
   that the appellant has demonstrated that she is at  risk  of  persecutory
   treatment on return to the DRC and for  similar  reasons  she  cannot  be
   satisfied that the appellant is in need of humanitarian protection.


13. The Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  under  asylum  grounds,  the
   humanitarian and protection provisions and  Article  3  of  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights and the Immigration Rules.


   The appellant's grounds of appeal

14. Mr Royston at the beginning of  the  hearing  said  that  he  relies  on
   grounds 1, 3, 7 and  his  oral  arguments.  The  appellant's  grounds  of
   appeals are as follows which I summarise. The first ground is failure  by
   the Judge to have  regard  to  material  consideration  of  risk  to  the
   appellant due to her connection with her father. The Judge failed to have
   regard to the appellant's future risk even if he did not accept that  the
   appellant had been personally mistreated in the past. The Judge  accepted
   that the appellant's father was a political activist who was at  risk  of
   detention and was arrested repeatedly by the authorities.  The  objective
   evidence supported factors which give rise to a risk to the appellant  on
   return. He failed to take into  account  that  the  appellant's  father's
   political activities would put her at risk because of her father's active
   membership of the DC and the fact that he had been arrested and  detained
   on four occasions, and would therefore almost certainly be on  file.  The
   Judge did not say it disagreed with the experts evidence  on  this  issue
   but does not appear to have taken it into account. The appellant  claimed
   she was at risk because of her father's political  activities  and  would
   "be perceived to have a military political profile in opposition  to  the
   government."

15. The third ground of appeal is unfairness and failure to have  regard  to
   material consideration that appellant's evidence was unchallenged at  the
   hearing. The Judge makes no reference to the material consideration  that
   the appellant's oral evidence  on  the  circumstances  of  rape  was  not
   challenged at all by the respondent or the Judge. The  Judge  appears  to
   have accepted the appellant's claim to have  suffered  rape  in  DRC  but
   rejected her claim that this happened in detention accepting  submissions
   made by the respondent in closing. There was no suggestion made that  the
   appellant had not been raped in the circumstances she alleged, or  indeed
   that she had not been raped at all.  The  Judge  should  have  taken  the
   respondent's failure to cross examine the appellant into account.

16. The appellant's  evidence  was  unchallenged  at  the  hearing  and  the
   reasons for refusal letter. In the case of RR (challenging evidence)  Sri
   Lanka [2010] UKUT 274 (IAC) (25 August 2010) it was stated  that  if  the
   appellant or expert chooses to give oral evidence  then  the  respondents
   cross-examination should fearlessly and clearly  include  the  suggestion
   that the appellant or expert that for example an injury  was  not  caused
   and the way alleged by the appellant but by  a  different  mechanism.  It
   states that if the respondent does not put its case clearly it  may  well
   be very difficult for the Tribunal to decide against an appellant who has
   not been given an opportunity to deal with the respondent's concerns.

17. The seventh ground of appeal is  that  the  Judge  made  logical  errors
   regarding the appellant's credibility assessment.  The  Judge  stated  "I
   have considered all of the accounts given by the appellant as to how  she
   was treated and I am satisfied that they are all sufficiently  consistent
   for me to find that the accounts  she  has  given  is  a  credible  one".
   However, the Judge then found that there  was  insufficient  evidence  to
   allow him to find her account credible. These two accounts are  logically
   incompatible.  The  Judge  also  placed   weight   on   an   absence   of
   corroboration.  While  accepting  that  the  appellant's  father  was   a
   political activist and was  detained  by  the  authorities,  nevertheless
   required corroboration. A failure to corroborate true allegations  cannot
   logically weaken the credibility of other parts of that person's account.
   The Judge also does not explain how the  appellant  could  possibly  have
   corroborated her claim  to  have  been  raped  in  detention  beyond  the
   evidence she did provide  from  Dr  Turvill  and  the  objective  country
   evidence.

   The respondent's rule 24 response

18. The respondent's rule 24 response is the following  which  I  summarise.
   The Judge of the first-tier Tribunal directed himself  appropriately.  On
   the reading of the determination as a whole it is clear  that  the  Judge
   was entitled to the conclusion that the  appellant  is  not  at  risk  on
   return to the DRC. The Judge points out at paragraph 77,  to  a  lack  of
   evidence to demonstrate that any treatment she may have  sustained  would
   reach the threshold. Paragraph 66 also notes the lack  of  evidence  that
   the appellant had experienced torture at the  hands  of  captives.  These
   findings  do  not  detract  from  or  contradict  the   Judges   positive
   credibility findings.  The  Judge  has  as  required,  given  a  balanced
   consideration to the  relevant  factors  leading  to  the  decision.  The
   positive credibility findings  are  not,  in  themselves,  sufficient  to
   satisfy the Judge that the appellant qualifies for asylum or humanitarian
   protection.

   The appeal hearing

19. Mr Royston on behalf of the appellant, in his submissions said that  the
   Judge accepted that the appellant had been raped in the DRC  even  though
   he did not accept that it was during captivity. The  appellant  therefore
   has not  fabricated  her  rape.  This  was  not  put  to  her  in  cross-
   examination. Being detained or not  is  not  determinative.  Not  putting
   direct questions in cross-examination is significant. There was a lack of
   challenge to the  appellant's  evidence.  The  Judge  accepted  that  the
   appellant's father was a political activist and the appellant  was  raped
   but then found that she was not detained. The Judge failed to  appreciate
   that the risk both to the appellant was due  to  her  father's  political
   connection. The Judge did not give cogent reasons  for  why  he  did  not
   agree with Dr Seddon's view as to why the appellant would be at  risk  in
   the DRC. Background evidence on DRC supports the  proposition  that  risk
   attaches for family members  of  targeted  persons.  The  Judge  did  not
   grapple with this. The Judge stated that the appellant's evidence had not
   been  corroborated.  The  Judge  placed  weight   on   the   absence   of
   corroboration and criticised her for  not  providing  documentation.  The
   appellant could not have provided anything further.  The  Judge  did  not
   take into account that the respondent has a shared responsibility because
   the appellant was a child at the time of the events.

20. Mr Mills on behalf of the respondent  made  the  following  submissions.
   The Judge has  failed  to  deal  with  whether  the  appellants  father's
   activity puts the daughter at risk. It was accepted by the Judge that the
   father was a political activist but did not accept the  appellant's  risk
   on return. The error is not material. Country guidance does not show risk
   to relatives in the position remains that low-level  supporters  are  not
   themselves at risk. It would not have made a difference  to  the  Judge's
   conclusion. It is regretted that  the  presenting  officer  did  not  put
   questions to the appellant. The appellant may well have been a victim  of
   rape and this was a finding open to the  Judge  to  make.  It  is  not  a
   material error. The Judge made a finding that the appellant is  an  adult
   and therefore the Home Office policy is not relevant for her.

   Discussion and findings on whether there is an error of law

21. I have  given  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  determination  of  first-tier
   Tribunal Judge Osborne and have taken into account the grounds of appeal,
   the case law and the documents in the appeal.

22. The Judge accepted that the appellant's father was a political  activist
   and had been detained.  He  accepted  that  the  appellant's  father  had
   meetings at his house and had been detained. The Judge did not make clear
   findings as to whether the appellants father's  political  profile  would
   put the appellant at risk on her return. This is a material error of  law
   as it was incumbent on the Judge to be clear findings as  this  was  very
   relevant to the appellant's risk on return.

23. The Judge also accepted that the appellant had been  raped  in  the  DRC
   but said that it was not whilst in detention as the appellant  claims.  I
   find this to be remarkable finding in that because the appellant was  not
   raped while in detention, she is not at risk on return.  Rape  in  itself
   can amount to persecution and it matters not whether  the  victim  is  in
   detention are not when she is raped.

24. The Judge accepted  the  background  evidence  that  rape  is  prevalent
   throughout the DRC which means that the Judge should  have  assessed  the
   serious possibility of it  re-occurring  again  for  the  appellant.  The
   appellant should not be expected to put up with the  serious  possibility
   of being raped  again  even  if  this  is  part  of  the  normal  country
   conditions. Lord Justice  Buxton  in  AA  Uganda  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  579,
   considered forced prostitution as  being  normal  country  conditions  in
   Uganda. The same logic should be applied to rape in the DRC  particularly
   where the appellant had already been  raped  and  being  made  vulnerable
   thereby.

25.  The Judge made inconsistent credibility findings in her  decision.  She
   stated "I have considered all of the accounts given by the  appellant  as
   to how she was treated and I am satisfied that they are all  sufficiently
   consistent for me to find that the accounts she has given is  a  credible
   one". However, the Judge then found that there was insufficient  evidence
   to allow her to find her account credible. I agree  with  the  permission
   Judge that these two accounts are logically incompatible.

26. Mr Royston made much of the fact that the appellant had  not  be  cross-
   examined at the hearing. There is some merit  in  this  argument  as  the
   responsibility of challenging evidence of  the  appellant  rests  on  the
   respondent. He referred to the case  of  RR  (challenging  evidence)  Sri
   Lanka [2010] UKUT 274 (IAC) (25 August 2010) where it was stated that  if
   the  appellant  or  expert  chooses  to  give  oral  evidence  then   the
   respondents cross-examination should fearlessly and clearly  include  the
   suggestion that the appellant or expert that for example  an  injury  was
   not caused and the way alleged  by  the  appellant  but  by  a  different
   mechanism. It states that if the respondent does not put its case clearly
   it may well be very difficult for  the  Tribunal  to  decide  against  an
   appellant who has  not  been  given  an  opportunity  to  deal  with  the
   respondent's concerns. In the absence of  any  cross  examination  or  an
   alternative position put to the appellant as to how the rape occurred, it
   was not fair or open to the Judge to find  that  the  appellant  was  not
   raped in detention but in some other setting.

27. The Judge also  material  into  error  by  requiring  corroboration.  At
   paragraph 51 the Judge stated that "the appellant's claim  to  have  been
   raped  on  numerous  occasions  whilst  in  detention   demands   careful
   assessment on the basis that sufficient  proof  of  such  a  claim  would
   indicate that she had been treated in a persecutory  manner".  The  Judge
   said that the only piece of evidence of the appellant's claimed  rape  is
   contained within Dr Turvill's report were at paragraph 13 to 22, she sets
   out the version of events as described to  her  by  the  appellant.   The
   appellant provided whatever  evidence  she  could  which  was  a  medical
   report. Dr Turvill in her report said that it internal examination  would
   not reveal whether the appellant had been raped or  not.  Therefore,  the
   only evidence which the appellant could possibly have given that she  has
   been raped is her own evidence.

28. The Judge did not properly address the risk on return for the  appellant
   as a  lone  female  particularly  bearing  in  mind  that  she  has  been
   previously subjected to  sexual  violence.  The  Judge  stated  that  the
   appellant's family lives in Kinshasa and they will help her  reintegrate.
   The Judge failed to consider the evidence that  the  appellant  had  been
   raped in Kinshasa, where she has always lived. This should  have  alerted
   the Judge that her family were not able to  protect  the  appellant  from
   being raped. The Judge having found that the  appellant's  father  was  a
   political activist, the risk to the appellant would increase.

29. I find that the Judge was not entitled to reach his conclusion that  the
   appellant can return  to  the  Congo,  based  on  his  consideration  and
   evaluation of the evidence as a whole. I find that I have  difficulty  in
   understanding the reasoning in the Judge's determination and for  why  he
   reached his conclusions on the facts of this case. I find that the  Judge
   was not entitled  to  conclude  on  the  evidence  before  him  that  the
   appellant is not entitled to be recognised as a refugee or to be  granted
   humanitarian protection in this country.

30. I find that  material  errors  of  law  have  been  established  in  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I set it  aside  and  remake  the
   decision.


31. Having considered all the evidence in  this  appeal,  I  find  that  the
   appellant has demonstrated to the required burden of proof of  real  risk
   that she would be at risk if she is returned to  the  Congo.  I  consider
   that  substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for  believing  that   the
   appellant, if returned to the DRC, would face a real  risk  of  suffering
   serious harm and in her circumstances will be unable, to avail herself of
   the protection of  that  country.  It  follows  that.  the  appellant  is
   entitled to Humanitarian Protection as defined by paragraph 339C  of  the
   Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).


DECISION

The appellant's appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds



      Dated this 14th day of September 2016
Signed by,

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Mrs Chana








