
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  AA/06768/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

| Heard at Field House                 |             Decision and Reasons    |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 8th May 2015                       |             On: 1st July 2015       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A Y
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Wilson, Counsel instructed by Blavo & Co
solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn promulgated  on
    29th January 2015, whereby the judge allowed  the  respondent's  appeal
    against the decision of the SSHD dated 29th August 2014 to  remove  the
    respondent from the UK.

 2. The respondent claims to  be  a  citizen  of  Eritrea.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal considered it necessary to make and  anonymity  direction.  In
    the circumstances I make an anonymity direction.

 3. By decision made on the 10th February 2015 leave to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appeared before me  to  determine
    in the first instance whether or not there is an error of  law  in  the
    original determination.

 4. The grounds of appeal  raise  the  issue  of  the  nationality  of  the
    respondent and whether Judge Quinn had made a finding  on  that  issue.
    Accompanying the Reason for Refusal Letter  are  Detailed  Reasons  for
    Refusal. In those detailed reasons are listed, which caused the SSHD to
    conclude that the respondent is not a national of Eritrea. In paragraph
    32 to 41 of the Detailed Reasons there is a careful assessment  of  the
    evidence and reasons are given for concluding that  the  respondent  is
    not a national of Eritrea.

 5. In the Decision in dealing with the issue of Nationality Judge Quinn in
    the final sentence of paragraph 12 states:-

        The Respondent [the appellant herein]  did  not  dispute  that  the
        Appellant [the respondent herein] was Eritrean.

 6. In the light of  that  Judge  Quinn  did  not  consider  the  issue  of
    nationality. The SSHD had clearly challenged  the  nationality  of  the
    respondent and no finding had been made on that issue. It was necessary
    to deal in the first instance with Nationality and the  judge  has  not
    done so. If the respondent is not a national of Eritrea, an  assessment
    needs to be made on the basis that he is not a national of  Eritrea  as
    to whether he is at risk.  No assessment of nationality has  been  made
    and no assessment of whether there is a  risk  in  such  circumstances.
    That is a material error of law. In turn that approach may impact  upon
    the findings made.

 7. Further as identified in the leave there  are  inconsistencies  in  the
    respondent's evidence.  Judge  Quinn  has  not  sought  to  assess  the
    discrepancies or given reason for failing to  do  so  or  assessed  the
    impact of those inconsistencies on the credibility of the  respondent's
    account. The failure to deal with the inconsistencies and  the  failure
    to give adequate  reasons  to  justify  that  approach  undermines  the
    findings of fact made by Judge Quinn.

 8. In the circumstances there are material errors of law and the  decision
    by the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand.

 9. I invited the parties to address me as to how the appeal should proceed
    if there were errors of law.

10. I have considered carefully the submissions made but  the  findings  of
    fact by the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand. It is necessary for fresh
    findings of fact to be made. In  the  light  of  that  the  appropriate
    course is for this appeal the decision to be heard afresh in the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Decision

11. There are material errors of law  in  the  determination.   I  set  the
    decision aside and direct that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard afresh.

Signed                              Dated



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
