
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06412/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 25 February 2015                  |On 21 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Madubuke, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant,  who  is  a  national  of  Pakistan,  has  been  granted
    permission to appeal the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  De
    Haney.  For reasons given in a decision dated 27 October 2014 the judge
    dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision dated 26  August
    2014 to remove him to Pakistan.

 2. The appellant had appealed on refugee, humanitarian  and  human  rights
    grounds.  His case on the first two limbs was based on the consequences
    of having joined Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM) in 2002 and the work he
    had undertaken  for  this  party.   He  had  been  ill-treated  by  the
    authorities in January or February 2008.  Whilst he was in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2011 the police raided his house seeking his whereabouts and
    beat his wife as  well  as  threatened  his  daughter.   On  return  to
    Pakistan in 2012 a friend who had  been  asked  about  the  appellant's
    whereabouts was murdered  and  in  the  same  year  the  appellant  was
    attacked by three unknown persons on motorbikes.  On the day  prior  to
    his arrival in the United Kingdom in July 2013 he was again attacked.

 3. The appellant's wife and child have joined him in  the  United  Kingdom
    and as well as the appellant, she gave evidence before the judge.

 4. The judge concluded the appellant had not been targeted as  claimed  or
    that he was at risk from political opponents.  In essence  he  did  not
    believe the appellant apart from the possibility that he was  a  member
    of MQM.  He did not consider that any interference  with  the  family's
    private lives was disproportionate.

 5. The grounds of challenge are several.   The  first  essentially  argues
    unfairness regarding the evidence of the appellant's wife.   The  judge
    noted that her statement dealt only with the  claimed  police  raid  at
    their house whilst he was in the United Kingdom in 2011.  He considered
    that she could have given evidence about his  membership  of  MQM,  his
    detention in 2008, the murder of his  friend  and  other  matters.   He
    considered the appellant's credibility undermined by the fact that  she
    had not done so.

 6. The second ground is tied in with the first in which it is argued  that
    the judge had failed to make a proper finding on the  evidence  of  the
    judge's wife.

 7. The third ground argues error by the judge attaching  undue  weight  to
    evidence that had not been called, in particular the testimony  of  the
    appellant's mother, who has lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for  twelve
    years.

 8. The fourth ground argues that the judge had failed to properly consider
    or "interpret the  evidence"  before  him  with  regard  to  the  power
    position of MQM in Karachi where the appellant lived.

 9. The fifth ground argues that the judge unfairly shifted the  burden  of
    proof to the appellant in respect of the allegation of  forgery  raised
    by the respondent in the refusal letter (at paragraphs 58 to 64).   The
    respondent had not specifically found that the documents that had  been
    produced were forgeries and  thus  the  appellant  had  discharged  the
    burden of proof that was upon him.  The judge had erred  in  concluding
    that the onus remained on the appellant.

10. The sixth ground argues an error by the judge in failing to  take  into
    account material evidence.  The respondent had considered there  was  a
    lack of clarity and poor quality of certain documents  which  had  been
    dealt with in new material produced at the  hearing.   Furthermore  the
    judge had erred in considering that there were inconsistencies with the
    FIR but had failed to mention what they were.

11. Although permission was granted on all grounds the focus of the judge's
    observations related  to  the  silence  in  the  determination  on  the
    evidence of appellant's wife and the conclusion  that  the  appellant's
    credibility had been undermined by the fact that  none  of  his  family
    members in the United Kingdom, his mother,  sister  and  brother-in-law
    had appeared to give evidence.

12. In the course of Mr Madubuke's submissions Mr Diwncyz candidly observed
    that his record of cross-examination of the appellant's wife  indicated
    that she had been asked questions about events in 2008.  This  included
    reference to her husband having stopped membership of MQM in  2008  and
    whether her life was in danger.  He accepted that the judge had made no
    findings on the credibility of the wife's  evidence.   He  acknowledged
    the difficulties caused  by  the  absence  of  any  indication  of  the
    evidence that the appellant's family  members  in  the  United  Kingdom
    might have led.

13. In my view the first two grounds identify legal error. The  judge  made
    these observations on the appellant's wife's testimony at [21]:

         "...I note that his wife's statement deals only  with  the  claimed
         police raid at their house whilst he was in the United  Kingdom  in
         2011. The appellant's wife could surely have given  evidence  about
         his membership of the MQM, about his detention in 2008, the  murder
         of his friend and other matters. I note that she has  not  done  so
         and I find that this undermines the appellant's claim".

14. It is correct that the appellant's wife's  statement  related  only  to
    matters in 2011 and the impact of those events on her and her  daughter
    but as revealed by Mr Diwncyz from his Record of Proceedings her cross-
    examination included additional  matters.   I  consider  therefore  the
    judge erred in failing to explain what weight he gave to  the  evidence
    in the statement apart from identifying its limited span;  he  made  no
    finding on her credibility. Furthermore  he  did  not  explain  how  he
    factored in the additional evidence at the hearing  or  may  well  have
    erred by overlooking it. I consider below  the  impact  of  this  error
    after my consideration of the other grounds which do  not  in  my  view
    identify error.

15. I consider the  judge  was  entitled  to  comment  on  the  absence  of
    corroborative evidence from the appellant's family members who no doubt
    would have been at least aware of the events in 2011 whilst he  was  in
    the United Kingdom.  With reference to [30]  of  the  determination  it
    appears that Mr Madubuke had made the  suggestion  that  they  had  not
    given evidence because the children had not got on  together.   He  was
    not in a position  as  the  appellant's  representative  to  give  such
    evidence.

16. I find no merit at all in the fourth ground;  the  judge  observed  the
    appellant had produced a volume of articles and documentation and  went
    on to observe:-

         "I also note and take account of the fact that  the  appellant  has
         produced selective documentation which shows that there are ongoing
         feuds between  different  political  parties  in  Pakistan  and  in
         Karachi.  The respondent has also produced references to  the  fact
         that the MQM is, and has been, the dominant party  in  Karachi  for
         many years (paragraphs 55 - 57 of the Reasons for Refusal  Letter).
         I find there is nothing in the documentation I have referred to  in
         the appellant's bundle which disputes this."

17. I am not persuaded that the judge failed  to  understand  the  evidence
    before him and this ground is no more than a disagreement.

18. As to the fifth ground relating to the burden of proof, the  extent  of
    the challenge to the documentation by the respondent was that:

      a) The copy of the membership to  MQM  was  a  photocopy  and  not  an
         original with a date of 3 June 2001 during which the appellant  had
         claimed he had stopped working for MQM.

      b) The Daily Khabrain Karachi article dated 16 July 2013 was also  not
         an original copy.  It was considered that the  quality  of  writing
         was below standard and its authenticity was therefore questionable.

19. The respondent therefore considered that the documents produced had not
    been found to assist the appellant's credibility.  It was not the  case
    that the respondent had found the documents forgeries but  had  applied
    the principles of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT  00439.   I  consider  the
    judge was correct to observe that it had been open to the appellant  to
    take steps in order to enhance the reliability of the evidence and  was
    unarguably entitled to observe that the onus was on  the  appellant  to
    prove his case.

20. As to the asserted failure by the judge to identify inconsistencies  in
    the First Information Report I consider the  ground  misconceived.   At
    [26] the judge noted a discrepancy in dates  over  the  timing  of  the
    reporting of the incident in 2013.  Although at [27] of his decision he
    does not identify the further inconsistencies, these  are  referred  to
    out of sequence further on the determination at [31].

21. Despite these positive aspects of the  determination,  I  am  persuaded
    that the failure by the judge to reach a conclusion on the  credibility
    of the appellant's wife has a sufficiently material impact  to  require
    the decision to be set aside and remade.  This is  a  protection  claim
    where there has been a comprehensive challenge to  credibility  and  it
    cannot be safely resolved without findings on all the evidence.   Since
    this will involve a complete rehearing of  the  appeal  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian grounds for which factual findings need to be reached,  it
    is appropriate for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for this purpose for hearing by other than Judge De Haney.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed on the basis  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside and the case is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for its reconsideration afresh.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant  and
his family members are granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.
This direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.



Signed        Date 20 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

