
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06274/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th February 2016                         |On 19th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                   mr a n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Mallick, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born on [ ]  1966.   On  12th  June
    2001 the Appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain with a  grant
    of status (asylum).

 2. On 28th May 2014 the Secretary of State notified the Appellant of their
    intention to withdraw his refugee  status  on  the  grounds  that  they
    believed that he had voluntarily re-availed himself of  the  protection
    of Iran.  Thereafter the Appellant's previously  instructed  solicitors
    submitted representations on 13th January 2015 and 11th February  2015.
    On  25th  March  2015  following   careful   consideration   of   those
    representations the Secretary of State decided that compelling  reasons
    had not been provided as to why the Home Office should  not  cease  the
    Appellant's status and the  cessation  of  refugee  status  letter  was
    issued.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Morron sitting at Taylor House on  24th  September  2015.
    In a decision promulgated on 9th October 2015  the  Appellant's  appeal
    was allowed and the Appellant was granted anonymity.  On  27th  October
    2015 the Secretary of State lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 9th  November  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidge
    refused the application for permission to  appeal.   On  25th  November
    2015 renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged.  Those renewed grounds were
    identical to the original.

 4. On 9th December 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Kekic noted that the Respondent's case was  that  having
    found  the  Appellant  had  a  fear  of  criminal  gangs  and  not  the
    authorities i.e. a non-Convention reason the  judge  erred  in  finding
    that the Appellant remained a refugee.  It was argued  that  the  judge
    also erred in failing to consider whether the Appellant would  be  able
    to seek the protection of  the  authorities  against  those  gangs  and
    whether relocation would be an option.  She considered the  grounds  to
    be arguable and granted permission.

 5. No Rule 24 response appears to  have  been  served  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  Whilst noting that this is an appeal by  the  Secretary  of
    State for the purpose of continuity throughout the appeal process Mr AN
    is referred to herein as the Appellant and the Secretary  of  State  as
    the Respondent.  The Appellant appears by  his  instructed  Counsel  Ms
    Mallick.  Ms Mallick has served a skeleton argument dated 25th February
    2015 in support of the appeal which I have given due consideration  to.
    The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr
    Staunton.

 6. The Appellant personally  did  not  attend.   Correspondence  has  been
    produced showing that the Appellant has a heart condition and  that  he
    is unable to attend.  A prior application  had  been  made  seeking  an
    adjournment but this had been refused on the basis that  the  Appellant
    did not need to be present at this hearing.  I further note that  there
    is a change of solicitors on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  his  present
    solicitors going on the court record on 17th February.  It is  on  that
    basis that the appeal comes before me to determine whether or not there
    is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. It is the contention of the Secretary of  State  that  the  Immigration
    Judge misdirected himself by finding the  Appellant  to  be  a  refugee
    despite his fear of return to Iran being for a  non-Convention  reason.
    Mr Staunton considers the nub of the appeal to be in paragraphs 26  and
    27 of the Immigration Judge's decision.  He points out it is  noted  by
    the Immigration  Judge  at  paragraph  27  that  the  Appellant  sought
    Facilitated Early Release in October 2009 and wished to return to  Iran
    to assist his brothers who had been arrested.  The Secretary  of  State
    therefore contends that at that point in time  the  Appellant  did  not
    express a fear of returning to Iran for any reason  and  therefore  was
    not outside his country of nationality due to a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution.  The judge accepts that the  Appellant  changed  his  mind
    after speaking to his mother and the  risk  he  faced  on  return.   He
    submits that the judge goes on to state that "I further find  that  the
    reason for his change of mind is more likely to have been his  fear  of
    the Iranian mafia than of the Iranian  authorities".   He  consequently
    submits that the judge had found that the Appellant was a refugee for a
    reason not covered by the Refugee Convention but for fear  of  criminal
    gangs and as a result the Appellant should not be classed as a  refugee
    if their fear is for a reason not covered by  the  Refugee  Convention.
    He  further  submits  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  consider  what
    protection the Appellant could get from the State and  his  ability  to
    relocate away from those that might wish to harm  him.   He  emphasises
    that the sole thrust of the Secretary of State's appeal is  that  there
    is no Convention reason  now  outstanding  preventing  the  Appellant's
    return to Iran.  He asked me to find a material error  of  law  and  to
    remit the matter to the First-tier for re-hearing.

 8. Ms Mallick takes me to her skeleton argument.  This is a very  detailed
    document which I have considered and it is inappropriate to recite  the
    content therein in detail.  She starts by  reminding  me  that  at  the
    hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  both  parties   were
    represented and that this is a question of whether refugee  status  can
    continue or whether it can be taken away.  She points out that this  is
    not an asylum appeal.  She takes me to the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and reminds me the legal issue is  set  out  therein  at
    paragraph 3.  That is: Article 1C(1) of  the  Convention  and  Protocol
    relating to the Status of Refugees which states as follows:

         "This Convention shall cease to apply to any person  falling  under
         the terms of Section A if ...

         (1)  he has voluntarily re-availed himself of the  country  of  his
             nationality."

    The burden of proof lies with the Appellant to prove, on the balance of
    probabilities, that Article 1C(1) does not apply him.

 9. She points out that Article 1C(1) requires an affirmative  action  from
    the Appellant and that it would be necessary for the Appellant  to  re-
    avail himself of his nationality and that this  did  not  happen.   She
    submits that the judge rightly focused on what the  Appellant  actually
    did pointing out that that shows clearly that the Appellant was not re-
    availing himself of his country of nationality.

10. She submits that that is why the Secretary of State wrote in the  terms
    that he did but that it was found that the Appellant did  not  have  an
    Iranian passport.  She submits that  there  was  no  evidence  for  the
    Secretary of State allowing him to conclude that the Appellant would re-
    avail himself of his Iranian nationality.

11. Ms Mallick submits that in granting permission UTJ Kekic focused on the
    wrong question.  She takes me to the objective evidence  of  the  UNHCR
    Handbook at paragraph 48 therein which  states  that  possession  of  a
    passport cannot always be evidence of loyalty on the part of the holder
    or as an indication of the absence of fear and that the mere possession
    of a valid national passport is not a bar to refugee  status.   Further
    any national passport or an extension of  its  validity  under  certain
    exceptional circumstances would not involve terminating refugee status;
    for example whereas the holder of a  national  passport  would  not  be
    permitted to return to the country of his nationality without  specific
    permission.  She consequently submits that what  has  happened  is  not
    such that would constitute re-availment and  thereafter  refers  me  to
    paragraph 128 of the handbook which suggests that nationality  must  be
    expressly or impliedly accepted before cessation  under  Article  1C(2)
    would be appropriate and that the  guidelines  on  the  application  of
    cessation clauses suggest that the mere possibility of reacquiring  the
    lost nationality by exercising a right of option is not  sufficient  to
    put an end to refugee status.  She therefore submits that the Appellant
    did not nothing to re-avail his status.  The Secretary of State accepts
    that the burden is on the Appellant.  Thus she  contends  he  has  done
    nothing to re-avail himself of his status and that the error  that  the
    Secretary of State has fallen into and Judge Kekic is considering  this
    case as an asylum appeal when it is not.  It is a re-availment appeal.

12. She takes me to paragraph 27 of the decision pointing out that all  the
    Appellant did was sign early release relating to  the  balance  of  his
    prison sentence in Iran.  She submits that that did not constitute  re-
    availment and that the judge  has  made  the  appropriate  and  correct
    conclusions.  Further she  submits  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider the Appellant's additional fear in 2007 and that paragraph  27
    does not  say  that  the  Appellant  was  no  longer  in  fear  of  the
    authorities by reason of his faith.  She asked me to find that there is
    no material error of law  and  to  dismiss  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

15. I start by reminding myself that the issue before me  is  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I am not re-hearing this appeal.   This  is
    an appeal against the  decision  of  the  judge  to  find  whether  the
    Appellant has obtained an Iranian passport and thus re-availed  himself
    of  the  protection  of  that  country.   The  decision  is  very  well
    constructed and logically set out.  It starts by noting the basis  upon
    which  the  Appellant  was  granted  asylum  back  in  November   1996.
    Thereafter it sets out the legal issue  and  the  facts  in  detail  at
    paragraphs 7 to 23 the evidence.  The judge thereafter goes on to  make
    detailed and important findings of fact at paragraphs 24 to 28.   Judge
    Morron  considered  that  the  sole  reason  given  for   ceasing   the
    Appellant's refugee status was that he had obtained an Iranian passport
    and thereby  re-availed  himself  of  the  protection  of  the  Iranian
    Government.  The Secretary of State did not decide cessation  based  on
    Mr N's agreeing to return to Iran  to  serve  his  prison  sentence  in
    exchange for early release and in any  case  Mr  N  changed  his  mind.
    Therefore the agreement to facilitate early release was not  sufficient
    irrespective of the reasons that played on his mind  at  the  time  and
    that is something considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

16. The judge had correctly started off by considering the reason  for  the
    refugee status was that the Appellant was a Christian and  the  reasons
    why the Secretary of State applied Article 1C.  That reason  the  judge
    found was that the Appellant had  an  Iranian  passport.   However  the
    judge thereafter went  on  to  make  findings  accepting  that  it  was
    plausible that Mr N was seeking to go to Austria with his family on his
    UK travel documents and that he did not have an Iranian passport.

17. Thereafter the judge made findings of fact at paragraph 27 and 28 which
    he was entitled to.  He found that Mr N was prepared to return to  Iran
    in October 2009 but changed his mind in less than a week  and  although
    the judge found that the reason for his change of mind was the  Iranian
    mafia it was never suggested by the Secretary of State that  Mr  N  had
    suggested that he  no  longer  feared  persecution  because  he  was  a
    Christian.

18. Thereafter the judge had focused on the  key  issue  that  he  had  not
    obtained a genuine Iranian passport and gave reasons  which  the  judge
    was entitled to for reaching that conclusion.

19. The matter to be decided was whether  or  not  the  Appellant  had  re-
    availed himself of the protection of Iran and  the  judge's  conclusion
    that he had is properly framed in the context of the  argument  put  on
    the day.  In  such  circumstances  the  decision  reveals  no  arguable
    material error of law and the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
