
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/06897/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th April 2016                         |On 22nd April 2016                |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between


                            Rajendran Thushandev
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel, instructed by Loshana &
Co Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Sri Lanka born on 1st December 1994.
     The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 23rd September 2014  when  he
    was given leave to enter as  a  student.   The  Appellant  applied  for
    asylum on 22nd October 2014.  That application was refused on 9th April
    2015 for the reasons given in the Respondent's  letter  of  that  date.
    The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Devittie (the Judge) sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  13th
    October 2015.  He decided to dismiss the appeal on asylum  grounds  for
    the reasons given in  his  Decision  dated  25th  November  2015.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and  on  24th  February
    2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal because he found  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant lacking in credibility and therefore  he  was  not  satisfied
    that the Appellant had been involved in any LTTE activity in Sri Lanka.
     The Judge also found that even taking  the  Appellant's  case  at  its
    highest, the Appellant did not come within any of the  risk  categories
    identified in GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).

 4. At the hearing, it was agreed  between  the  representatives  that  the
    decision of the Judge contained  material  errors  of  law  and  should
    therefore be set  aside  for  the  reasons  given  in  the  grounds  of
    application.  I find accordingly.  The Judge in  assessing  credibility
    had failed to give due weight to the expert medical report of Professor
    Lingham  particularly  as  it  complied  with  the  Istanbul  Protocol.
    Further, the Judge had taken as  his  starting  point  the  Appellant's
    delay in seeking asylum and had therefore given too much weight to  his
    finding that the Appellant's credibility was damaged in accordance with
    Section 8, Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act
    2004.  Finally, the Judge had failed to consider the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant in the light of the background country  information.   In  my
    view all these factors amount to material errors of law and I set aside
    the decision of the Judge.

 5. I did not proceed to remake the decision of the Judge.  I  agreed  with
    the submission of both representatives that  that  decision  should  be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with  paragraph  7.2(b)
    of the Practice Statements as the Judge's errors of law relate  to  his
    fact-finding.  At the remake hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal,  none
    of the Judge's findings as to credibility and fact are to be preserved.





Notice of Decision

 6. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside that decision.

    The decision is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

 7. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.  I was not
    asked to do so, and indeed I find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


