
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06435/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 30 August 2013                             |On 27 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE



                                   Between

                                     DG
                           (Anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Heller, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   I make an  order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellant.

Introduction

2.   On 15 May 2013, the Court of Appeal remitted the appellant's appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal for re-determination.  The accompanying Statement of
    Reasons usefully summarises the matter:

         "1.      The appellant is a citizen  of  Albania  who  entered  the
             United Kingdom on 13 March 2011 and claimed asylum on 15 March
             2011.  The respondent refused the appellant's claim on 11  May
             2011. The appellant appealed and his appeal was  dismissed  by
             Immigration Judge  Sharp  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  7
             November 2011. Permission to appeal that decision was  granted
             and the determination of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside
             to be re-made.  The matter was reheard on 13 March 2012 before
             Deputy Upper Tribunal Immigration  Judge  Holmes  who,  in   a
             determination dated 3 July 2012, made adverse findings  as  to
             the appellant's credibility and dismissed the  appeal  finding
             that it had not been proved that the  appellant  would  be  at
             risk from a blood feud on his return to Albania as claimed.


         2.   The appellant then ought permission to appeal to the Court  of
             Appeal.  Permission was granted by  the  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  David
             Keene on 23 November  2012  (sealed  order  dated  5  December
             2012).


         3.   The  respondent  has  considered  the  appellant's  notice  of
             appeal,  accompanying  bundle  and   skeleton   argument   and
             considers that the Upper Tribunal materially erred in  law  in
             first failing  to  provide  a  determination  which  concerned
             issues of  credibility  within  a  reasonable  period  of  the
             hearing and second in relying on material that was not adduced
             in  evidence  and  upon  which  the  parties  were  not  given
             opportunity to comment, namely a report of the Immigration and
             Refugee Board of Canada dated 1 February 2012.


         4.   The parties are  in  agreement  that  this  matter  should  be
             remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  re-determination   in
             accordance with the current country  situation  prevailing  in
             Albania."


The appellant's written statements

3.   The appellant  has  made  four  statements  in  connection  with  these
    proceedings.  In the first, he describes the  alleged  blood  feud,  as
    originating in a dispute between his family and the A  family  about  a
    piece of land.  In August 2007, the appellant was grazing  cattle  near
    the disputed land where he saw members of the A family working it.   He
    shouted at them and was beaten up  by  them  as  a  consequence.   Upon
    arriving home with the news, the appellant's uncle took a gun and  shot
    BA, fatally wounding him.  The A family sent "elders to formally notify
    us that our family was now in a blood feud with  the  A  family".   The
    appellant's father and  elder  brother  were  "immediate  targets"  and
    "began to stay indoors".  A week after  the  killing,  the  father  and
    brother fled the village.

4.   In September 2007 a maternal uncle took the appellant  and  his  mother
    to live with him in the town of P; but the A family got to  know  about
    this.  By the summer of 2009, even before the appellant had turned  16,
    a message was received from the A family saying  that  since  they  had
    failed to find the father, brother  or  uncle,  the  appellant  was  to
    become the next target of the blood feud.  Attempts  at  reconciliation
    failed.  Accordingly, the maternal uncle decided that it was better for
    the appellant to leave Albania.  He boarded a lorry that  took  him  to
    France.  After two failed attempts to come to the UK  from  France,  he
    finally arrived here in March 2011.

5.   In his second witness statement  dated  12  June  2011,  the  appellant
    sought to reply to various matters raised in the  respondent's  letter,
    refusing his application for asylum.  The appellant said  that  it  was
    difficult for him to provide evidence that his uncle had killed  BA but
    the "fact that my uncle fled from the village and the  police  came  to
    our  house" was said  to  be  evidence  of  suspicion  at  least.   The
    appellant said that the reason he was not harmed for  the  first  month
    after the death of BA was because he was indoors  in  "self-isolation".
    This was in accordance with the laws of the Kanun, which provided  that
    a blood feud target "is never attacked in his  own home. I could   have
    been attacked if I am  outside".   The  appellant  contended  that  the
    police could not protect "anyone from  blood  feud  revenge"  and  that
    blood feuds were "a significant part of the lives of  most  Albanians".
    State protection was not an option  and  "anyone  can  find  anyone  in
    Albania" given its small population grouped around a few  major  towns.
    As for the fact that he could live in a suburb of Tirana and  had  done
    so for over three years, "I lived in hiding, indoors. Of course I could
    [not] live in that situation for the rest of my life".

6.   Dealing with the issue as to why he had not claimed asylum  in  France,
    the appellant said that the situation  there  was  "very  loose".   One
    could get in and out of the country quite easily. I  felt  insecure  in
    France.  I also saw a lot of people who were attempting to claim asylum
    in France but the French authorities  were  simply  not  interested  in
    their claims.  I myself was stopped twice by the police  but  they  did
    not provide me with any help to communicate with them".

7.   The appellant said  that  his  father's  whereabouts  were  not  known,
    although it was believed he could be in hiding in Albania.  He said  he
    would provide a document from the Nationwide  Reconciliation  Committee
    to confirm the work they had done to seek a reconciliation in his case.



8.   The third witness statement is dated 5  March  2012.   With  this,  the
    appellant  provided  "an  up-to-date  letter  from  the  Reconciliation
    Committee dated February 2012".  He had asked  his  mother  to  procure
    this letter, which had been  delivered  by  a  friend  travelling  from
    Albania to the UK.  It was stamped and sealed by the CNR.

9.   The appellant said that in the beginning "I did not even  have  contact
    with my family.  I even lost my passport  in  France".   The  appellant
    had suffered injuries following the attack by  the  A  family  and  had
    moments of panic and anxiety.  Although he felt  safer  in  the  UK  "I
    still feel scared". He said that he had had to  go  into  isolation  in
    Albania since "if I had gone out I would have been apprehended as I was
    made a target and stayed indoors. From 2007 when the events   happened,
    I was very young and not a target straightaway. From when just before I
    turned 16 in 2009, I was made a target". He said he had lived with  his
    maternal uncle in the suburbs of Tirana.  He had been   in  France  for
    two months staying in a camp.  When he had  asked  for  help  from  the
    French police he had been  "slapped" and since he did not  want  to  be
    hit again, he would run away whenever he saw the police.  His agent had
    told him that he would be going to the UK and the  appellant  was  told
    "to wait at this abandoned house in France".  There had been  at  least
    two more attempts to reconciliation since the last appeal hearing.

10.  The appellant said that prior to his  departure  from  Albania  he  had
    been given a phone number (mobile number) belonging to  his  family  as
    they had no landline. This number had been written on a piece of  paper
    but the appellant believed it had been lost  when  he  had  washed  his
    trousers with the paper in it.

11.  The appellant's fourth statement is dated 19 August 2013. He said  that
    despite  the  previous  Tribunal's  adverse  credibility  findings   he
    maintained he would be at risk of  persecution  because  of  the  blood
    feud.  He confirmed that he was currently in contact  with  his  mother
    and maternal uncle in Albania.  His mother "continues to live  with  my
    uncle in ... Tirana".  They had recently informed  the  appellant  that
    his father and elder brother had made contact with his mother "and said
    that they were safe and living abroad after they fled the village". The
    whereabouts of the uncle who had killed BA remained unknown.

12.  The appellant's mother and uncle  had  told  the  appellant  that  they
    would not be able to obtain police reports of the murder "because  they
    did not have any authority  as  the  matter  was  against  my  paternal
    uncle".  Although the assault on the appellant had not been because  of
    the blood feud, young teenagers in Albania "are considered to be  young
    men and can be targets of feuds".  Gjin Marku of the CNR  had  provided
    two letters in support of the blood feud.  The one  dated  24  February
    2012 confirmed his signature was genuine.  There was also a letter from
    the head of the municipality.

The first determination of the appellant's appeal

13.  In the determination promulgated on 7 November 2011, Immigration  Judge
    Sharp dismissed the appellant's appeal.  Judge  Sharp  found  that  the
    appellant was not a credible witness. Although  the  determination  was
    subsequently set aside and the decision in the appeal re-made by Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Holmes, the issue of what Judge Sharp recorded the
    appellant as saying at the hearing is of potential significance for the
    purposes of the present proceedings:

         "35.     He was asked about the arrangements made for his departure
             and he  agreed that he had never been outside  Albania  before
             and his mother  and  uncle  sent   him  across  the  world  by
             himself.   He  was  asked  whether  he  had   any   means   of
             communicating with his family and he explained that there  was
             no method of contract agreed and he did  not  take  any  phone
             number with  him and his uncle and mother did not  know  where
             he was other than that he was travelling through France.


         ...


         40.  He was finally asked further questions as to the  arrangements
             made when he left Albania and  reiterated  that  although  his
             mother said goodbye to him, they made  no  discussions  as  to
             remaining in contact or communicating in the future.  He  said
             his uncle had a mobile telephone  but  he  did  not  take  the
             mobile number. Equally his uncle wished no  confirmation  that
             he arrived despite the fact that his uncle was paying for  his
             trip.


         41.      He then reiterated how he eventually  managed  to  get  in
             touch with them again through the Social Services and spoke to
             his mother and  it  was  through  the  person  met  at  Social
             Services who knew their family."

The second determination of the appellant's appeal

14.  As I have already observed, Deputy  Judge  Holmes's  determination  was
    quashed by the Court of Appeal.  He too found the appellant not  to  be
    credible.  At [70] of the  determination,  Judge  Holmes  recorded  the
    following evidence:-

         "The appellant was asked why he had initially  denied  being  given
         contact details for his mother and maternal  uncle,  and  had  then
         changed his account to claim that he had lost those contact details
         whilst in France as a result of washing his trousers which  had  in
         the pocket a piece of paper with the  contact  details  on  ...  He
         offered no explanation for the inconsistency, which I am  satisfied
         exists, but asserted that his most recent  version  of  events  was
         correct. He then claimed however to  have  lost  both  the  contact
         details and his passport at the  same  time,  because  the  contact
         details were on a piece of paper inside the passport.   He  gave  a
         new explanation for the loss, which was that  he  had  dropped  his
         passport when climbing onto a lorry in  France.   He  then  changed
         tack again, and said he could not now recall if the contact details
         were in the passport, or separately  on  a  piece  of  paper  in  a
         pocket."

The appellant's oral evidence on 30 August 2013

15.  The  appellant  gave  evidence  with  the  assistance  of  an  Albanian
    interpreter, who I am satisfied  the  appellant  understood  (and  vice
    versa).  The appellant sought to  rely  on  all  four  of  his  witness
    statements, saying that they were true.  While he was in  France,  what
    might have happened was that the telephone number written on a piece of
    paper had fallen out of his trousers while he was washing them;  or  he
    might have lost it in his wallet, when he got onto a lorry.   This  was
    when he also lost  his passport, with the result that  all  he  had  on
    arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  his  ID  card,  which  he  kept
    separately.

16.  The appellant was asked about the psychiatric report  prepared  on  him
    by Dr Hajioff on  6  March  2012.   This  described  the  appellant  as
    "suffering from chronic PTSD and has evidence of injury consistent with
    his account".  It was said that he would "benefit from  anti-depressant
    medication" in the form of specified anti-depressants  and  also  "from
    psychological treatment such as counselling". The appellant  was  asked
    if he had ever received such treatment or counselling.  He  said   not.
    This was because although he had a GP he did not speak to his GP  about
    the matter because he could not speak English.  In cross-examination he
    said he had not been to his GP after receiving the medical report.  The
    appellant's social worker had not said anything to help him about  this
    matter and the appellant had chosen not to mention it again as  he  was
    afraid of upsetting the social worker.

17.   The appellant said that the A family was a very big family  who  lived
    all over Albania and would be able to find  him, wherever he  might  be
    in that country.

18.  In cross-examination, the appellant was asked about the passage in  the
    determination of Immigration  Judge  Sharp,  where  the  appellant  was
    recorded as saying that he had not taken any telephone number with him.
     The appellant said that he had been speaking at that point  about  his
    home telephone number, which he had not  taken  but  he  did  take  the
    mobile number.

19.  The appellant said that he moved to Tirana in  September  2007.   Asked
    to account for the  absence  of  risk  to  him  before  he  moved,  the
    appellant said that he was under age and so not under  threat  but  his
    brother and father were older and that is why they had  run  away.   He
    also remained in the  house with his mother.  Asked why he had not left
    Tirana for some two years (2011) after hearing  in  2009  that  he  was
    considered a target of the feud, the appellant said he hesitated to  be
    separated from  his mother because she was in distress.   He  also  did
    not think he would have to leave because he hoped that the  feud  would
    be reconciled.

20.  The appellant was asked about the letters from Mr Marku. That dated  24
    February 2012 was in the appellant's bundle. The appellant said he  did
    not know about the alleged existence of a further letter.

21.  The appellant said that the plan was for him  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom as it was known that he would be safe here. He had  not  sought
    protection in France because Albania was in Europe.   Asked  what  that
    meant, the appellant said that one could  use an Albanian passport   to
    travel to Italy or France.  Thus the A family could  travel  to  France
    but not to the United Kingdom.  Asked how the A family  would  know  he
    was in France, the appellant said that there were lots of Albanians  in
    France and it was easier to travel  to  France.   There  were  probably
    members of the A family in France.

22.  It was put to the  appellant  that  if  there  was  any  truth  in  the
    assertion that there was a blood feud concerning  him,  he  would  have
    been harmed in Tirana during the eighteen months  or  so  spent  there.
    The appellant said that he was locked up in the  house and according to
    the Kanun, one could not be  harmed  whilst  inside  the  home.  Having
    stayed indoors for so long he could not remain  there  any  longer.  He
    therefore decided to leave.

23.  It was put to the appellant that  at  questions  107  and  108  of  his
    asylum interview, he had said that he was "mainly" inside and that,  he
    must, therefore, have gone outside on occasions.   The  appellant  said
    that he rarely went out but when  he  did  so  it  would  be  with  his
    maternal uncle, such as obtain his passport .

24.  In answer to a question from me, as to where  his  father  was  living,
    the appellant said that he did not know; other than that his mother had
    told  him that the father was living outside Albania.  His  father  had
    spoken to his mother and the mother had said that he had not  told  her
    where  he  was.   Asked  if  that  was  not  strange,  given  that  the
    appellant's mother  knew  that  he  was  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    appellant responded that his father  had  not  said.   As  far  as  the
    appellant knew, the letters from Mr Marku were genuine.

Other evidence

25.  Besides the written materials to which I  have  already  referred,  the
    appellant's bundle contains a number  of  other  evidential  documents,
    including the UKBA COI Report on Albania (March 2012), an expert report
    of Antonia Young (incomplete  but  subsequently  supplied  in  complete
    form), the "certificate" of 24 February 2012 signed by Gjin Marku (with
    translation ) and a certificate, with translation, dated 9  June  2011,
    purported to be issued by the head of the Kala e Dodes municipality  in
    Dider, Albania.  In reaching my decision in this  appeal,  I  have  had
    regard to the entirety of the evidence in the appellant's bundle, along
    with the oral evidence and  what  previous  judges  have  recorded  the
    appellant as saying (as  opposed  to  their  conclusions  thereon).   I
    considered all of this evidence  as a totality.

Burden and standard of proof

26.  The burden of proof is on the  appellant,  to  show  that  there  is  a
    reasonable likelihood (or real risk) that, if returned to  Albania,  he
    would suffer persecution within the ambit  of  the  Refugee  Convention
    (and Qualification Directive) or  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
    punishment, contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.   I  have  applied  that
    standard of proof in the present case.

Country guidance

27.  The relevant country guidance case  is  EH  (Blood  feuds)  Albania  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00348.  For our purposes,  the  relevant  passages  of  the
    guidance are as follows:


   1.  While there remain a number of active blood feuds  in  Albania,  they
   are few and declining.  There are  a  small  number  of  deaths  annually
   arising from those feuds and a small number of adults and children living
   in self-confinement for protection.   Government  programmes  to  educate
   self-confined children exist but very few children are involved in them.

   ...

   3. The Albanian state has taken steps to improve state protection, but in
   areas where Kanun law predominates  (particularly  in  northern  Albania)
   those steps do not yet provide  sufficiency  of  protection  from  Kanun-
   related blood-taking if an active feud exists and affects the  individual
   claimant.  Internal relocation to an area of Albania  less  dependent  on
   the Kanun may provide sufficient  protection,  depending  on  the  reach,
   influence, and commitment to prosecution of the  feud  by  the  aggressor
   clan.

   ...

   5. Where there is an  active  feud  affecting  an  individual  and  self-
   confinement is the only option, that person  will  normally  qualify  for
   Refugee status.

     ...

   7. In order to establish that there is an active blood feud affecting him
   personally, an appellant must produce satisfactory individual evidence of
   its existence in relation to him.   In  particular,  the  appellant  must
   establish:

        i) his profile as a potential target of  the  feud  identified  and
           which family carried out the most recent killing; and

      (ii)        whether the appellant has been, or other  members  of  his
      family  have  been,  or  are  currently,  in  self-confinement  within
      Albania.

   8.  Attestation  letters  from  Albanian  non-governmental  organisations
   should not in general be regarded as reliable evidence of  the  existence
   of a feud.

   9.  Documents originating from the Albanian courts, police or prosecution
   service, if genuine, may assist in establishing the existence of a  blood
   feud at the date of the document relied upon,  subject  to  the  test  of
   reliability set out in A v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
   (Pakistan) [2002] UKIAT 00439, [2002] Imm A R 318 (Tanveer Ahmed).


28.  Apart from the various items  of  background  evidence,  testifying  to
    there being serious issues regarding the genuineness of letters  issued
    by Mr Marku on behalf of CNR, the Tribunal  in  EH,  which  heard  oral
    evidence from Mr Marku,  formed  a  "strongly  negative  view"  of  his
    credibility and of "the value of any attestation letters from the  CNR"
    [54].  The Tribunal also found as follows:-

         "55.     We reject the evidence of the CNR and Mr  Marku  that  the
             blood feud problem is large and growing;  international  press
             reports before us are all traceable to his  evidence  and  are
             tainted by its unreliability.  We noted that Mr Marku admitted
             that at least some CNR letters had been forged by Mr Loci, and
             that the organisation would accept benefits in  kind  such  as
             cars, as part of the mediation process.  We consider that  the
             organisation and Mr Marku are wholly unreliable  and  that  no
             weight can be placed on the attestation letters they  produce.
             We also reject Mr Marku's evidence that the CNR  is  the  only
             body which can issue attestation letters: we note the position
             of the Albanian authorities that attestation is a  matter  for
             the prosecutors and the courts.


         56.      On the totality of the evidence  before  us,  we  consider
             that Mr Marku's  claimed  expertise  is  so  damaged  that  an
             attestation letter from the CNR, or indeed  from  any  of  the
             mediation  organisations  now  under  investigation,  adds  no
             weight whatsoever to an otherwise unsatisfactory account of an
             alleged blood feud. We do not go so  far  as  saying  that  an
             attestation letter ought to be  regarded  as  detracting  from
             such an account, although such a conclusion may be permissible
             on the individual facts  of  a  particular  case.  But,  as  a
             general proposition,  we  consider  that  where  an  appellant
             relies on a CNR or other NGO attestation letter to  prove  the
             existence of a blood feud from which he would be  at  risk  on
             return, that is unlikely to be determinative of the appeal  in
             his  favour.  By  contrast,  documents  found   genuinely   to
             originate from the  Albanian  courts,  police  or  prosecution
             service may assist in establishing the existence  of  a  blood
             feud at the date of the document relied upon.  However,  given
             the evidence regarding corruption in Albania,  the  fact  that
             such a document  comes  from  its  asserted  source  will  not
             necessarily be probative of the reliability of the information
             contained within that  document.  Judicial  fact-finders  may,
             therefore need to assess  its  reliability  on  Tanveer  Ahmed
             principles."

Discussion

29.  In  order  to  establish  a  claim  to  international  protection,  the
    appellant in the present case needs to  show that there is a reasonable
    likelihood that he is involved in a blood feud with the A family. If he
    is not, that is the end of the matter.   Accordingly,  the  first  and,
    possibly, only issue is whether the appellant is reasonably  likely  to
    be telling the truth.  In considering that question, I have placed  his
    own  evidence  of  his  alleged  experiences  in  the  context  of  the
    background  evidence.  This  includes  the  expert  report  of  Antonia
    Young.  However, her evidence is set out in a  report  dated  1  August
    2011.  By contrast, the Tribunal in EH analysed evidence  up  to  early
    2012 and did so on a more comprehensive basis.  I do not consider  that
    there is anything in Ms Young's report or, indeed, in any other of  the
    materials adduced on behalf of the appellant, to  cause  me  to  depart
    from the country guidance in EH (applying Practice Direction 12 of  the
    Senior President's Practice Directions of 2012).   In  particular,  the
    background material, read overall, does not, with respect, point to  an
    "appalling situation concerning an increase  in  the  number  of  blood
    feuds currently operating in Albania" (as asserted on  page  11  of  Ms
    Young's report).   Furthermore,  although  that  report  notes  certain
    problems that had been  identified by others in the  utterances  of  Mr
    Marku of the CNU, the full extent of  those  problems  became  apparent
    only in the proceedings leading to promulgation of the country guidance
    in EH.  When dealing with  the  appellant's  specific  case,  Ms  Young
    appears to have placed weight on the certificate allegedly issued by Mr
    Marku's organisation (page 18).  She also speculated that the appellant
    "might not have undertaken the self-isolation that his father and uncle
    imposed on themselves" following the death of BA,  owing  to  his  age,
    when the appellant's evidence points to the fact that he did do so.

30.  Whilst I accept the fact that the medical report provides some  support
    for the appellant's account (I note particularly the Istanbul  Protocol
    terminology used at [35] of the report), none of the physical  symptoms
    examined by the doctor, even if consistent or highly consistent with an
    incident of personal violence, have a  necessarily  strong  correlation
    with the fundamentals of the appellant's case; namely, he was  attacked
    so as to lead to a fatal retributive killing and an ongoing blood feud,
    in which the appellant is a target.

31.  Despite Miss Heller's  able  submissions,  I  have  come  to  the  firm
    conclusion that the appellant is not telling the truth as  regards  his
    claim to be in need of international protection.  I make that  finding,
    notwithstanding the supportive elements  to  which  I  have  just  made
    reference, as well as bearing in mind his  comparative  youth  and,  in
    particular, that he was around 17� years of age when he arrived in  the
    United Kingdom in March 2011 (and when he was interviewed by  the  Home
    Office).

32.  I agree with the respondent that  there  is  a  striking  contradiction
    between, on the one hand, the asserted animosity of the  A  family  and
    its capacity to seek out the appellant, not only throughout Albania but
    also, it is alleged, in France and, on the other  hand,  that  family's
    failure, particularly from 2007 to 2011, to take any steps  to  inflict
    physical harm on the appellant.  This is particularly  so,  given  that
    the evidence, as it has emerged, indicates that the appellant may  well
    have been a target from the outset, given that teenagers  are  said  by
    him to be at risk, and that nothing befell him  following  the  alleged
    indication in 2009 from the A family that he was now a target. This  is
    particularly so, given that  the  appellant  did  not  obey  the  Kanun
    principles of seclusion, whilst in Tirana but would go out from time to
    time (albeit in the company of his uncle).

33.  The appellant failed to give a coherent explanation  for  the  decision
    in 2011 to leave Albania.  Whilst I  accept  Miss  Heller's  submission
    that a person living in confinement might well, after time, come to the
    conclusion  that,  in  effect,  "enough  is  enough",  the  appellant's
    evidence indicates that attempts  at  reconciliation  were,  allegedly,
    still ongoing when he decided to  leave.  This  sits  poorly  with  the
    appellant's assertion that he did not want to cause his mother distress
    and did not see a  reason  to  leave,  whilst  he  harboured  hopes  of
    reconciliation: [19] above.

34.  As a judicial fact-finder, I am not  compelled  by  section  8  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  to
    conclude that the appellant's case is necessarily damaged significantly
    by his failure to claim asylum in France, where he  remained  for  some
    one and a half months. By the same token,  however,  the  existence  of
    section 8 does not preclude me from placing very considerable weight on
    events in France, if I find that is warranted.  In the present case,  I
    consider it clearly is.  The appellant has given contradictory  reasons
    for not claiming asylum.  These range from indifference on the part  of
    the  French  authorities  to  outright  hostility.   All  of  that   is
    indicative of an interest in claiming asylum in  France  (supported  by
    the comment in his screening interview that he did,  in  fact,  try  to
    claim).  However, in evidence to me, the appellant was adamant that  he
    was intent on getting to the United Kingdom because he feared that  the
    A family could detect him, even in  France,  owing  to  the  fact  that
    Albanians were able to travel to France more easily than they could  to
    the United Kingdom.

35.  The appellant has also been significantly inconsistent on the issue  of
    whether, at some stage during his stay in France, he  did  or  did  not
    have a telephone number, which would have enabled him  to  contact  his
    relatives in Albania.  When the discrepancy  between  his  most  recent
    statements on this issue and what he  had  said  to  Immigration  Judge
    Sharp was put to him, the  appellant  attempted  to  suggest  that,  in
    answering questions at Judge Sharp's hearing, he had been referring  to
    the absence of a  landline  telephone  number,  rather  than  a  mobile
    number. That is, however, impossible to reconcile with the totality  of
    what Judge Sharp recorded in his determination:  [13]  above.   Despite
    the problems regarding the findings of Judge Sharp,  it  has  not  been
    shown that the latter incorrectly recorded the evidence.

36.  The appellant would have me believe that,  although  his  mother  knows
    that he is in the United Kingdom, his own father has not  seen  fit  to
    tell his mother where his father and brother are residing,  other  than
    that it  is  not  in  Albania.   Miss  Heller  submitted  that  it  was
    speculation to derive anything from this. I disagree. Whilst  I  accept
    that the appellant cannot be held responsible for the acts or omissions
    of his father, it is frankly incoherent and incredible for  the  mother
    to be unaware of the location of the father  and  brother  and/or  that
    those persons, if outside of Albania, would nevertheless have feared to
    tell the mother where they are.

37.  I have considered  the  terms  of  the  certificate  of  Mr  Marku,  as
    translated (page 20 of part A of the bundle).  Even without the benefit
    of the country guidance in EH, the terms of this  document  are  highly
    problematic.  It certainly does not in any way  materially  assist  the
    appellant's case.  On the contrary, given the problems I have with  the
    appellant's  credibility,  and  given  what  is  now  known  about  the
    unreliability of Mr Marku, I conclude, on the individual facts of  this
    case, that the decision to  enlist  his  support  further  damages  the
    overall credibility of the appellant's claim (see [56] of EH).

38.  In reaching  my  findings,  I  have  specifically  had  regard  to  the
    certificate (bundle part A page 22) said to be from the head of Kala  e
    Dodes Municipality.  This is dated 9 June 2011.  Although there  is  no
    indication that Gjin Marku has had a hand in  the  production  of  this
    document, it is in its own terms problematic. It purports to  "declare"
    that the appellant "has left Albania because his life was threatened by
    the [A] family because of conflict that his  paternal  uncle  [AG]  had
    with [BA]".  There is  no  explanation  as  to  how  the  head  of  the
    municipality came to know that the appellant had  left  Albania.   More
    significantly,  the  certificate  makes  no  mention  at  all  of   the
    appellant's assertion that  his  uncle  fatally  wounded  BA.   On  the
    contrary, it goes  on  to  describe  the  "conflict"  between  the  two
    families as having "happened a few years  ago  because  of  a  property
    dispute that ended up with the  use  of  the  fire  arms".   Since  the
    municipality's "committee created for the reconciliation of  the  blood
    feuds" is supposed to have  been  involved  in  reconciliation  in  the
    present case, this lack of detail assumes significance.   The  same  is
    true of the entirely vague description of the A family  being  "a   big
    family".

39.  Despite the fact that the appellant has claimed that the  threat  posed
    by the A family was reported to the police, no police records have been
    forthcoming.  Likewise, there is no official record for  the  death  of
    BA.   Antonia  Young  does  not  appear  to  have  undertaken  her  own
    independent research to identify potentially reliable  records  of  the
    feud.  There is no evidence from independent  sources  to  support  the
    surprising assertion in the appellant's fourth written  statement  that
    the family in Albania could not obtain  official  confirmation  of  the
    alleged murder of BA because the matter involved the father's  side  of
    the family: [12] above.

40.  In all the circumstances, I have concluded that the appellant is not  a
    witness of truth and that he is, in reality, a  party  to  an  attempt,
    involving members of his family, to concoct an entirely false claim  to
    international protection.  No Article 8 claim was advanced on behalf of
    the appellant at the hearing; nor is such a claim "Robinson obvious".

Decision

41.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed on asylum and human rights  grounds
    (Article  3).   The  appellant  is  not  entitled  to  the   grant   of
    humanitarian protection.





                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane


