
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06616/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On May 13, 2015                      |On May 14, 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                     F C
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Mr O'Ryan, Counsel, instructed by Compass
                        Immigration law Ltd
    For the Respondent:     Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sierra  Leone.  On  August  7,  2010  she
    entered the United Kingdom with a valid entry clearance.  This  enabled
    her to remain in the United Kingdom until December 2, 2010. On December
    13, 2013 she contacted the UK immigration  authorities  to  arrange  an
    appointment to claim asylum. On January 14, 2014 she applied for asylum
    and was served with  form  IS151A  as  an  overstayer.  The  respondent
    refused her appeal on August 21, 2014  and  a  decision  was  taken  to
    remove her.

 2. On September 8, 2014 she appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under
    Section 82(1) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (hereinafter
    called the 2002 Act), as amended.

 3. The matter was listed before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davies
    (hereinafter called "the FtTJ") on January 7, 2015 and he  refused  the
    appeal in a determination promulgated on January 13, 2015.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on January 27, 2015.  Permission
    to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Plumptre  on
    February 6, 2015.

 5. The matter came before me on the date set out above. The appellant  was
    in attendance and the parties were represented as set out above.

 6. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order was made in the First-tier Tribunal and I saw no reason to  amend
    that order.

SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr O'Ryan submitted the FtTJ had erred by failing to have regard to the
    contents of the expert report both in his assessment of the appellant's
    claim and when considering the best interest of  the  child.  The  FtTJ
    acknowledged the report in his  determination  at  paragraph  [69]  but
    attached no weight to its contents  because  of  his  findings  on  the
    appellant's credibility.  Mr  O'Ryan  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  erred
    because in making his credibility findings he failed to have regard  to
    the expert's opinion on the prevalence  of  female  genital  mutilation
    (FGM) in the appellant's society or the fact her husband belonged to  a
    society that actively encouraged FGM. The FtTJ made an adverse  finding
    on the delay between her husband insisting that she have a full FGM and
    when it was planned  for  despite  the  fact  the  expert  provided  an
    explanation as to why there could have been a  delay.  The  FtTJ  dealt
    with the child's best interests in a  brief  paragraph  ([69])  and  in
    doing so failed to consider the risk a young child would face  of  FGM.
    He invited me to find an error in law.

 8. Mr Harrison relied on the Rule 24 response dated February 13, 2015.  He
    submitted that it did not matter which order the  FtTJ  considered  the
    evidence as long as he  demonstrated  he  had  considered  all  of  the
    evidence. He accepted the FtTJ had not examined the report or  analysed
    its contents when considering the appellant's credibility and whilst it
    was clearly open to him to reject the report he accepted that following
    the decision of MK (Section 55-Tribunal options)  Sierra  Leone  [2015]
    UKUT 00223 the Tribunal made clear that clear and adequate reasons  for
    rejecting an argument should be given. Mr Harrison  conceded  that  the
    FtTJ had failed to demonstrate any engagement with the contents of  the
    report both in so far as the appellant's social issues  were  concerned
    and with regard to the risk posed to a young female being  returned  to
    that culture.

 9. Both parties agreed that if I accepted there was an error in  law  then
    the credibility findings should not stand  and  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

10. In light of the concerns expressed above I was satisfied there had been
    an error in law. The FtTJ was entitled to  reject  the  report  but  in
    doing so he had to demonstrate he had engaged  with  its  contents  and
    thereafter give his reasons for finding the opinion carried no  weight.
    In this case the FtTJ rejected  the  report  outright  because  he  had
    rejected the appellant's account even though the report  provided  some
    support for the appellant's case  and  I  am  satisfied  this  evidence
    should have been considered along side the other evidence  before  him.
    The FtTJ also failed to consider the risk of FGM to the minor child and
    under Section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009
    this was something he should have done. I find there was  an  error  in
    law.

11. Having considered Part 3, Section 7.1 to 7.3 of the Practice  Statement
    I agreed to remit the appeal back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh hearing with no findings preserved.

12. The parties should ensure compliance  with  any  subsequent  directions
    issued  in  light  of  the  fact  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014  will  apply  to
    this appeal from hereon.

    DECISION

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law. I have set aside the decision.

14. The appeal is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    appeal  hearing  under  Section  12  of  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007.





                                            DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                          Date: May 13, 2015
