
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06664/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 10 August 2015                   |On: 13 August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                 SAID ZARWAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. This is an appeal against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Cassel in which he dismissed the appeal of the  Appellant,  a
         citizen of Morocco, against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to
         refuse asylum.

      2. The Appellant, having previously  travelled  through  a  number  of
         European countries, arrived in the United Kingdom  on  10  November
         2013 and  claimed  asylum.  His  application  was  refused  by  the
         Respondent on 26 August 2014. The Appellant exercised his right  of
         appeal against this decision and this is the appeal that was  heard
         before Judge Cassel on 1 April 2015 and dismissed. The  Appellant's
         application  for  permission  to  appeal  against  the   First-tier
         Tribunal Judge's decision was granted on 20 May 2015 by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge McDade in the following terms

             "The grounds of application for permission  to  appeal  state,
             inter alia, that the judge has failed to give adequate reasons
             for his findings  in  relation  to  credibility  and  internal
             relocation. The judge's decision is a short one and while this
             is often laudable it is arguable in these  circumstances  that
             anxious scrutiny has not been given to  the  entirety  of  the
             matters before him. There is an arguable error of law."

      3. At the hearing before me Mr Richards appeared for the Secretary  of
         State and Mr Neale represented the Applicant. Mr Neale submitted  a
         written skeleton argument.

    Submissions

      4. Mr Neale referred to his skeleton argument and said that  the  only
         real adverse credibility findings were made by reference to section
         8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants  etc)  Act
         2004 with regard to the Appellant's immigration history and  indeed
         these were the sole reasons for the Judge finding his  account  not
         to be credible. I was referred to the authority  of  JT  (Cameroon)
         [2008] EWCA Civ 878. Section 8 should not be  the  sole  basis  for
         assessment of credibility.  The  Judge  has  not  given  sufficient
         reasons for his findings and has not taken proper  account  of  the
         Appellant's  evidence.  The  Judge  has  not   engaged   with   the
         Appellant's explanations  for  the  section  8  credibility  issues
         raised. The Judge was obliged to consider  the  explanations  given
         and to give reasons for rejecting  those  explanations.  The  Judge
         found that the Appellant might face some risk  if  he  returned  to
         Western Sahara but does not go on to properly  deal  with  internal
         relocation.

      5. For the Respondent Mr Richards said that whereas the acceptance  of
         a possible risk to the Appellant in Western Sahara seems to come as
         a result of a concession by the Presenting  Officer  there  was  no
         concession in the refusal letter or  in  the  Presenting  Officer's
         notes. Nevertheless there are far too  many  imponderables  in  the
         decision and reasons for the decision to be defended. It is perhaps
         an extreme example of section 8 being taken as the deciding issue.

      6. I said that it was clear the decision contained material errors  of
         law and could not stand and I reserved my  written  decision.  Both
         advocates agreed that the proper course was to remit to the  First-
         tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.

    Error of law

      7. The Appellant is a citizen of Morocco from the  region  of  Western
         Sahara. He does not  claim  to  have  had  any  personal  political
         involvement or to have had troubles with the authorities until  May
         2013 when he was at a friend's house and received a telephone  call
         telling him that his home had been raided by masked police and  his
         father and two of his brothers  arrested  for  alleged  involvement
         with the separatist group Polisario. The Appellant feared  that  he
         too faced danger by association with his family and this was  borne
         out when a few days later the police came to his house looking  for
         him. As a result the Appellant left the country and  travelled  via
         Turkey, Hungary, Austria, Italy and France to  the  United  Kingdom
         where he claimed asylum.

      8. The Respondent refused the Appellant's claim on the basis that  his
         account was not credible  and  that  his  credibility  was  further
         damaged by his conduct firstly in not pursuing an asylum  claim  in
         any of the countries that he passed through and secondly because he
         initially gave a false date of birth when he claimed asylum.

      9. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  Appellant  gave
         oral  evidence  and  submitted  a  substantial  appeal  bundle.  In
         dismissing his appeal the Judge found that the Appellant was not  a
         credible witness. However in making this finding the  Judge  refers
         only to the Appellant's  conduct  in  failing  to  pursue  a  claim
         elsewhere and claiming to be a minor when  first  interviewed.  The
         Judge says that the Appellant  gave  no  credible  explanation  for
         these failures but does not  examine  the  explanations  that  were
         undoubtedly given and explain why he found them not to be credible.
         This in my judgement is a material error of law. So far as the core
         of the Appellant's claim is concerned the Judge only says  that  he
         does not find the Appellant  to  be  credible  without  giving  any
         reasons for this finding. Indeed the Judge does not record  in  any
         detail either the Appellant's claim or the Appellant's explanations
         for any of the credibility issues that were raised and  upon  which
         the Judge may have  based  his  decision.  In  my  judgement  these
         omissions  are  material  and   the   inadequacy   of   explanation
         constitutes an error of law. It is impossible reading this decision
         and reasons as a whole to say with any confidence  that  the  Judge
         has engaged with the Appellant's account in any substantive way.

     10. In my judgment the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  not  given  adequate
         reasons for its findings on material  matters.  In  particular  the
         Tribunal  has  failed  to  give  adequate   reasons   for   adverse
         credibility findings and not only has the Tribunal taken section  8
         above as the starting point for its adverse credibility findings it
         has failed to engage with the  Appellant's  explanations  in  these
         respects in any meaningful way. These are material errors of law.

     11. Due to the nature of the errors of law and in accordance  with  the
         President's direction it is  appropriate  for  this  matter  to  be
         remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing  de  novo  with  no
         findings preserved.

    Conclusion

     12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law for the reasons set out above.

     13. I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in
         accordance with the President's direction this matter  is  suitable
         for and should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
