

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06337/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 June 2013                                |On 5 June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                            UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                 D E TAYLOR


                                   Between


                            MUHAMMAD ANSAR ANJUM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Barry, Harehills & Chapeltown Law Centre.
For the Respondent: Mr Diwncyz, HOPO





                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1. This is the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      tribunal Judge Shimmin made following a hearing at Bradford on  the  2
      August 2012, dismissing the  appeal.


   2. The appellant challenged the decision on the grounds  that  the  judge
      had not taken into account key evidence produced  in  support  of  his
      appeal, namely two letters from the Ahmadya Association UK  supporting
      his claim to be an Ahmadi and to have been active in Pakistan.

   3. The judge made comprehensive and well reasoned  findings  against  the
      appellant. The grounds challenging them, in the main, amount to a mere
      disagreement with the decision. However, in not  taking  into  account
      material evidence supportive of the appellant's  case,  which  thereby
      infected his findings as a whole, the judge erred in law.

   4. Mr Diwncyz said that he was content to leave matters in my  hands  and
      did not seek to defend the determination.

   5. This appeal will be heard at Bradford so  that  the  decision  can  be
      remade by a judge other than Judge Shimmin under  7.2  of  the  Senior
      President's Practice Statements dated 25 September 2012 because of the
      nature and extent of the judicial fact finding which is  necessary  in
      order for the decision in the appeal to be remade.




Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
