
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/06705/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Columbus House Newport|                   Decision  and Reasons |
|                                |Promulgated                              |
|On:  23 June 2015               |                    On 1 July 2015       |
|                                |                                         |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     IK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:           Mr B Hoshi, Counsel instructed by Sultan Lloyd
For the Respondent:          Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the determination  of  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McCarthy  in  which  he  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, against the Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse asylum.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 11 February 2009  as  an
    unaccompanied minor then aged 13 and  claimed  asylum.  His  claim  was
    refused but he was  granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  until  8
    October 2010 in accordance with the Respondent's policy  and  this  was
    later extended to 1 July 2013. On 27 June 2013  the  Appellant  applied
    for further discretionary leave and on 29 August 2014 this  application
    was refused. The Appellant appealed against this decision on asylum and
    Article 8 ECHR grounds. This is the  appeal  which  came  before  Judge
    McCarthy on 10 October 2014 and was dismissed.  The  Appellant  applied
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  application  was
    refused by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge MacDonald on 8 December
    2014 but on renewal to the Upper  Tribunal  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey  on  24  March  2015  in  the
    following terms

       I see no substance  in  the  contention  that  the  judge  erred  in
       relation to  consideration  of  the  family  tracing  issues  or  in
       relation to the  westernisation  or  delay  issues.  However,  I  am
       troubled by the fact that in the course of finding the appellant  to
       lack credibility, the judge does not appear anywhere  to  take  into
       account  that  when  the  appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  and   was
       interviewed he was still a minor and the assessment of minors cannot
       be approached in the same way as assessment of adults.


    The Respondent submitted  a  rule  24  response  dated  14  April  2015
    opposing the appeal and submitting  that  the  Judge  directed  himself
    appropriately.



 3. At the hearing before me Mr Hoshi appeared on behalf of  the  Appellant
    and Mr Richards represented the Respondent. Mr Hoshi  submitted  copies
    of the authorities of AA (unattended children)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
    UKUT 00016 (IAC) and KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 00552 (IAC).




Background


 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the appellant left Afghanistan at a very young age
    being fingerprinted in Greece in July 2008 (aged 12) before arriving in
    the UK on 11 February 2009. On his arrival in the  United  Kingdom  the
    Appellant claimed that it had taken him two months  to  travel  to  the
    United Kingdom from his home in  Afghanistan  and  he  maintained  this
    account until his application for asylum was refused  in  October  2009
    when it was established that he had been fingerprinted in Greece on  29
    July 2008. In claiming that it had taken  two  months  to  get  to  the
    United Kingdom the Appellant's account was that  his  father  had  been
    killed three months before he left Afghanistan. After  his  application
    for asylum was refused the Appellant revised the account of his journey
    to the United Kingdom saying that it took one year and  two  months  to
    get here rather than just two  months  and,  as  a  result,  events  he
    claimed occurred in  Afghanistan  took  place  a  year  before  he  had
    initially claimed.


 5. The particular event that the Appellant claimed  caused  him  to  leave
    Afghanistan was the death of his father and cousin. The Appellant  said
    that his father had been a Mujahedeen Commander before the Taliban were
    established. He ran a petrol station with the Appellant's  cousin.  One
    night, about 3 months before the Appellant left Afghanistan, whilst his
    father was guarding the petrol station he and  the  Appellant's  cousin
    were killed. His father was stabbed and his cousin shot with a  machine
    gun. The Appellant went to live with his uncle  but  was  subjected  to
    threats by letter  and  in  person.  The  Appellant's  uncle  sent  the
    Appellant away because he told him that he was in danger.


 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  an  adverse  credibility  finding.
    Having found that the Appellant was  not  telling  the  truth  when  he
    claimed to have left Afghanistan two  months  before  arriving  in  the
    United Kingdom the Judge's reasons for disbelieving his amended account
    are probably best summed up at paragraph 36

        "...I realise that if the appellant's latest account  of  how  long
        his journey took is  accepted,  then  it  undermines  his  accounts
        regarding when his father and cousin were killed. This  is  because
        their deaths could  not  have  occurred  in  2008  but  would  have
        occurred in 2007. If that were true, then the  appellant's  answers
        at interview about how long it was after he left  school  that  his
        father and cousin were killed must be wrong. The consistent account
        simply falls apart if the journey took one year and two months."


 7. In the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  the  Appellant  asserts
    that the Judge failed to give any consideration  to  the  core  of  the
    Appellant's claim basing  his  adverse  credibility  finding  upon  the
    Appellant's account of his journey and in so doing the Judge failed  to
    have proper regard to the fact that the Appellant was, at all  material
    times, a minor.


Submissions


 8.  For the Appellant Mr Hoshi referred to the grounds  of  appeal  saying
    that there was a narrow issue concerning the age of the  Appellant.  He
    reminded me of the timeline of the Appellant's account. AA  (unattended
    children) refers (at paragraph 38) to Article 4(3) of the Qualification
    Directive requiring an  individual  basis  of  assessment  taking  into
    account, inter alia, the age of the applicant. Paragraphs  350-352X  of
    HC395 provide that where the applicant is a child more weight should be
    given to objective  indications  of  risk.  This  is  repeated  in  the
    Respondent's asylum policy guidance and further this guidance  suggests
    that care must be taken before making an  adverse  credibility  finding
    and that the benefit of the doubt should be applied more generously. Mr
    Hoshi  referred  to  KS  (benefit  of  the  doubt)  and  in  particular
    paragraphs 97-99 regarding children.


 9. The  Appellant's'  account  is  rejected  on  the  basis  of  a  single
    discrepancy.  The decision refers to the Appellant's age only twice. At
    paragraph 24 the Judge refers to the Appellant's age and asks  "why  he
    gave (his first) account and why he only admitted it  was  wrong  after
    the initial refusal of his asylum claim." This not the  right  question
    and it was not right to assume that the Appellant only admitted it  was
    wrong after the refusal. The Judge should have  followed  the  guidance
    and considered the objective evidence not drawn adverse inference.  The
    Judge should have asked if the Appellant's account of what happened  in
    Afghanistan was broadly consistent with the objective evidence to which
    the answer would have been positive.


10. Mr Hoshi added that compelling third party evidence  had  been  ignored
    referring to the evidence given by the Appellant's foster mother.  This
    was rejected out of hand (paragraphs 47 and 53). It was highly unlikely
    that the Appellant would have been able to  conceal  contact  with  his
    family from his foster mother. The Judge's criticism of the Appellant's
    vagueness (paragraph 30) does not recognise that he was being asked  at
    the age of 19 about a journey undertaken when he was  11  or  12  years
    old. It was unfair to compare his recollection of  recent  events  with
    his recollection of events long ago. When he was  recalling  events  at
    interview they occurred two or three years ago whereas at  the  hearing
    these events were seven or eight years ago. At paragraph 36  the  Judge
    suggests that if the Appellant's latest account is  accepted  then  his
    timeline is awry but gives no indication  that  this  was  put  to  the
    Appellant or that this is the kind of  thing  that  age  is  likely  to
    distort.


11. The second mention of the Appellant's age is at paragraph 41 where  the
    Appellant's account is rejected. When the decision is looked at in  the
    round it can be seen that proper account was not taken of  age.  It  is
    accepted that the change in the Appellant's account was significant and
    material but the Judge did not do enough to consider  the  age  of  the
    Appellant at the relevant times and the third party evidence.


12. For the  Respondent  Mr  Richards  said  that  no  material  error  was
    disclosed. This is an extremely meticulous and fair  determination  and
    the Judge clearly had the Appellant's  age  in  mind  at  the  relevant
    times. Referring to paragraph  24  Mr  Richards  said  that  the  Judge
    directed  himself  properly.  It  was  appropriate   to   examine   the
    Appellant's account. There is an extremely thorough examination of  the
    evidence and full account is  taken  of  the  Appellant's  age  at  the
    material times. It is quite obvious that a child is just as capable  of
    telling a lie as an adult.  The  thorough  analysis  results  in  clear
    conclusions.


13. The Judge goes on to analyse how the untruths  told  by  the  Appellant
    have a knock on effect on  his  story  generally.  This  was  a  proper
    conclusion to draw. The Appellant's account could not be true. There is
    no question of applying the benefit of the doubt because on the Judge's
    analysis there was no doubt. So far as the evidence of the  Appellant's
    foster mother is concerned this, looking at matters in the  round,  did
    not have an effect on the  findings.  The  crucial  issue  is  why  the
    Appellant fled. The Judge makes the later  finding  that  even  if  the
    Appellant had lost contact with his family then as an adult this has no
    bearing on risk on return. This is a thorough and  meticulous  analysis
    and the grounds do not disclose a material error.


14. I reserved my decision. Both representatives agreed that if a  material
    error of law was found this matter should properly be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


Error of law


15. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  taken  together  with  the
    grant of permission and Mr Hoshi's submissions are straightforward.  It
    is asserted that the  Judge  failed  to  take  proper  account  of  the
    Appellant's age when assessing credibility. The rule 24 response and Mr
    Richards submissions are equally clear  in  their  rejection  of  these
    grounds on the basis that in a commendably meticulous and fair analysis
    the Judge took proper account of the Appellant's age.


16. In the first place it is essential in considering whether there  is  an
    error of law to be clear about the  Appellant's  age  at  the  relevant
    times. There is no dispute about the Appellant's age. He was born on  1
    January 1996. When he first came to recorded attention in Greece on  29
    July 2008 this  means  he  was  12  years  old.  There  is  nothing  to
    corroborate his evidence of when  he  left  Afghanistan.  His  original
    claim to have left Afghanistan 2 months before he arrived in the United
    Kingdom (i.e. December 2009) was clearly wrong. His revised claim (made
    in his statement of 20 August 2010 when he was 14 years old)  puts  the
    date of leaving Afghanistan at one  year  and  two  months  before  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom (i.e. December  2008).  Whether  this  is
    correct or not it is clear that the  Appellant  must  left  Afghanistan
    just before or just after his 12th birthday  meaning  that  the  events
    that he claimed caused him to  leave,  if  they  did  in  fact  happen,
    happened when he was 11 or 12 years of  age.  The  Appellant's  initial
    account of these events was given when  he  was  13  and  his  'revised
    account' when he was  14.  The  Appellant  was  asked  to  explain  the
    discrepancies between his original consistent account,  caused  by  the
    timescale in his revised account, when he was 18.


17. It is against this background that  the  Judge's  credibility  findings
    must be examined. Firstly it is clear from a holistic  reading  of  the
    determination that the Judge was at all times aware of the  Appellant's
    age at the relevant  times.  Apart  from  the  references  to  his  age
    highlighted by Mr  Hoshi  at  paragraphs  24  and  41  there  is  clear
    reference to his date of birth in the opening paragraph and to his  age
    and placement in foster care in paragraph 2  and  to  the  Respondent's
    policy concerning unaccompanied children  in  paragraph  3.  The  later
    references to the Appellant's schooling in Afghanistan and  his  foster
    family and schooling in the UK make it  apparent  that  his  age  is  a
    constant factor in this determination and in the Judge's  consideration
    of events.


18. However whereas the Judge was clearly aware of the Appellant's  age  it
    is not clear how, if at all, this factor was taken into account in  the
    Judge's credibility assessment. There  is  no  self  direction  to  the
    Respondent's asylum policy guidance or to the established case law. The
    reasoning in respect of lack of credibility is indeed meticulous,  even
    forensic, but in my judgement it is at fault in three ways.


19. Firstly the  reasoning  concentrates  exclusively  on  the  Appellant's
    account of the length of time  his  journey  from  Afghanistan  to  the
    United Kingdom took. Although there is reference to  the  core  of  his
    claim this reference is brief and is informed by the credibility issues
    over the Appellant's journey
        "The consistent account simply falls apart if the journey took  one
        year and two months" (paragraph 36).




20. Secondly in examining the Appellant's account of his journey the  Judge
    takes as his starting point the account that the Appellant accepted  as
    being incorrect (paragraphs 14 -21) rather than examining  the  account
    adopted since 2010. Whereas the Judge correctly says  at  paragraph  24
    that it is appropriate to  examine  why  the  Appellant  gave  the  one
    account on arrival only  admitting  it  was  wrong  after  the  initial
    refusal of the asylum claim the Judge  does  not  give  any  allowance,
    despite referring to the Appellant's age, for the fact that an  account
    given by a child of 12 or 13 may well be  intrinsically  unreliable  or
    have been influenced by others and  therefore  go  on  to  examine  the
    objective basis of his claim. At no point does the Judge  consider  the
    core of the Appellant's claim having already rejected  his  credibility
    on the basis of the varying accounts of his journey.


21. Thirdly  there  are  in  any  event  miscalculations  in  the  forensic
    analysis, for example at paragraph 16

        "The appellant said that his father was killed three months  before
        he left Afghanistan (question 31) and  that  he  had  been  out  of
        school for two and  a  half  years  when  his  father  was  killed,
        although he was not exactly sure  (question  32).  Given  that  the
        appellant arrived in the UK in February 2009, three months  earlier
        would place his father's death in November  2008.  Equally,  if  it
        occurred two and a half years after he left school, it  would  have
        occurred in late autumn 2008. Both calculations  tie  in  with  the
        Appellant's account of his journey having taken two months".

    In fact if the Appellant's journey took two months and his  father  was
    killed three months before he left Afghanistan his father's death would
    have occurred in September, i.e. early  autumn,  2008.  This  paragraph
    indeed is a clear example of the Judge being  extremely  forensic  over
    dates factoring into his calculation a 13 year olds account of the time
    he spent at school between the ages of 7 and 9 along with  the  Judge's
    inference of the dates of the Afghan school  year  (paragraph  15)  but
    then making a miscalculation.




22. In my judgement, and looking at the determination as a whole, the Judge
    has misdirected himself by  failing  to  take  proper  account  of  the
    Appellant's age and thereby taking a child sensitive  approach  to  the
    standard of proof. This is a material error of law.


23. Finally I turn to the evidence  of  the  Appellant's  step  mother.  At
    paragraph  47  of  the  determination  the  Judge  confirms  that   the
    Appellant's step mother confirmed that the Appellant had not been  able
    to contact his mother by telephone since a few months after he arrived.
    At paragraph 53 the Judge finds that  he  is  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant is no longer in contact with his family in Afghanistan as  he
    has been found "to be generally not reliable as a witness".  No  reason
    is given  why  the  Appellant's  step  mother's  corroboration  of  the
    Appellant's  account  in  this  respect  is   rejected.   The   general
    unreliability  goes  back  to  the  credibility   assessment   of   the
    Appellant's account of his journey. Whereas this does  not  go  to  the
    core  of  the  Appellant's  account  it  is  in  my  judgement  further
    indicative of an over forensic approach to the evidence of a child that
    renders the adverse credibility findings unsafe.


24. My conclusion from all of the above is  that  the  adverse  credibility
    findings made are unsafe. The Judge whilst clearly having in  mind  the
    Appellant's age has failed to demonstrate that he has had due regard to
    the Appellant's age in assessing  credibility  either  at  the  various
    stages of his account or at the time that he was being called  upon  to
    recall events. This is in my judgement a material error of law and  the
    nature of the error of law goes to the root of the adverse  credibility
    finding and is such that the determination falls to be set  aside.  The
    only fair and proper course is a full rehearing of this appeal with  no
    findings preserved. As this is a full rehearing and in accordance  with
    the President's direction this matter is suitable  for  and  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


  Summary


25. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. I set aside that decision and remit  the  matter
    to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.




Signed:                                                  Date:



J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
