
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number:  AA/06291/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Notification issued:         |
|on 20 November 2013                           |on 4 December 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 LIFANG ZENG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer

                         NOTIFICATION OF WITHDRAWAL

 1. The respondent refused the appellant's protection claim on  asylum  and
    on all other available grounds for reasons explained in a letter  dated
    19 June 2013.  Oddly, the letter dealt  with  the  issue  of  the  best
    interests of the appellant's child, although no child was yet born.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Scobbie heard the appellant's appeal  on  2  August
    2013 and dismissed it by determination promulgated on 20  August  2013.
    The appellant still had no child but, misled by the  approach  of  both
    sides, the judge also dealt with the case in part by  considering  "the
    best interests of the child".

 3. The appellant gave birth to a son on 26 August 2013.  The father is the
    appellant's husband, a Chinese citizen with indefinite leave to  remain
    in the UK.    The  child  is  entitled  to  both  Chinese  and  British
    citizenship.

 4. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  are  based  on  "the  best
    interests of the child" and "the article 8 rights  of  the  appellant's
    husband".

 5. An unborn child  has  no  rights  in  immigration  law.   However,  the
    Presenting Officer suggested that it would be  undesirable  to  try  to
    unravel the confusion so far or to reach what might effectively  be  an
    initial decision in the Upper Tribunal.  She  sought  to  withdraw  the
    respondent's case, on the basis that a fresh decision based on  current
    circumstances would be made.  The appellant's counsel did not  wish  to
    argue against that course, which seems sensible and pragmatic.

 6. In terms of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  Rule
    17, the respondent's case is recorded as having  been  withdrawn,  with
    the consent of the Upper Tribunal.


                                    [pic]
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               20 November 2013



