
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06209/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 October 2014                   |On 13 January 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     sM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss M Anderson, ILAC, Leeds


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, SM, was born in 1994.  He is a citizen of  Afghanistan.
    He entered the United Kingdom illegally in 2008 but, on account of  his
    minority, he was given leave to remain.  He challenged decisions of the
    Secretary  of  State  between  2008-2013,  ultimately  challenging  his
    removal by way  of  judicial  review.   He  was  last  served  with  an
    appealable decision of the Secretary of State  on  29  May  2013.   The
    Secretary of State rejected  the  respondent's  repeated  asylum  claim
    (previously rejected by a Tribunal in 2011) and also his claim that  he
    was stateless.  The Secretary of State also considered the  appellant's
    circumstances under the provisions of paragraph 276ADE of  HC  395  and
    the  long  residence  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.    The
    Secretary  of  State  concluded  that   there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances which would justify his being  granted  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules.  The appellant appealed against that decision to the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Canavan) which, in a determination which  is
    dated 5 August  2014,  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR).  The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.  I shall hereafter refer to the appellant as the
    respondent and to the respondent as the  appellant  (as  they  appeared
    respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. Judge Brunnen granted permission in the following terms:

         The grounds on which permission to appeal is sought  submitted  the
         judge's finding that the appellant's  mental  illness  amounted  to
         compelling  compassionate  circumstances  was  irrational.   It  is
         arguable there was  insufficient  evidence  on  which  the  judge's
         finding could properly be assessed.

         The grounds submit that the judge failed to follow the approach  to
         consideration of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules stipulated
         by Gulshan.  I do  not  consider  that  there  was  merit  in  this
         submission  -  see  MM  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985  at  paragraph  128.
         Nevertheless permission to argue the point is not refused.

    Dealing with that latter point  first,  I  agree  with  Judge  Brennan.
    There is no material error in the judge's determination for failing  to
    consider any Gulshan "test".  Indeed, the  judge  was  unaware  of  the
    ratio of Gulshan and other relevant jurisprudence as  is  evidenced  at
    [37].

 3. The issue in the appeal is whether the judge should not have  concluded
    that the appellant's mental health  difficulties  and  high  levels  of
    distress  would  indicate  that  his  removal  in  consequence  of  the
    immigration decision would "impact on [his] right to private life in  a
    sufficiently grave way as to amount to a disproportionate  interference
    with his right to  private  life  (including  his  physical  and  moral
    integrity) under Article 8 [ECHR]." [44].  The  grounds  complain  that
    there was simply insufficient evidence for the judge  to  come  to  any
    proper finding on the matter.

 4. I find that the ground does not have merit.  The judge  was  very  well
    aware that she had only limited  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
    mental health.  She had a letter from a Dr Miller which  she  described
    as "very brief" but which did indicate that the appellant "is likely to
    be suffering from moderate depression."  [42].  She went on to  observe
    that

         [The letter] supports my own observations  on  the  high  level  of
         distress the appellant seems to be experiencing following the death
         of his mother and the  response  to  the  prospect  of  removal  to
         Afghanistan.   Unfortunately  due  to  restrictions  in  legal  aid
         appellants will increasingly be unrepresented and full medical  and
         psychiatric  assessments  will  not  be  available  to  assist  the
         Tribunal.  In the absence of an expert report I am unable to make a
         full assessment of the impact of removal is likely to have upon the
         appellant's  mental  health.   His  presentation  at  the   hearing
         certainly indicated he might  have  a  strong  subjective  fear  of
         return and that the reason why he thinks he might be  targeted  are
         unclear from the limited information he has been able  to  provide.
         Nevertheless I am satisfied even on the limited evidence before  me
         that his mental health is sufficiently precarious that  removal  is
         likely to cause him  real  fear  and  anguish  and  is  capable  of
         amounting  to  compelling  compassionate  circumstances:  see  also
         Ireland v UK [1978] 2 EHRR 25 and Soering v UK [1989] 11 EHRR 439.

 5. The judge had to make findings of fact and reach a determination on the
    basis of the evidence available to her.  Part of that evidence included
    her observations of the appellant at the Tribunal hearing.  Whilst, for
    example, demeanour of appellants in such proceedings will rarely be  of
    relevance in determining questions of credibility, I see no  difficulty
    here that Judge Canavan, having very little documentary evidence before
    her, had regard to the presentation of the  appellant  in  court.   The
    judge was well aware of the difficulty of  making  findings  as  to  an
    individual's mental health with only limited expert assistance but I do
    not find that she has reached findings which are  perverse,  given  the
    limited evidence before her.  In the circumstances, therefore,  I  find
    that the Secretary of State's appeal should be dismissed.

DECISION

 6. This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 19 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


