
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06166/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgation sent            |
|On 22 October 2013                            |On 25 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                         MR MOHANAD TAHER FADHIL AL BAYATI
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Harding of counsel instructed by Gulbenkian
Andonian solicitors For the Respondent: Mr G Saunders a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 10 May 1990. He has
   been given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier Tribunal
   Judge Ian Howard (the FTTJ) who dismissed his appeal against the
   respondent's decision of 14 June 2013 to refuse to vary his leave to
   remain in the United Kingdom and to give directions for his removal.


2. The appellant came to this country with a visit visa arriving on 5 March
   2013. He claimed asylum on 3 April 2013. The basis of his claim was that
   he would be at risk on return to Iraq at the hands of the Badr
   Organisation which was a powerful force in the political and security
   structure of the dominant Shiite government in Iraq. They were hostile to
   the appellant's father and his family because his father had been a Sunni
   academic in Iraq under the previous regime. The family left Iraq in 2005
   after the appellant's father received threats. They went to live in
   Jordan where the appellant's father remains.


3. The appellant's Jordanian visa was cancelled and he went back to Iraq in
   February 2013 before leaving the country four days later. At the end of
   March 2013 he received a call from his neighbour in Iraq telling him that
   the family home had been attacked by gunmen who were looking for the
   appellant's father and members of his family. The appellant believed that
   his return to Iraq had become known to the Badr Organisation who had
   arranged the attack on the house by members of a criminal militia. He
   feared that if he returned to Iraq he would be killed or seriously ill
   treated and because the Badr Organisation was so closely connected with
   the authorities and the police the authorities would not provide him with
   protection.


4. The respondent did not believe most of the appellant's account of
   events, concluding that he would not be at risk on return to Iraq. There
   would be a sufficiency of protection available to him in his home area
   but even if it was not he could relocate to another part of the country.


5. The appellant appealed and the FTTJ heard the appeal on 5 August 2013.
   Both parties were represented and the appellant gave evidence. The judge
   dismissed the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights
   grounds.


6. The appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal arguing
   that the FTTJ erred in law by failing to make any credibility finding in
   relation to his evidence and no clear findings in relation to a number of
   important aspects of his claim.


7. Mr Saunders conceded that the determination contained the material
   errors of law alleged in the grounds. He accepted that the determination
   should be set aside so that the appeal could be redetermined. This was
   what Mr Harding seeks on behalf of the appellant.


8. I find that the FTTJ erred in law. Whilst it appears that the FTTJ
   doubted the appellant's evidence and gave little weight to the documents
   he had submitted, there is no clear finding as to whether the appellant
   was or was not a credible witness. Such a finding was essential. The
   closest the FTTJ gets to a finding in relation to the evidence is in
   paragraph 28 in which he says; "In absence of such material, given the
   fact it exists in some for I am unable to find, even to the deliberately
   low standard applicable in asylum cases, the factual matrix advanced by
   the appellant." This passage makes little sense. There are no findings in
   relation to a number of important aspects of the claim, for example the
   appellant's father's position in Iraq before the family left for Jordan,
   whether he and the family were at risk then, if so why, whether the
   appellant returned to Iraq and if so for what period and whether the Badr
   Organisation would be likely to take an adverse interest in somebody in
   the appellant's father's position. It might have been possible for the
   FTTJ to make a blanket adverse credibility finding if sufficient good
   reasons were given but this was not done. The determination is fatally
   flawed.


9. I find that by reason of the matters which I have set out the
   determination contains material errors of law. I set aside the FTTJ's
   decision. None of any findings he made are preserved. In deciding whether
   to remake the decision rather than remitting it to the First-Tier
   Tribunal I find that the effect of the error has been to deprive the
   appellant of a fair hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal. In the
   circumstances I remit the appeal to be re-determined by the First-Tier
   Tribunal.







Signed:........................................
Date: 22 October 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

