
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06917/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                sabir hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Moksud, International Immigration Advisers
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Sabir Hussain, was born on  1  January  1967  and  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant appealed against  the  decision  of
    the respondent dated 20 August  2014  to  refuse  his  application  for
    asylum and to make directions for his removal from the United  Kingdom.
    The First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Devlin)  in  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 5 November 2014, dismissed his appeal  on  all  grounds.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds assert that the decision is both irrational  and  perverse.
    The appellant claimed to be  a  homosexual,  a  claim  which  had  been
    rejected  by  the  respondent.    The   judge,   in   a   determination
    characterised by exceedingly short  paragraphs  but  which  contains  a
    detailed analysis of the written and oral evidence, concluded that  the
    appellant had given discrepant evidence and concluded  [181]  that  the
    appellant was not a gay man and that he was not in a relationship  with
    another man as he claimed.  In essence, the judge found the very  basis
    of the appellant's claim (that he was homosexual and could not live  in
    Pakistan in consequence) was not true.  The  judge  could  identify  no
    other factors in the appellant's circumstances and  character  or  past
    history which might expose him to risk in Pakistan.  On that basis, the
    judge dismissed the appeal.

 3. The decision of the judge betrays  extremely  poor  proof-reading.   At
    [203] the judge refers to the appellant as a female and having  a  son.
    At [207] he refers to the fact that the appellant clearly  had  "social
    and family ties in  Bangladesh."   In  the  same  paragraph  the  judge
    expressed his satisfaction that there would be no "significant barriers
    to reintegration in Iran."  Such errors  are  not  acceptable  but  the
    question arises as to whether these obvious  errors  penetrate  to  and
    cloud the reasoning of the judge.   As  I  have  said,  the  judge  has
    carried out a detailed analysis of the  evidence  and  he  has  reached
    conclusions as to the appellant's lack  of  credibility  which  do  not
    appear to have  been  challenged.   I  agree  that  the  errors  cannot
    properly be described as typographical  errors  but  they  may,  in  my
    opinion, be described as "template errors".  It is quite apparent  that
    the judge has used a form of template for this decision  which  he  has
    employed in other cases (including those relating  to  appellants  from
    Bangladesh and Iran).  His failure to amend the  template  or  to  make
    corrections upon proof-reading is not excusable and they do  little  to
    inspire confidence in the quality of judicial practice.  However, these
    are not errors which, in this particular instance, enter the  heart  of
    the judge's reasoning or in  any  way  cast  doubt  upon  his  detailed
    assessment of the evidence.  It cannot be said that the judge  actually
    mistook this appellant, towards the end of  his  written  decision,  as
    either an Iranian or a Bangladeshi.  He did not  actually  mistake  the
    appellant as a female who had a son.  In that  sense,  the  errors  are
    much closer to typographical errors than they are to errors arising out
    of and vitiating the reasoning of the decision.   Although  the  errors
    are deplorable they are not, in my opinion, material to the outcome  of
    this appeal.  It would be wholly disproportionate for the  Tribunal  to
    set aside the decision on the basis (as argued in the grounds) that  it
    is perverse and that there has been no proper or  anxious  scrutiny  of
    the evidence.  In the circumstances, I dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

 4. The appeal is dismissed.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 26 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 26 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

