
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06732/2015
                                                               aa/06735/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Phoenix House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 April 2016                     |On 27 April 2016                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                 [TAZEEN A]
                                    [Z G]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Faryl of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Respondent refused the Appellants' applications for  asylum  or
         ancillary protection on 30 March 2015. Their  appeal  against  this
         was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Henderson ("the  Judge")
         following a hearing on 2 July 2015.

The grant of permission

      2.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum  granted  permission  to  appeal  (21
         September 2015) on the grounds that it is arguable that;
         "(1)      ...  if  the  Appellant's  family  are   aware   of   her
             circumstances, the absence of any direct  attempt  to  contact
             her, as claimed by the Appellant, may be attributable to their
             knowledge of the illegitimacy of her  children,  and  this  in
             turn could arguably undermine the  Judge's  finding  that  the
             Appellant  is  in  contact  with  her  family  and  they   are
             supportive of her.
         (2)      The ... conclusion that the Appellant did not come from  a
             strict Muslim family, based as it appears to have been, on the
             Appellant's attendance at a college outside  the  family  home
             and her travel to the UK, failed to take account  of  relevant
             evidence including  the  fact  that  she  attended  a  woman's
             university, that she stayed in a woman only hostel, that (sic)
             was employment at  the  Ladies  branch  of  a  bank,  and  her
             evidence of her father accompanying her in the United Kingdom.
         (3)      ... in light of the COI  report  identifying  illegitimate
             children as "forbidden  under  Islam"  and  the  "huge  social
             stigma" associated with illegitimacy (63), the existence of an
             offence  of  fornication  (61),  and  the   difficulties   the
             Appellant would  have  in  explaining  how  she  had  children
             without disclosing that she  was  unmarried  (61),  the  Judge
             erred in concluding that she would hold a well-founded fear of
             persecution."

Respondent's position

      3. It states in the Rule 24 notice that the Judge considered  all  the
         evidence, and was alert to  the  relevant  issues,  gave  extensive
         reasons for her findings, considered  the  situation  in  Pakistan,
         applied KA &  Others  [2010]  UKUT  216  IAC,  and  refers  to  the
         objective material.

Appellant's position

      4. There was no comment on the issue of fornication  in  the  Rule  24
         notice. The Judge did not  require  statistics  on  the  number  of
         charges or convictions for fornication and KA was ignored.

General Discussion

      5. The Judgement ran to 26 pages and 74 paragraphs.  The  Judge  noted
         that the Appellant worked for  the  Habib  Bank  Ladies  Branch  in
         Jhelum [11] until she came here. The Judge  noted  the  Appellant's
         evidence that her family are strict Muslims [13]. The  Judge  noted
         that the Respondent accepted that she had given birth to 2 children
         out of wedlock and was unmarried [30]. The  Judge  noted  that  the
         Appellant's representative accepted that there was no risk to speak
         of from the Appellant's family as no one was threatening her [35].

The Judges findings in relation to grounds 1 and 2

      6. The detailed findings are set out below and are underlined.
         "40.     The Appellant is accepted as a national  of  Pakistan  who
             was born  in  Pakistan  where  she  was  educated  to  college
             standard with the support of her family. She then worked in  a
             bank and came to the United Kingdom for further studies. I was
             not provided  with  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  additional
             qualifications but I  note  that  the  Appellant  was  granted
             additional visas to continue with her studies here which would
             indicate that she has completed some additional courses here.
         41. The Respondent accepts that the  Appellant  is  unmarried  and
             that she has given birth to two children outside marriage. The
             Appellant has stated that this will result in the danger of an
             honour killing from her family or prosecution under  the  laws
             of Pakistan.
         42. The Appellant has stated that she has had no contact with  her
             family for five years and they are unaware that  she  has  two
             children. She has stated that she has not received any threats
             from them but they are religious and will take action  against
             her when they find out.  The  Respondent's  argument  is  that
             there is no reason for them to find out.
         43. I do not accept that the Appellant is being truthful about her
             lack of contact with family members or about  their  knowledge
             of her circumstances. She gave evidence before me that she had
             always stayed with her family whilst growing up but  that  she
             lived away from home whilst attending college in Pakistan. She
             referred to her family being a strict  religious  family.  She
             also stated that her father did not allow her to come to  this
             country on her own. Her father came with her to keep an eye on
             her for 4-5 months after her course  began.  She  also  stated
             that her father came here in 2006, 2007 and 2009. He  came  to
             stay with her and he would even accompany her to the bus  stop
             when she was travelling to college and wait for her at the bus
             stop when she returned.
         44. The Appellant is asking me to accept  her  evidence  that  she
             broke off all contact with her father and her brothers because
             of her pregnancy. She stated they were trying to call her  and
             she changed her telephone number. She also stated that  people
             who know her and her family have informed her  that  they  are
             all fine.
         45. If the Appellant comes from a strict family and a very  caring
             family and her father went to the effort of supporting her  to
             study in this country, accompanying her on her  trip  to  this
             country and making annual visits to see her I  do  not  accept
             that he would simply accept that she was no longer in  contact
             with him. As a caring parent his first concern is most  likely
             to be regarding her welfare and whether or not she is ill or a
             victim of crime. I question why he or one of  his  sons  would
             not contact the authorities in this country or family  friends
             to make enquiries about the Appellant's welfare if as she  has
             stated she stopped contact with them. It is a dramatic  change
             from being closely looked after and communicating regularly to
             a complete breakdown in all  communication.  The  reaction  of
             most parents would be to try and trace  their  child  and  the
             information given  about  the  Appellant's  family  and  their
             inaction (aside from trying to call her on her  old  telephone
             number)  is  not  consistent  with  the  family  history   the
             Appellant has given.
         46. I do not accept that  the  Appellant  has  given  a  plausible
             account of this lack of contact between her and her family. It
             was put to the Appellant that if she was pregnant  and  simply
             contacting her family by telephone then the  family  would  be
             unaware that she was pregnant. The Appellant referred to being
             afraid of other people telling her family.  My  conclusion  is
             that the Appellant's family would  be  unlikely  not  to  make
             strenuous attempts to locate her because of concern about  her
             well-being given the family circumstances  the  Appellant  has
             outlined.
         47. The Respondent has stated that it is  not  accepted  that  the
             Appellant's family are aware of her situation. This  statement
             is simply accepting what the Appellant has  said  -  that  her
             family are not aware of her situation. However I do not accept
             that  it  is  likely  that  her  family  are  unaware  of  her
             whereabouts given the evidence she  provided  in  the  hearing
             before me. She has stated that she is in contact  with  people
             who know her family and she asked about them. It is reasonable
             that the Appellant's family would use these  same  friends  to
             make enquiries about the Appellant. This calls  into  question
             the Appellant's claims regarding her status as a single  woman
             facing family retribution and a lack of support.
         48. Whilst I appreciate that there is a  very  different  attitude
             towards single unmarried mothers in Pakistan the Appellant has
             not provided credible evidence to show  that  her  family  are
             seeking any form of punishment or retribution against her  and
             her children as a result of her giving  birth  to  2  children
             outside marriage. The Appellant has stated that she  was  well
             educated and worked in a bank prior to coming  to  the  United
             Kingdom. She states now that the reason  her  father  has  not
             sought her out is because her father is mentally unwell  as  a
             result of the death of her brother. I cannot reconcile how the
             Appellant considers that her father would not  have  the  same
             kind of concerns about her as a result of her disappearance or
             that neither he nor the Appellant's brothers would be  content
             to accept that she was no longer in contact.  Would  this  not
             increase her father's mental health  problems?   I  also  note
             that she stated in the Tribunal that she had  been  told  that
             all her family are fine. At the  same  time  however  she  has
             informed me that her father has been mentally ill as a  result
             of her brother's death.
         49. There is no evidence the Appellant's  family  will  disown  or
             harm her.  There  is  no  evidence  that  they  are  a  strict
             religious family. She has been allowed to obtain education  to
             a high level and did  so  by  attending  college  outside  the
             family home. This is inconsistent  with  her  account  of  her
             father monitoring her in this country by staying with her  and
             visiting regularly and is inconsistent with her  account  that
             her family would not make strenuous efforts to locate  her.  I
             do not accept that she could not return to her  family.  I  do
             not accept that she has stopped all contact with her family or
             that they are unaware of her current situation.  There  is  no
             evidence to show that her father is a strict Muslim  who  will
             perpetrate violence against her and her children. There is  no
             evidence to show that her brothers will take a similar  stance
             against her. My  conclusion  is  that  there  is  insufficient
             evidence to show any risk to the  Appellant  or  her  children
             from family members."

Discussion regarding grounds 1 and 2

      7. There is no merit in grounds 1 or 2. The Judge  does  not  have  to
         recite every detail of the evidence. It is plain from  reading  the
         whole of  the  determination  that  the  Judge  was  aware  of  the
         allegation that her father had strict control over  her  life.  The
         Judge did not have to list every detail of  that.  The  Judge  gave
         multiple reasons for finding that she was not being truthful  about
         her lack of contact with family members or about their knowledge of
         her circumstances [43, 45-48], and for finding that she had  failed
         to establish she was  from  a  strict  Muslim  family  [49].  Those
         reasons  are  cogent  and  were  available  to  her.  She   plainly
         understood the Appellant's case and rejected her account.  She  was
         entitled to do so. The  grounds  amount  to  nothing  more  than  a
         disagreement with that.

The Judges findings in relation to ground 3

      8. The detailed findings are set out below and are underlined.
         "51.     The Respondent provided a response to  country  of  origin
             information on  the  issue  of  registration  of  illegitimate
             children. Advice was received from  the  British  Embassy  who
             consulted with Khan and Piracha, a consultancy firm  based  in
             Islamabad, who reviewed the legislation and met with officials
             of the National Database and Registration  Authority  (NADRA).
             They have stated that it is mandatory  for  the  parent  of  a
             child to register the child (with NADRA) within one  month  of
             the birth of the child (Section 9 (1) of the National Database
             and Registration Authority Ordinance 2002). Every citizen  who
             attains the age of eighteen whether inside or outside Pakistan
             is mandatorily required to register with the  same  authority.
             The documents issued  are  a  Child  Registration  Certificate
             (CRC) or  Computerised  National  Identity  Card  (CNIC).  The
             report states as follows:
                  "Given  the  severe  repercussions  for  the   mother   of
                  admission of illegitimacy,  registration  of  illegitimate
                  children (except where abandoned and under the care  of  a
                  listed orphanage) is not recognised by NADRA. "
         52. This report therefore appears to accept two issues  -  firstly
             that registration of illegitimate children with  the  national
             authorities is not possible  in  Pakistan  and  secondly  that
             there are severe repercussions for a mother in  the  admission
             of illegitimacy. The further issue is whether it has to become
             apparent that children are illegitimate  when  an  application
             for registration is made in  this  country  or  on  return  to
             Pakistan.
         53. A question asked in the COI request was:
                  "If a child of Pakistani origin is born in the UK,  can  a
                  CRC or CNIC be  obtained  on  production  of  a  UK  birth
                  certificate?
             The response is as follows:
                  "Registration of birth with the Pakistan Mission in the UK
                  in accordance with section 5 of  the  1951  act  (Pakistan
                  citizenship Act) will probably be possible on the basis of
                  a UK birth certificate. However to obtain  CRC  and  CNIC,
                  applications have to be made on forms prescribed under the
                  1952 Rules (the Pakistan Citizenship  Rules)  which  forms
                  required details/documentary evidence of details  of  both
                  parents.  For  a  CRC  a  birth   certificate   is   valid
                  documentary evidence but issuance of  CRC  will  not  only
                  depend on production  of  the  birth  certificate  as  the
                  requisite form will also have to be filled in."
         54. The application of this advice is  that  the  Appellant  would
             have to provide details and documentary  evidence  of  herself
             and the father of her children. The further question asked  in
             the COI request was:
                  "Does the father's name  have  to  be  provided  and/or  a
                  marriage certificate produced upon application?"
             The response is as follows:
                  "The  father's  name  has  to  be  provided   for   making
                  application  for  obtaining  CRC  or  CNIC.  There  is  no
                  requirement for furnishing a marriage certificate.
                  Issuance of a CRC is dependent  on  the  production  of  a
                  birth  certificate  from  the  Union  Council  and   whose
                  jurisdiction the  baby  is  born.  No  other  document  is
                  required for a child under the age of 10 years. However in
                  order to obtain the birth certificate,  names  of  parents
                  will be required and the parents may be called to  produce
                  their CNICs."
                  ...
                  "Issuance of CNIC is dependent on the production of  birth
                  certificate  or  matriculation  certificate  or  CNICs  of
                  immediate blood relatives. Father's name is given in birth
                  certificate as also matriculation certificate."
                  ...
                  "... father's actual name or any  dummy  name  has  to  be
                  given to NADRA for registration as  any  application  form
                  for CRC or CNIC from which either of the parents  name  is
                  missing will not be entertained by NADRA."
         55. It is clear from  this  evidence  that  the  production  of  a
             father's identity document is not a mandatory required  within
             Pakistan although the name of the father is a requirement  and
             he may be required to provide a CNIC.  The Appellant is  aware
             of the full name of her eldest child's father. She could  have
             a birth certificate which names the child's  father.  She  has
             stated that she is not aware of the full name  of  her  second
             child's father. I have some  concerns  about  whether  she  is
             being truthful. As I have previously stated the  Appellant  is
             an intelligent and well-educated young woman. She has referred
             to a second relationship and I conclude it  is  unlikely  that
             she would not be aware of the full name of the father  of  her
             second child.
         56. The  Appellant  argues  that  she  would  need  to  apply  for
             passports or  identity  documents  in  this  country  for  her
             children. The documents  produced  from  High  Commission  for
             Pakistan  website  show  that  they  require  valid   original
             documents issued by NADRA before a Pakistan  passport  can  be
             issued including one of the following:
                   i. A Computerised National Identity Card (CNIC)
                  ii.  National  Identity  Card  for  Overseas   Pakistanis
                      (NICOP)
                 iii. Smart National ID card
                  iv. Computerised Child Registration Certificate (CRC/Form
                      B) for under 18 years applicants only.
             The website advises that if an  individual  does  not  have  a
             valid version of any of these documents  that  an  application
             needs to be made to NADRA.  The  additional  requirements  for
             children  under  18  include  the  production  of  a  National
             Identity Card for Overseas Pakistanis and a  computerised  CRC
             issued by NADRA.
         57. I note that the High Commission for Pakistan require firstly a
             Pakistan passport for any individual making an application for
             a National Identity  Card  for  Overseas  Pakistanis  (NICOP).
             Secondly the full birth certificates of the mother and  father
             of the applicant are required in order to issue an  individual
             child with a NICOP. The website also  refers  to  needing  the
             NICOP card of the child's mother and father.  There is a final
             note stating that if the parents of the child are separated or
             divorced the custodian father or mother is required to produce
             court orders confirming his or her right  to  custody  of  the
             child.
         58. Finally I note that  the  High  Commission  for  Pakistan  has
             produced a sheet on frequently asked questions  in  connection
             with NADRA. This states as follows:
                  "NADRA holders are advised to  get  their  marital  status
                  updated on the cards as  soon  as  possible.  The  marital
                  status on at least one of the parents ID cards  must  have
                  been updated to "married" for child  application  process.
                  NADRA  system  will  not  allow  the  child's  application
                  processing  if  both  parents  status  is   mentioned   as
                  single/unmarried."
         59. My conclusion from reading carefully through this  information
             is that the concept of removal of  these  children  cannot  be
             divorced from the requirements regarding  their  identity  and
             familial background. It shows that she  cannot  register  them
             through the NADRA system as a single  mother.  The  fact  that
             their mother cannot register through NADRA or obtain  a  NICOP
             for them and  therefore  cannot  obtain  a  passport  for  her
             children would mean that she would be returning  without  full
             travel  documents  or  registration  identification.  Although
             removal of the Appellant and her children is a matter for  the
             Respondent I am unclear as to how the Appellant would be  able
             to avoid further enquiry into the  family  background  of  her
             children if  she  arrives  in  Pakistan  without  registration
             documents or valid passports or even a court order. I am aware
             that travel arrangements can be made by the Respondent for the
             two children through the use of a one  way  identity  document
             without the use of national passports but it is likely to lead
             to enquiries on the Appellant's arrival about her children. In
             the event that it does not lead to enquiries by  the  Pakistan
             Immigration authorities then the Appellant is still left  with
             the problem of registering her children in Pakistan.
         60. I find that it would be extremely difficult for the  Appellant
             to register  her  children  in  this  country  without  formal
             identification documents of the children's father's  or  being
             untruthful with  her  national  authorities.  The  information
             provided in the COI does not answer the question of  what  the
             situation would be for  a  child  returning  from  the  United
             Kingdom without being formally registered by the Pakistan High
             Commission.  In  addition  the  information  provided  by  the
             Respondent is not consistent with the information provided  on
             the  website  of  the  Pakistan  High  Commission.   The   COI
             information ignores the requirement given for the  parents  of
             the child to be married before registration is possible and  I
             therefore question whether there is now that same  requirement
             for  applications  made  within  Pakistan.   The   information
             provided by the experts makes no mention of  this  requirement
             by NADRA. This is a gap in the COI  request  since  it  refers
             simply to the names of the father and mother of the child  and
             ignores what is likely  to  be  an  important  requirement  of
             providing proof of marital status which is referred to on  the
             High Commission website.
         61. On the basis of this information I conclude that the Appellant
             would have difficulties in explaining how she has two children
             without disclosing that she is unmarried. The COI response  to
             a request for information also referred to whether there  were
             any statistics on the numbers of charges or convictions  under
             the offence of zina. The Appellant has not committed adultery.
             The COI on the treatment of Women dated July  2014  states  as
             follows:
                  "2.5.3 Whilst the offence of zina defines  "adultery"  and
                  is covered under the  Hudood  Ordinance  described  above,
                  [67] sexual relations between parties who are not  married
                  is considered "fornication" and is deemed an offence under
                  the Protection of Women (Criminal Law Amendment) 2006 Act.
                  This offence is punishable by imprisonment for up to  five
                  years  and  a  fine  not  exceeding  10,000   Rupees.   An
                  accusation of adultery must be lodged  directly  with  the
                  court.  It  is  considered  an  offence  to   make   false
                  accusations of adultery and fornication. [68]"
         62. The COI  response  to  a  request  for  information  does  not
             properly differentiate between adultery  and  the  offence  of
             fornication. It referred to whether there were any  statistics
             on the numbers of charges or convictions under the offence  of
             zina. "No statistics were available for charges or convictions
             for simple zina (adultery)." I have not  been  presented  with
             statistics on the number of prosecutions for fornication under
             the Protection of Women  Protection  of  Women  (Criminal  Law
             Amendment) 2006 Act and  the  likelihood  of  the  authorities
             using this legislation against the Appellant.   The  Appellant
             relied  on  a  report  from  Law  Nexus  which  is  of  little
             assistance. It refers to the  Hudood  laws  and  the  Pakistan
             Penal code and makes the distinction between the two. It  also
             states that the Appellant  is  liable  to  be  prosecuted  and
             refers to the punishments of stoning to death or whipping.  It
             is not consistent with the  objective  evidence  which  stated
             that there are no record of statistics and does not given  any
             indication of the numbers of women who are prosecuted. It also
             contradicts the information provided in the  country  guidance
             case of KA and Others which I shall refer  to  later  in  this
             determination.
         63. I have no evidence to show how the authorities would react  to
             an unmarried mother  of  two  children  who  are  undocumented
             entering  the  country.  According  to  the  COI  illegitimate
             children are referred to as "forbidden under Islam." There  is
             a reference to "huge social stigma"  and  not  being  able  to
             inherit but the Appellant has not provided any evidence  about
             how an illegitimate child would be treated in a  family  where
             he or she is supported.
         64. The Respondent has accepted that the Appellant has given birth
             to two children in  relationships  outside  marriage.  I  have
             concluded that  it  is  not  possible  for  the  Appellant  to
             register these children prior to returning to Pakistan. I find
             that unless the Appellant is willing to be dishonest about her
             marital status it is reasonable for me to  conclude  that  she
             will have  difficulties  registering  the  children  with  the
             Pakistani  authorities  given  her   unmarried   status.   The
             authorities will be aware that she has  no  children  yet  her
             identity status remains as a single woman.
         65. The further question therefore is how these children  will  be
             treated on their return to Pakistan. I have referred to  their
             status as "forbidden under Islam." The COI reply to a  request
             on information refers to the absence of an  ID  card  and  its
             effect in Pakistan. I note that the requirement for an ID card
             is described as becoming increasingly vital for gaining access
             to admission to educational institutions, employment  both  in
             the private and government sectors and in all practical day-to-
             day affairs such as access to  travel  by  air  and  telephone
             connections.  Any  access  to  the   healthcare   and   social
             welfare/governmental sector will  also  be  dependent  on  the
             production of ID cards. However the US State Department report
             states as follows:
                  "While the government reported more than 75 percent of the
                  population was registered, actual figures  may  be  lower.
                  Public services, such as education and health  care,  were
                  available to children without a birth certificate.
         66. The Appellant's objective evidence concentrated on  the  issue
             of honour killings. Some of the evidence concentrated  on  the
             murder of illegitimate children by family relatives. It  would
             have been extremely helpful to have had further information on
             the  treatment   of   children   who   are   illegitimate   or
             undocumented. As I have previously stated I find that there is
             no evidence that either the  Appellant  or  her  children  are
             directly at risk of violence from the  Appellant's  family  or
             that they would not be supported by them.
         67. I have read through the country guidance case of KA and Others
             and note that the guidance is that:
                  "i.  In general persons who on return face prosecution  in
                  the Pakistan courts will not be at real risk of a flagrant
                  denial of their right to a fair trial,  although  it  will
                  always   be   necessary   to   consider   the   particular
                  circumstances of the individual case.
                  ii.  Although conditions in  prisons  in  Pakistan  remain
                  extremely poor, the evidence does not demonstrate that  in
                  general such  conditions  are  persecutory  or  amount  to
                  serious harm or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.
                  iii. The Protection of Women (Criminal Laws Amendment) Act
                  2006 ("PWA"), one of  a  number  of  legislative  measures
                  undertaken to improve the situation of women  in  Pakistan
                  in the past decade, has had a significant  effect  on  the
                  operation of the Pakistan criminal law as it affects women
                  accused of adultery.  It  led  to  the  release  of  2,500
                  imprisoned women. Most sexual  offences  now  have  to  be
                  dealt with under the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) rather than
                  under the more punitive Offence of  Zina  (Enforcement  of
                  Hudood) Ordinance 1979. Husbands no longer have  power  to
                  register a First Information Report (FIR) with the  police
                  alleging  adultery;  since  1  December  2006   any   such
                  complaint must be presented to a court which will  require
                  sufficient grounds to be shown for any charges to proceed.
                  A senior police officer has to conduct the  investigation.
                  Offences of adultery (both zina liable to  hadd  and  zina
                  liable  to  tazir)  have  been  made  bailable.   However,
                  Pakistan remains a heavily patriarchal society and  levels
                  of domestic violence continue to be high."
         68. My difficulty in this appeal is the lack of information on the
             likelihood of  the  Appellant  facing  prosecution  and  as  a
             consequence the impact this will  have  on  her  children.  It
             could  be  argued  that  the  concept   of   prosecution   for
             "fornication"  and  the  sentence  involving   a   five   year
             imprisonment and fine is an inhumane  and  degrading  form  of
             treatment and punishment against a woman where  she  would  be
             forcibly separated from her two very young children. However I
             do not have the necessary evidence to  show  that  this  is  a
             likely consequence for the Appellant.
         69. I do not accept that the  Appellant  has  provided  sufficient
             evidence to show that she will be prosecuted as  a  result  of
             her status as an unmarried mother. I do not  accept  that  the
             Appellant is in need  of  state  protection  as  there  is  an
             absence of any threat of honour killing against her. I do  not
             accept  that  there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that   the
             Appellant faces a real risk of harm on her return or that  she
             would be  forced  to  internally  relocate  away  from  family
             members. I do not accept that she has shown  that  she  is  at
             risk  for  a  convention  reason.  The   Appellant   has   not
             established there is a real  risk  she  would  face  treatment
             contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR in the event of her  removal
             from the United Kingdom to Pakistan.  There is no evidence  to
             suggest that she would  face  rejection  from  her  particular
             family or that her family would reject her two children."

Discussion regarding ground 3

      9. There is no merit  in  ground  3.  The  Judge  considered  all  the
         evidence very carefully and gave multiple reasons for finding  that
         the Appellant could produce birth  certificates  for  her  children
         identifying the father's names [55]. The Judge explains  in  detail
         the requirements regarding obtaining documents and registration for
         the children in Pakistan. She notes that there is no evidence  that
         the Appellant and children would be unsupported [66]. She explained
         at length the lacuna in the evidence regarding  the  likelihood  of
         being prosecuted for having children outside marriage [68, 69].  It
         was for the Appellant to make out  her  case,  and  the  Judge  was
         entitled to find she had failed to do so for the reasons she  gave.
         These findings were open to the Judge on the evidence before her.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
25 April 2016
