
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06856/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 January 2016                    |On 8 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                            NIROSAN SELVARATHINAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Garrod, Counsel instructed by Marsh & Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  to
    vary and extend his leave to remain and to  refuse  asylum.  Designated
    First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy ("the judge") dismissed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 28 September 2015.

2.     The  appellant  seeks  to  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision on the ground that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  his
    assessment of what weight to place on a newspaper article reporting the
    arrest of the appellant's father  in  2001.  The  appellant's  previous
    solicitors translated the article inaccurately  to  indicate  that  two
    owners of the vehicle were arrested. The appellant's evidence was  that
    his mother wasn't arrested. The discrepancy between the translation and
    the appellant's evidence was relied upon by the judge and  formed  part
    of his adverse credibility findings. While the error was caused by  the
    solicitor and not the judge, it nevertheless undermined his credibility
    findings because they were based on a mistake of fact.

Decision and reasons

3.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

4.    The judge gave some weight to the  apparent  discrepancy  between  the
    appellant's evidence and the (incorrect) translation of  the  newspaper
    article [32-33 & 36]. However, it is clear from an overall  reading  of
    his decision that this was only one factor amongst  a  number  that  he
    took into account in coming to his conclusions about the credibility of
    the appellant's account.

5.    Mr Garrod sought to widen  the  scope  of  the  grounds  by  including
    further arguments relating to other aspects of the judge's  credibility
    findings.  However,  I  conclude  that  none  of   those   points   are
    sufficiently persuasive for me to permit an amendment to  the  grounds.
    The judge gave adequate reasons to explain why he did not place  weight
    on the letter from the Human Rights Commission  of  Sri  Lanka  on  the
    ground that it only stated what his mother reported to them. There  was
    no evidence to show that they had carried out  an  investigation.  That
    finding was open to him on the evidence. The  evidence  related  to  an
    alleged arrest in 2013 and not to his father's arrest  in  2001,  which
    was the subject of the original error alleged in the grounds of appeal.
    An issue is taken with the judge's findings relating  to  the  evidence
    from his brother [40-44] but even if the letter  had  been  written  in
    more fluent English it would have been  open  to  the  judge  to  place
    little weight on it given the evidence was not independent.

6.    Mr Garrod also argued that the decision was flawed because  the  judge
    failed to make specific findings in relation to a  letter  from  a  Sri
    Lankan attorney, who stated that he  had  made  enquiries  at  Kotahena
    police station. He confirmed  that  the  appellant's  father  had  been
    arrested on 24 July 2001 on suspicion of involvement in the  attack  on
    Katunayake airport.

7.    Even if the judge overlooked this evidence I find that  neither  this,
    nor the original error alleged in relation to the judge's assessment of
    the newspaper article, is  material  to  the  overall  outcome  of  the
    appeal. In the original reasons for refusal letter the  respondent  did
    not appear to dispute that  the  appellant's  father  might  have  been
    arrested for three days in July 2001. However, the respondent concluded
    that it was not credible that the authorities would have had an ongoing
    interest in his father in 2013 given the length of time that had passed
    since the arrest [38].

8.    Even if the judge accepted that part of the appellant's  account,  his
    findings relating to the other aspects of the evidence,  including  his
    immigration history and the delay in claiming asylum, were all  matters
    that he was entitled to  take  into  account.  The  crucial  issue  was
    whether the  appellant's  father  was  re-arrested  in  2013,  but  the
    appellant has failed to demonstrate any material error in  the  judge's
    findings in relation to that aspect of the case. The  judge's  findings
    relating to sur place activities and risk on return are sustainable and
    in accordance with the relevant country guidance.

9.    For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of a material error on a  point  of
    law. The decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed      [pic]      Date 02 February 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

