
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06287/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 June 2015                      |On 22 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     L T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss V Laughton, Counsel instructed by Tamil Welfare
                    Association
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  We  make
    this order because there is always a risk in cases such as  this  of  a
    person being put at risk solely because his claim attracting publicity.

 2. We allow this appeal and these are our reasons.

 3. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary
    of State denying him asylum in the United Kingdom.

 4. The main point taken in the grounds  of  appeal  and  in  the  skeleton
    argument before us is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  deal
    adequately or at all with medical evidence going to the  mental  health
    of the appellant.  We find this very significant because, although  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge gave several  reasons  for  disbelieving  the
    appellant, amongst the reasons seen to be the  best  were  examples  of
    inconsistencies in the account.  However  these  could  have  been  the
    result of the appellant's apparent mental ill health rather than  as  a
    result of dishonesty on the part of the appellant.

 5. There was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  clear  evidence  that  the
    appellant's mental health was not ideal.  There  is  a  medical  report
    from a general medical practitioner. It was not signed but no one  took
    any point on this. There was no reason to think that it was a  forgery.
    The report shoed that in  response  to  a  questionnaire,  which  is  a
    perfectly proper  method  of  diagnosis  in  these  circumstances,  the
    appellant gave a score suggesting  that  he  suffered  from  moderately
    severe depression and moderate  anxiety  and  that  he  was  prescribed
    medication   by   the   medical   practitioner   to   deal   with   his
    "anxiety/depression/posttraumatic stress".

 6. It is not obvious to  us  from  this  medical  evidence  just  how  the
    apparent ill health might have impacted on the appellant's  ability  to
    give an account of himself. This is something which ought to have  been
    investigated. It was left out of the Decision.

 7. We have more than a little sympathy for the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    because, as far as we can see, neither the grounds of  appeal  nor  the
    skeleton argument suggested that the appellant gave wrong, confusing or
    inadequate answers because of his mental health.  This surprised  us  a
    little, especially as he was represented by Counsel (not Miss Laughton)
    and it would have been more attractive from the  appellant's  point  of
    view to be able to say that the  point  was  pursued  with  vigour  and
    ignored by the judge.

 8. Nevertheless, the fact of the matter is that  it  was  clearly  raised.
    Not  only  was  it  there  in  the  medical  report,  which  the  judge
    acknowledged reading, but it was also raised in correspondence with the
    Tribunal from the Appellant's solicitors in support of a request for  a
    transfer to a hearing centre said to be  more  agreeable.   The  letter
    there says in terms that he complains of the appellant:

         "... suffering the after-effects of his torture. Indeed he presents
         with  the  following   visible   symptoms:   anxiety,   low   mood,
         flashbacks/nightmares related to his past experiences and abuse  in
         detention and general reluctance to talk about and narrate his past
         experiences in Sri Lanka etc."

 9. It is absolutely clear that the suggestion that mental health  impacted
    on his ability to give an account of himself was never abandoned.  This
    possibility should have been in the Judge's mind and the point was  not
    dealt with by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

10. There are  other  reasons  for  disbelieving  the  appellant  and  they
    themselves have been challenged.  We note Miss  Laughton's  submissions
    that points were taken that ought not to have been about  plausibility.
    We have read the relevant paragraphs of the determination.  We make  no
    comment or finding on that particular ground.  The case has got  to  go
    back to the First-tier Tribunal.  No findings will be preserved and the
    First-tier Tribunal will be, we are sure, careful to make sure it makes
    findings that are properly supported by the evidence  or  if  it  makes
    findings on inference the inference is properly justified.

11. We considered Miss Fijiwala's submissions before making  our  decision.
    It is undoubtedly the case that the judge has referred to  the  medical
    evidence and claims to have considered all the  papers.  We  find  that
    this is not good enough when, as is the case here, it is possible  that
    the mental health of the appellant goes to the very core of his ability
    to conduct himself. It might  go  to  the  very  core  of  the  adverse
    credibility findings. This is not a case that is saved by  the  generic
    albeit no doubt perfectly truthful reference to having  considered  the
    papers.  This is a point of such importance that we  are  satisfied  it
    required specific clear direct consideration.

12. We have asked ourselves if the point is material.  We remind  ourselves
    that the situation in Sri Lanka certainly is better than  it  once  was
    but it is this appellant's case that after the conflict has  ceased  he
    has been tortured by the authorities  and  that  they  continue  to  be
    interested in him and show it by contacting his mother.

13. We make no findings on these claims but if they are credible they might
    lead to the appellant being found to need protection.

14. It follows therefore that the core finding  about  credibility  is  not
    satisfactory because it does not show proper  regard  for  all  of  the
    evidence.

15. We also note that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not refer  directly
    to the appellant's witness  statement,  which  is  in  the  form  of  a
    rebuttal of various points taken in the refusal letter.   He  may  have
    considered it but it would  have  been  much  better  if  it  had  been
    considered specifically so it was apparent to everyone not merely  that
    it was read but that its contents were understood and noted.  This  has
    not been done.

16. There errors in this case cannot be repaired without a further hearing.

17. We allow the appellant's appeal.  We set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  We rule that the case must be  decided  again  in
    the First-tier.

18. We make no  directions  on  this  point  but  we  understand  that  the
    Appellant's solicitors have order a further report which is  likely  to
    be ready by the end of August. It seems undesirable to list the  appeal
    before then but that is a matter for the First-tier Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed. The case will be decided again in the First-tier
    Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 19 June 2015                   |

