
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06368/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 16 July 2015                              |On 19 August  2015            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     nE
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Head, Solicitor, of Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on  11  August  2014  refusing  to  grant  him
    further leave to remain and to remove him to Palestine.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Palestine born on 6 September 1987.

 4. The appellant arrived in the UK on 2 September 2012 with a student visa
    valid from 1 September 2012 to 30 January 2014.  He  returned  to  Gaza
    between 29 May 2013 and 17 June 2013. He  claimed  asylum  on  20  July
    2013; stating that he would face mistreatment from  Hamas  if  returned
    because of his  past  political  activities.  His  activities  included
    criticising  Hamas  on  his  Facebook  and  Twitter  pages,  publishing
    articles and taking part in demonstrations. He was  detained  in  March
    2013 and again when he returned in May 2013 but he managed to escape on
    12 June 2013 and flee to the UK.

 5. The respondent did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  is  a  political
    activist or that he had attended demonstrations or been  arrested.  The
    evidence regarding his activities criticising Hamas was  contradictory.
    He was able to leave Gaza on his own passport.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. He attended an  oral
    hearing at Hatton Cross  on  7  October  2014.  The  judge  found  that
    individuals publicly criticising Hamas risk persecutory  reprisals  and
    applicants who establish a well-founded fear of  the  authorities  will
    not be able to obtain protection from them.

 7. The judge rejected the appellant's claim to have been detained  on  two
    occasions because of inconsistent evidence. The on line material  post-
    dating the appellant's return to the UK did not give rise to  any  real
    risk because the content did not go beyond general comment  of the kind
    that is common on the internet, the material was password protected and
    there was no reason to suppose  that  it  would  be  read  by  a  Hamas
    official who would take the trouble to identify the appellant on return
    to Gaza and because there was no evidence that Hamas has the  resources
    to detect and apprehend each person who makes an  unfavourable  comment
    on the internet. The appeal was dismissed.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 10 March 2015. The grounds
    of appeal assert that the appellant produced copies of the  information
    that he was forced to show Hamas whilst he was  in  detention  and  the
    judge's finding that he had not produced  copies  is  not  sustainable.
    None of the criticism of Hamas is password protected and  the  comments
    are evidently highly critical of and offensive to Hamas. The  appellant
    has 6000 followers on Twitter. That is indicative of his profile.

 9. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on
    Brunnen on 19 March 2015 on the basis that it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge failed to take  proper  account  of  or  misapprehended  material
    evidence  concerning  the  nature  and  public  availability   of   the
    appellant's criticism of Hamas and consequently failed to give adequate
    reasons for his finding that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return to Gaza. Those grounds were arguable.

10. In a rule 24 response dated  2015, the respondent sought to uphold  the
    judge's decision on the basis that the judge gave clear and substantial
    reasons for not accepting the credibility  of  the  appellant  and  his
    witnesses, the appellant had sought to enhance his claim, it  was  open
    to the judge to find that the comments did not go beyond common comment
    and that the appellant had not demonstrated to  the  required  standard
    that the authorities in Gaza were aware of his posts or Twitter comment
    or that they had the resources to identify the appellant.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

12. Ms Head submitted that  the  judge  did  not  adequately  consider  the
    evidence. The appellant evidenced postings that were highly critical of
    Hamas. The judge misunderstood the  evidence  and  the  nature  of  the
    postings. The finding that Hamas would not know about the  postings  is
    not consistent with the objective evidence showing  detentions  because
    of postings on Facebook. The errors infect the assessment of risk  upon
    return. If the Upper Tribunal identifies a material error of  law  then
    the appeal should be  remitted  for  a  fresh  hearing.  There  is  new
    material in light of the appellant's ongoing political activity.

13. Mr Whitwell responded that the grounds simply amount to a  disagreement
    regarding the credibility findings. The decision is nuanced and  refers
    to the  objective  evidence.  The  USSSD  report  at  page  14  of  the
    appellant's bundle refers to anecdotal  reports  rather  than  evidence
    from non-partisan actors or non-government organisations. The reference
    to password protection is not  determinative  of  the  risk  on  return
    finding - two other points  are  made  that  do  properly  support  the
    finding.  Twitter has 600 million users and  it  is  not  open  to  the
    appellant to post a few critical comments on social media and then  say
    that Hamas will be aware of each and every post. The appellant  is  not
    calling for the overthrow of Hamas and the judge was  critical  of  his
    credibility. The outcome of the appeal is not perverse.

14. Ms Head responded that paragraph 56 of the decision is clear; Hamas  do
    exercise  reprisals.  The  judge  has  not  adequately  considered  the
    material before him. The USSSD can only get evidence from people living
    in Gaza. The appellant has always said that his activity  is  political
    and he has clearly made fun of Hamas. The findings about detention  are
    caught up with the error about the appellant's profile and Hamas  being
    aware of that profile.







Discussion

15. I find that the judge erred in fact when he  found  that  Facebook  and
    Twitter are password protected. That is not disputed by the respondent.
    That finding cannot be isolated  from  the  remainder  of  the  judge's
    findings  in  relation  to  the  risk  of  Hamas  being  aware  of  the
    appellant's  social  media  activity  and  their  likely  response.  In
    addition, I find that the error of fact infects the overall  assessment
    of the appellant's credibility because the social media activity  is  a
    central plank of the appellant's claim and the judge's finding that the
    social media activity did not give rise to  any  real  risk  on  return
    impacted upon the overall credibility assessment.

16. I find that the error of fact amounts to a failure to properly consider
    relevant evidence and that is a material error of law. There is nothing
    to suggest that the judge was made aware in submissions  that  Facebook
    and Twitter are not password protected but there is none  the  less  an
    obvious unfairness to the appellant arising from the inadvertent  error
    of the judge.

17. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

18. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the error of law infects  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

19. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.




Signed   [pic]                      Date 15 August 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


