
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06547/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 7 January 2014                               |On 19 February 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                             mr evgeny mishurov
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                  Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Russia, born on 9 November 1991.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 10 September  2013  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    King TD found an error of law and set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination for re-making  in  due  course  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Further background evidence was to be obtained and is still pending  in
    the form of a country report from Professor Robert Chenciner  which  is
    expected on 7 February 2014.

 2. In light of the concerns about the findings of fact in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal I do not consider that this  is  a  case  which  needs  to  be
    retained in the Upper Tribunal and it is more appropriate that findings
    of fact be made afresh in the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  will
    therefore be heard on the first open day after  1  March  2014  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross).

 3. The credibility findings are to be preserved also the finding that  the
    claimant is a Jehovah's Witness  and  an  interpreter  in  the  Russian
    language.

 4. Save for subparagraph 4 of the directions given by Upper Tribunal Judge
    King on 10 September 2013,  those  directions  are  maintained  and  no
    further directions will be made by the Upper Tribunal.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

