
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07461/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 10 March 2014 and 24 April 2014            |On 21 May 2014               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                     M a
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Appiah, Counsel, instructed by Stepstones
                    Visas, Legal Representatives
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sangha in a determination  promulgated  on  2
    October 2013 in which he dismissed her appeal against the  decision  of
    the respondent made on 25 July 2013 to refuse to grant her  asylum  and
    to remove her from the United Kingdom.

 2. On 23 October 2013, the appellant was granted permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal against Judge Sangha's decision.   Her  appeal  then
    came before Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coates,  sitting  at  Bennett
    House, Stoke-on-Trent on 18 December 2013.  For the reasons  given  in
    his decision of 8 January 2014 (a copy of which  is  attached  to  this
    determination) Judge Coates found that the decision of Judge Sangha did
    involve the making of an error of law such that it was to be set aside.
    He directed that the decision be remade and that it  should  be  listed
    before him.  The matter came before us as a result of a transfer  order
    made by Principal Resident Judge Southern on 11 February 2014.   It  is
    accepted by both parties that none of the  findings  of  fact  made  by
    Judge Sangha are to stand.

The Appellant's Case

 3. In summary, the appellant's case is  that  she  (and  her  father)  are
    undocumented Bidoons from Kuwait.  Her husband is also an  undocumented
    Bidoon and as a  result  their  children  are  in  the  same  position.
    Although she has some documents relating to her status in  Kuwait,  she
    does not have the necessary "security card" without  which  she  is  an
    undocumented Bidoon and  thus,  following  NM  (documented/undocumented
    Bidoon: risk) Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 00356 (IAC).  She  is  at  risk  of
    persecution on return.

 4. In addition,  the  appellant  faced  problems  in  Kuwait  due  to  her
    involvement in the distribution of leaflets calling for  Bidoon  rights
    which had been printed by her husband and his friends.  At the  end  of
    April 2012 she was arrested from home and taken  to  a  state  security
    office and interrogated about the leaflets.  She was held for  about  a
    month and as  a  result  of  the  beatings  during  interrogation,  she
    confessed that she had helped her husband in  delivering  the  leaflets
    but only once.  She was released on condition that she must  report  to
    the Authorities within one month  of  her  release  giving  information
    about her husband's whereabouts, and the identities of his  friends  to
    whom she had delivered leaflets.   She  was  forced  to  sign  a  paper
    confirming the conditions and was released through the intervention  of
    a Kuwaiti citizen guarantor known to her father.

 5. After her release, arrangements were made for the appellant  to  travel
    to the United Kingdom with the assistance of an agent.   The  appellant
    claimed asylum at the airport on arrival.

The Respondent's Case

 6. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter  dated  25  July
    2013.  In summary, she accepted that the appellant's account of how her
    family came to be Bidoons was consistent with  the  objective  evidence
    [17], but considered that her claim to be an  undocumented  Bidoon  was
    contradicted by the fact that she had produced  a  copy  of  her  birth
    certificate; by the fact that she, her husband and the children had all
    attended school in Kuwait; and, that although,  with  some  difficulty,
    she and her children would be able to access medical treatment.

 7. The respondent did not accept the appellant had been politically active
    in Kuwait given inconsistencies in her account as to  how  her  husband
    got the money to obtain a laptop and printer, her account of  what  she
    did with the leaflets and how she transported them.  The respondent did
    not accept either the appellant's account of her arrest  and  detention
    given the inconsistencies in her account.

 8. The respondent considered that the appellant is a documented Bidoon and
    accordingly, on the basis of BA and Others (Bidoon -  statelessness -
    risk of persecution) Kuwait CG [2004] UKIAT 00256 considered  that  she
    would experience significantly less problems than undocumented Bidoons,
    and that while she might face discrimination, that was  not  sufficient
    to amount to persecution.  The respondent considered that removing  the
    appellant to Kuwait would not be in breach of the Refugee Convention or
    contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations pursuant to Articles 2,  3
    or 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

Hearing on 10 March 2014

 9. We heard evidence from the appellant.  It did  not  prove  possible  to
    complete cross-examination, and the matter  was  adjourned  part  heard
    until 24 April 2014 when cross-examination continued.   We  then  heard
    submissions from both representatives.

10. We had before us the following documents:-

      a) respondent's bundle ("RB");

      b) the appellant's bundle ("AB");

      c) appellant's additional bundle containing witness statement from the
         appellant,  letters  of  support  from  Harrow  Kuwaiti   Community
         Association with  witness  statements,  NM  (documents/undocumented
         Bidoon: risk) Kuwait CG  [2013]  UKUT  00356  (IAC)  and  documents
         relating to the appellant's father's service in the army;

      d)  additional  translation  of  appellant's  father's  army   driving
         licence;

      e) skeleton argument from Miss Appiah.

11. The appellant gave evidence in Arabic with the assistance  of  a  court
    interpreter.  She adopted her witness statement of 5 March  2014  which
    states [4] that she had had read  back  to  her  and  agreed  with  the
    contents of her previous statements of 16 July 2012, 14 March 2013 and
    31 August 2013.

12. The appellant said that the documents relating to her father's  service
    in the army had been faxed to her by a friend in Kuwait who had visited
    her family.  She said she had last had contact with  her  parents  some
    one or two weeks earlier.

13. In cross-examination the appellant said that she had had a few contacts
    with her family in Kuwait and that she had only been able to  get  back
    in  contact  with  them  through  a  friend  recently  and  after  some
    questioning we were able to elicit that the appellant had got  back  in
    contact with her friend in March 2013.  She said that she had spoken to
    her friend who had tried to find the family and had been able to  track
    them down.  She said that the friend had found the family  in  February
    2013 and had told her at that point.  It was put to her that  this  was
    inconsistent with her statement [witness statement  of  3  March  2013]
    that her family had been missing since January 2013.

14. The appellant was asked if she could explain why her  father's  driving
    licence states (in translation) that it was  issued  in  1979  but  was
    valid from 1985.  She said that she had no idea and could  not  explain
    this.

15. Asked about the letter from Harrow Kuwaiti  Community  Association  and
    how she knew the two witnesses, the appellant said that she had  met  a
    person who had asked her about her problems.  She  was  asked  how  she
    knew the two people who had given statements, saying she had been asked
    a few questions about where  she  came  from  and  her  problems.   She
    confirmed that she had spoken to only one person.  Asked then how there
    were two people who had verified her identity, she said that  she  knew
    one person, Tariq, who had been a friend of her father's in Kuwait  for
    a long time and she had met him once since she had come here.  She said
    that she had met Ali Sankh here and that he knew about her  because  he
    had known of her family.  She had no idea when her father had last seen
    Tariq.  She could not recall when she had last seen him in Kuwait.  She
    said that Ali had provided the witness statement on the basis  of  what
    she had told him.

16. The appellant said that between her release and leaving Kuwait she  had
    not been in contact with her husband (and had been misunderstood in the
    screening interview at 6.2).  She said she had  not  seen  her  husband
    since she had been arrested and that he had not  been  present  at  the
    time of her arrest.  She said she had not asked her family if they  had
    heard of him.

17. Asked how, if she had had no contact with her husband, she knew he  was
    hiding in various locations, the appellant said it was obvious that  he
    had been in hiding as he had not been arrested.  She said she  did  not
    say in the screening interview that her husband was living at the  same
    address as her and it was put to her that although  she  had  corrected
    some parts of what had been said in the screening interview,  she  said
    that part had not been the subject of any revision.  She  denied,  when
    it was put to her, that she had any idea where he is.

18. The appellant said that she had received education up to the age of  17
    although it had been difficult and had been interrupted.

19. The appellant confirmed that she and her father  were  members  of  the
    Bidoon community in Kuwait (witness statement  of  31/8/13).   She  was
    asked what attempts had been made to get a security card and said  that
    they had tried to obtain it by organising demonstrators  agitating  for
    the rights of Bidoons and by protest.

20. The appellant had denied that she was a documented Bidoon, stating that
    her  children's  education  had  been  paid  for  (see   Q108,   Asylum
    Interview).

21. The appellant said that in order to get medical treatment she had  made
    up a number to give to the doctor which turned out not  to  work.   She
    attended the doctors with a face veil which meant  that  he  could  not
    identify her from the false identity she used (see Q110/111).

22. The applicant was asked if she had ever approached the Bidoon committee
    to inquire about getting registration.  She said she had not  and  that
    she was completely oblivious of this committee and did not know what Ms
    Isherwood was talking about.  Asked then what she meant by she and  her
    father being heavily involved  with  the  Bidoon  committee  (  witness
    statement 31 August 2013,  at  [15]),  she  said  that  they  had  been
    involved with them,  had  asked  them  to  get  a  green  card  to  get
    registered but that that had not happened.  She said that  her  earlier
    answer about being completely  oblivious  about  the  committee  was  a
    misunderstanding but she could not recall when she  had  dealings  with
    the committee.

23. Asked to explain what she meant by saying that she and her father  were
    involved members of the committee, the appellant  said  that  they  had
    explained to people what Bidoon means, their rights and  tried  to  get
    their  rights  but  without  success.   She  confirmed  that  she   had
    approached people to explain the difficulties the Bidoon face.  She was
    asked why she had not mentioned before that she had  approached  people
    to explain the difficulties of Bidoon people, she  said  that  she  had
    mentioned this and had been involved in the  distribution  of  leaflets
    about it which is why she had been imprisoned.  She said that  she  had
    distributed leaflets to people, to all  the  Bidoon  community.   After
    what she had said in her witness statement (paragraph 21) she said that
    she had not handed them out individually but was in contact with a  man
    to whom she had given them, but she said they had a  printer  at  home;
    she produced the leaflets, gave them to Ahmed  Yasser  who  distributed
    them and she said that  the  committee  consists  of  coordinators  and
    people who go out to mosques, distribute leaflets,  all  activities  to
    help Bidoon get their rights.  She  said  her  role  was  printing  out
    leaflets and giving them to Ahmed to distribute them.  Asked about  why
    she had not mentioned herself printing out some leaflets she said  that
    she and her husband had done it together, and that she and her  husband
    specialised in this task of printing them out  because  they  read  and
    write and so were tasked with that activity.

24. Asked why she and her husband had  been given the task of printing  out
    leaflets, the appellant said that they could read  and  write  and  are
    literate.  She was then asked about using a computer.  She said it  was
    just a typewriter, then after further  questioning  what  she  did  was
    basically photocopying; that they got the letters already  written  and
    made photocopies of them.  She said that they used a photocopier  which
    they had bought with money collected by the group and which they placed
    in their bedroom where no one could see it.  She said that she did  not
    have a laptop (a laptop was shown to her in court) and that it was  not
    a computer.  She said that her understanding of the device was that  it
    was only a photocopier and she did not know the name of it.

25. Asked if she had had her witnesses' statements read back to her in  the
    appropriate language, she said that she had only  had  interpreters  at
    court.  When asked to comment on the fact that  her  initial  statement
    (AB, Q8) had been signed by an interpreter,  she  said  she  could  not
    recall what had happened  and  had  not  paid  attention  to  what  had
    happened.

26. In re-examination  the  appellant  confirmed  that  she  had  signed  a
    statement dated 16 July 2012 but could not recall if it  was  read  to
    her.  Asked about the most recent statement she said she has a  problem
    with concentration, referring to a report from her doctor in the United
    Kingdom.

27. We then heard submissions.  Ms Isherwood submitted that  the  appellant
    was not a credible witness, asking us to note that it was only now that
    the appellant said that she and her husband  distributed  leaflets  and
    that whilst she had earlier clearly said they  had  had  a  laptop  and
    printer, she now said they had a photocopier which  was  a  significant
    difference.  She submitted that the explanation  regarding  a  lack  of
    interpretation in her witness statements was contradicted by  the  fact
    they were signed by an interpreter and that the contradiction  goes  to
    the core of the appellant's claim as there were political activities.

28. Ms Isherwood submitted also that the appellant had been inconsistent in
    her evidence about the distribution of leaflets and had given vague and
    incredible evidence as to the activities of the committee of which  she
    had formed a part.  She submitted that weight could not  be  placed  on
    the documents produced in relation to the appellant's  father  nor  the
    medical document.  She submitted the account of being  able  to  use  a
    friend's ID by wearing a veil was  inconsistent  with  the  account  of
    having visited the doctor on several occasions.

29. Ms Isherwood submitted that it was clear the appellant was  in  fact  a
    Bidoon who had been given a  security  card.   She  submitted  that  no
    weight could be attached to letters from the Bidoon community in Harrow
    given the lack of evidence in respect of  the  authors;  there  was  no
    evidence of their status and the appellant who confirmed that  she  had
    only spoken to one of the people.

30. Miss Appiah  relied  on  her  skeleton  argument  submitting  that  the
    appellant  had  given  consistent  evidence  throughout   her   witness
    statements, interviews and hearing and oral  evidence.   She  submitted
    that it was plausible that she had difficulties with memory and that it
    was possible that the appellant did not know the name of the equipment,
    whether it was a laptop, a computer, or a photocopier, which  had  been
    used.  The evidence had been consistent that  the  equipment  had  been
    used to produce leaflets in her home.  She  submitted  that  there  was
    confusion as to what was meant by the "Bidoon committee".  It was clear
    that that phrase was used in the country guidance case, NM, to refer to
    a Government committee;  the  appellant  was  clearly  referring  to  a
    committee formed by the Bidoon themselves.

31.  Miss  Appiah  submitted  that  it  was  entirely  plausible  that  the
    appellant's father had, given the history of the Bidoon, worked in  the
    army and that it was possible that the  uncle  had  been  in  a  better
    position than other members of the family, given the  inconsistent  way
    in which people from the same family were  treated,  as  shown  by  the
    background  evidence.   She  submitted  that   there   were   no   real
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence with regards to her husband
    when she had last seen him and had had contact with him.  She submitted
    it was possible for the appellant to be credible on core aspects of her
    evidence, yet to be lacking credibility in respect of others, yet still
    making out the core of her claim.  She said that  she  had  nothing  to
    submit with respect to Article 8.

The Background Evidence

32. The starting point for our consideration of this appeal is the  country
    guidance  set  out  in  BA  and  others  (Bedoon-statelessness-risk  of
    persecution) Kuwait CG [2004] UKIAT 00256 which sets out the history of
    the bidoons and the difficulties they encountered.  This is  of  course
    subject to the important qualification in NM where  it  is  noted  that
    there are three distinct categories of people in Kuwait:

      1) citizens with civil ID cards who were entitled to all the  benefits
         that flow from that;

      2) Bidoon who can hold security cards, also known  as  "green  cards",
         people who registered with the Bidoon committee  between  1996  and
         2000;

      3) unregistered Bidoons, that is those who are not able to renew their
         security cards or people who have never obtained security cards.

    The rights of each of these groups are different.  Many in  the  second
    category have to pay for tuition for their  children,  do  not  receive
    free healthcare and are without the legal protection for their right to
    work.  They face increased difficulty in receiving passports.

33. The third category, cannot obtain  passports,  are  not  provided  with
    educational funding and are denied access  to  Government  clinics  and
    hospitals altogether.

34. As was accepted in the refusal letter the appellant's  account  of  the
    circumstances  in  which  her  father  found  himself  a  "Bidoon"  are
    consistent with the background evidence.  We note that in  the  past  a
    substantial part of the Kuwaiti Army was made up of Bidoon and we  note
    that the situation for the Bidoon began to become more difficult in the
    mid-1980s and increased significantly after the first Gulf war.

35. There is little in the appellant's account or  the  documents  she  has
    produced (with the exception of the medical records and  the  education
    records) which is inconsistent with her being an  unregistered  Bidoon.
    That  said,  the  documents  are  also  consistent  with  her  being  a
    registered Bidoon.

36. In assessing the appellant's evidence we bear in mind the fact that the
    appellant  was  referred  by  her  GP  for  specialist  help  with  her
    psychological difficulties.  She had, according to  the  letter  of  26
    March 2013 presented with symptoms of obsessive compulsive disorder and
    trichollomania which results in stress and anxiety due to the  frequent
    compulsions and obsessions.  It is noted that her depression anxiety is
    currently in the severe range and  that  she  had  attended  five  high
    intensity psychological therapy sessions.  This  is  not,  however  any
    comment on her ability to recall  nor  does  the  letter  indicate  any
    memory problems.  The brief medical report from Kuwait  (RB,  page  L2)
    again refers to her suffering from OCD  and  the  appellant's  physical
    activity being impaired.  There is no mention  of  any  effect  on  her
    memory.

37. These reports make no comments on the appellant's ability to recall  or
    on her cognitive abilities. It is  not  possible,  in  the  absence  of
    expert evidence, to infer from the diagnoses made that the  appellant's
    memory is affected. The reports therefore do not confirm that assertion
    from the appellant.

38. The appellant's case is that she and her father were politically active
    within the "Bidoon committee."  We accept Miss Appiah's submission that
    this evidence could not relate to the committee referred to  in  NM  or
    the Human Rights Watch Report which is clearly a  Government  body  and
    must be, if we accept the appellant's testimony, a  reference  to  some
    other committee set up by Bidoons themselves.

39. At paragraph 15 of her witness statement of 31 August 13 the appellant
    says:

         "I confirm both my father and I were involved members of the Bidoon
         committee in Kuwait but neither  of  us  was  ever  issued  with  a
         security card.  I have not heard of a security card before and I do
         not know anyone that has ever been issued with one."

40. Her involvement with this committee is not  mentioned  in  her  initial
    statement dated 16 July 2012 (RB, Appendix Q).   There  is  no  direct
    mention of this activity in the appellant's interview although she  was
    asked why she did not attend demonstrations or gatherings  (Q207)  that
    is not the same as being involved with the committee.

41. That there is a distinction to be drawn between the "Bidoon  committee"
    run by the Government and a committee set  up  by  Bidoons  themselves,
    this is not an adequate explanation  of  the  appellant  stating  quite
    clearly that she is  oblivious  of  any  such  committee  yet  she  had
    mentioned this in her witness statement.  Further, when asked about the
    activities she was unable to explain what she did or  what  her  father
    did.  We find that her evidence was vague and that evidence  which  she
    did volunteer, that she produced leaflets and talked  to  people  about
    the rights of Bidoons, is in contrast to her evidence elsewhere  as  to
    the limits on her activities, such  as  attending  gatherings,  out  of
    fear.

42. The appellant's claim that she had  to  leave  Kuwait  due  to  adverse
    interest from the state, arises from the involvement  of  her  and  her
    husband in the production of leaflets  promoting  Bidoon  rights  which
    came to the attention of the Authorities.   In  her  initial  statement
    (RB, Q5) she states:

         24.   Around  March  2011  my  husband  and  his  friends  together
             purchased laptop and printer which was kept at our home and it
             was agreed  that  he  would  print  leaflets  and  they  would
             distribute them.   These  leaflets  were  calling  for  Bidoon
             rights.  It was at the same time that the Bidoon  uprsing  was
             taking place in Kuwait.  My husband started to print  leaflets
             that called for Bidoon rights.

         25.  My husband asked me to  deliver  these  leaflets  in  separate
             boxes to his  friends  who  would  distribute  these  leaflets
             amongst people to encourage people  to  rise  up  against  the
             regime's treatment of Bidoons.  Each box contained  about  250
             leaflets.

         26.  The reason that my husband was asked to print  these  leaflets
             was that because he knows how to use a computer and also as we
             live above my parents' house our place is less  suspicious  to
             the Authorities.

         27.  At the end of April 2012 three  men  who  were  wearing  plain
             clothes came into my flat  ...  [T]hey  found  some  boxes  of
             leaflets which were hidden in our bedroom.   The  printer  and
             the laptop were also in our bedroom and they found this.

43. In her interview the appellant was asked about  the  type  of  printer.
    She said "small one.  Square type.  It was put next to laptop, size  of
    a microwave."  (Q196).  The appellant was also asked  (Q202)  where  we
    used to distribute the leaflets, she said "I distribute in nearby areas
    to our friends and neighbours who are Bidoons in area."  She later said
    (Q209) "I did not distribute the leaflets myself I give them to  a  man
    and he would distribute them.  My job is to take them out of  home  and
    give them to man to distribute."  This is however after  she  had  been
    asked why  she  would  take  the  risk  of  doing  this  (Q208).   When
    questioned about this discrepancy she said that (Q210) that  she  would
    give them to one person to distribute, then to another.

44. In her  response  to  the  adverse  inferences  drawn  from  this,  the
    appellant states in her witness  statement  that  it  was  for  her  to
    distribute the leaflets in bulk [20] and that she had  not  distributed
    them to people [21].

45.  The  evidence  as  to  how  the  leaflets  were  produced  is   wholly
    inconsistent.  The appellant, when questioned, first said that she  and
    her husband were tasked with this because they could  read  and  write.
    She has also said that it was because her husband could use a computer,
    yet it emerged in oral  evidence  before  us  that  all  they  did  was
    photocopy  leaflets.   This  is  in  direct  contrast  to  her  witness
    statement as set out above. She now denies that they had a computer  or
    a laptop.

46. We do not accept that this was due to any confusion or lack  of  memory
    problems and we do not accept her explanation for the inconsistency  in
    her account of how she distributed the leaflets.   What  is  noticeable
    about the appellant's evidence, and indeed quite  remarkable,  is  that
    she simply changes her evidence when confronted with  a  difficulty  or
    inconsistency.  This is a thread which runs  throughout  her  testimony
    and serves significantly to undermine her  personal  credibility.   The
    strong impression we have formed is that the appellant will simply  say
    anything that suits her purpose.

47. A further example of this is  the  appellant  initially  stating,  when
    questioned, that her statements had not been translated to  her.   When
    confronted with the  signature  of  the  interpreter  she  changed  her
    evidence to saying that she could not explain  and  could  not  recall.
    This is in significant contrast to her most recent witness statement of
    March  2014  in  which  she  expressly  states  that  all  her  witness
    statements have been read back to her.

48. The evidence of the appellant's ability  to  access  medical  care  for
    herself is difficult to assess, given that the documents supplied  (RB,
    H to  M)  are  not  properly  translated  nor,  for  that  matter,  are
    translations provided for all of these documents (with the exception of
    the drug prescription sheet).  This document is of limited value  given
    that it is in the name of Tahani Mubarak, whose identity the  appellant
    says she used to  obtain  medication.   We  have  of  course  only  the
    appellant's word for that.  To accept it, we  would  have  to  discount
    what is said on the face of the document.  While the ID  cards  of  the
    friends are provided, we are nonetheless dependent on  the  appellant's
    testimony

49. The same observations apply in respect of the medical  records  in  the
    name of Fahdah Fahad Munawer.  (I1 to I6).  These documents  relate  to
    the period 18 May 2011 and 19 May 11.  The document at I7 is described
    as an appointment ticket with an ID card said to have been given to her
    by a receptionist to permit  her  to  see  a  doctor  but  the  chemist
    declined to issue the documents as she did not have an ID  card.   This
    is of course consistent with the evidence referred to in  NM  at  [43]-
    [44] that whilst medical insurance is available to  documented  Bidoon,
    albeit upon payment of a premium,  this  does  not  include  access  to
    medication.

50. Similar observations apply to the documents produced in respect of  the
    children.  Again a doctor appears to have seen them but the phrase,  no
    medication Bidoon, is stamped on them.  The documents at J1, K, L and M
    are not translated.  These appear to have been amended in manuscript to
    say a Civil ID was not  available  or  in  the  case  of  K,  "rejected
    stateless." This is written in English on  K3  and  K4,  but  why  that
    language should have been used on a  document  for  use  in  Kuwait  is
    unclear.

51. While there is no translation of K1  the civil ID number given  in  the
    form  is  different  from  that  at  J,  T00761203004  as  opposed   to
    T00761203005 but it is not possible to discern the name of the  patient
    in J; the name given for the patient in the forms at K  is  in  Arabic.
    We note also that the document at K5 bears the civil ID  number  ending
    003.  There is no civil ID number o  n  the  report  which  appears  at
    Appendix L or at Appendix M.  Given the absence of proper  translations
    difficult to attach any weight to these documents.

52. In her initial statement (Appendix Q) the appellant states at paragraph
    18 that she was able to see a doctor on 10 June 2012 when he prescribed
    medication but she was refused at the chemist because  she  has  no  ID
    card.

53. In her interview the appellant was asked at length  about  her  medical
    treatment, explaining that she had used the ID cards of two friends  to
    obtain medication.

54. In turning to the other documents adduced in support of the appellant's
    claim, we have  concerns  regarding  the  reliability  of  the  driving
    licence produced in respect of the appellant's father,  given  that  it
    states its date of issue is several years before the date from which it
    is valid. While it may be that "date of issue" refers back to when  the
    licence was  first  issued,  there  is  no  evidence  to  support  that
    submission, only conjecture, and  we  are  not  persuaded  that  it  is
    reliable. The licence is, in any event, of little evidential  value  in
    assessing whether the appellant is an undocumented Bidoon; while it  is
    capable  of  showing  her  father  was  in  the  army,  that   is   not
    substantially challenged nor is that fact  indicative  that  she  is  a
    undocumented Bidoon.

55. The appellant has produced (AB, 43 to 44) what purports to be a  notice
    requring the appellant to attend before an investigation officer on  22
    January 2013. That notice has a section which set out  the  purpose  of
    attendance and reads "to hear your statement as a witness/an accused/an
    accused case number".  This indicates that  it  is  a  standard  notice
    which can be adapted to show the reason the individual is  required  to
    attend. That has not been done here; there is no indication  from  this
    document that the appellant has been accused of  any  particular  crime
    and given that the section headed "witness" has not  been  struck  out.
    This document is consistent  with  her  being  asked  to  attend  as  a
    witness.

56. We considered that it is difficult to attach much weight to the  letter
    from the appellant's uncle who, on his evidence, migrated to  Australia
    in 1997.  His statement discloses the difficulties that the Bidoon face
    but says nothing specific about the appellant; in any event there is no
    indication he was in Kuwait during the period the  appellant  says  she
    was arrested and detained. While he does refer  to  having  obtained  a
    passport, as Miss Appiah submitted, given the arbitrary  way  in  which
    citizenship has been given or withheld and the  manner  in  which  some
    people have been able to get security cards or not, this is  of  little
    evidential weight in assessing whether  or  not  the  applicant  was  a
    documented Bidoon.

57. We attach little weight to the letter from the Harrow Kuwaiti Community
    Association while the author confirms the appellant was able to confirm
    familiarity with where she had lived, it does  not  necessarily  follow
    from this that  she  is  Bidoon  nor  is  it  stated  that  she  is  an
    undocumented Bidoon nor that she has no security  card.   The  "witness
    statements" attached to it do not  merit  that  title;  they  are  pre-
    printed forms and provide no details about either witness or  how  they
    knew that the appellant is an undocumented Bidoon.  We  have  only  the
    appellant's evidence as to how those who completed the forms knew  this
    to be the case.  Whilst we do  not  discount  the  possibility  of  her
    knowing somebody in the United Kingdom had been known to her family  in
    Kuwait, that has not been confirmed by the individual in question.

58. Taking all these factors into account and viewing them as a  whole,  we
    find that the appellant's credibility is wholly undermined.  For  these
    reasons, and bearing in mind also the decision  in  Tanveer  Ahmed,  we
    attach no weight to the documentary  evidence  that  she  has  adduced.
    Whilst we accept that the appellant is  from  Kuwait;  that  she  is  a
    Bidoon; that she is married; and that she has  two  children,  none  of
    which is in dispute, we are not satisfied that she has been involved in
    any political activity on behalf of the  Bidoon  people  nor  that  her
    husband has been involved in such activity.   We  do  not  accept  that
    either of them were involved in  the  production  and  distribution  of
    leaflets.  We do not accept that the appellant has ever  been  arrested
    or detained and accordingly we do not accept her assertion that neither
    she nor her husband were issued  with  security  cards.   Moreover,  we
    consider that the fact that she was able, apparently, to obtain medical
    treatment and that her children were able to obtain  medical  treatment
    but were refused medication is consistent with that.

59. In the light of these findings of fact we are not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant is at risk on return to Kuwait of ill-treatment of sufficient
    severity to engage either the Refugee Convention or Articles 2 or 3  of
    the Human Rights Convention.

60. Whilst Miss Appiah did not formally concede the appeal  in  respect  of
    Article 8, we are not satisfied on the basis of the evidence before  us
    that the appellant fulfils the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   Further,  we  are  not  satisfied  that  she  has
    established a family life here and  her  private  life  is  of  minimal
    content given the short time she has spent in this  country  which  she
    entered unlawfully.  Given the limited content of her private  life  we
    are not satisfied that her removal to Kuwait, the country where she has
    lived for the greater part of  her  life  and  where  she  has  family,
    including parents, a husband and children, that the interference caused
    by her removal is sufficient to engage Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

61. For these reasons, we  remake  the  appeal  by  dismissing  it  on  all
    grounds.

Summary of Conclusions

    (1)  The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
         making of an error of law.  It is set aside.

      2) We remake the decision by refusing the appeal on all grounds.

      3) We maintain the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

