
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07803/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2nd December 2013                          |On 6th June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                               Mr Irfan Braqi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                  DETERMINATION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Prior  ("the
    judge") in a determination promulgated on  17th  September  2013.   The
    appellant was born in May 1995 and is a national of Albania.  He claims
    to be at risk on return there in consequence of a  blood  feud  between
    his family and the Shabaj family.

2.   The judge found that much of the appellant's account  was  given  while
    he  was  a  minor  and  allowance  had  to  be  made  for  this   fact.
    Nonetheless, his account contained discrepancies  and  inconsistencies.
    A critical event claimed to have occurred was the killing of  a  member
    of the Shabaj family but the judge found that the evidence  before  him
    did not sufficiently support the appellant's account  in  this  regard.
    Even if the blood feud were in place, the judge was not satisfied  that
    the appellant would be unable to safely relocate in  Albania.   He  did
    not accept that the Shabaj family was so powerful that  they  would  be
    able to trace the appellant, if he were to relocate to  Tirana.   There
    appeared to be no explanation as to why reconciliation between the  two
    families, having succeeded between  2002  and  2003,  could  not  occur
    again, to resolve the fresh feud.  Overall, the  judge  concluded  that
    the appellant was not at real risk on return to Albania  and  dismissed
    the appeal on asylum grounds, humanitarian protection grounds and human
    rights grounds.

3.   An application was made for permission to  appeal.   It  was  contended
    that the judge erred in several respects.  First, the judge found  that
    a contemporaneous newspaper article detailing the murder of a member of
    the appellant's family, Ismet Braqi,  provided  some  support  for  the
    appellant's account although there was no  mention  of  the  murder  of
    Bashkim Shabaj, the event which, by the appellant's account, led to the
    resumption of the blood feud.  An article  describing  the  killing  of
    Bashkim a few days after Ismet's murder was  not  consistent  with  the
    appellant's evidence that it occurred a few  hours  afterwards.   There
    was no reason why this apparent contradiction should not be  considered
    with the same leniency as others, given that the appellant was a  minor
    at the time.  If Bashkim's murder took place a few days later, it could
    not feature in the article, which was dated one day after  the  killing
    of Ismet Braqi.  Even without the subsequent murder of Bashkim, it  was
    clear that the truce between the families was broken by the killing  of
    Ismet.  The logical inference was that the blood feud was reinstated by
    this murder and not the subsequent one.

4.   Secondly, the judge found that an attestation  letter  from  the  Peace
    Missionaries branch should  not  be  given  weight,  in  the  light  of
    guidance given in EH [2012] UKUT 00348.  There was, however,  no  basis
    for the judge not to give weight to the letter and  guidance  from  the
    Upper Tribunal concerned a different organisation.

5.   In a third ground, it was contended  that  the  judge  failed  to  have
    sufficient  regard  to  corroborative  or  supporting  evidence.   This
    included material downloaded from  the  internet  which  described  the
    mayor of Postribe as Faz Shabaj, a  member  of  the  aggressor  family.
    Although the judge referred to this individual at paragraph  8  in  the
    determination, there was no further  comment  or  mention.   The  Peace
    Missionaries letter also referred to the head of the municipality,  Faz
    Shabaj, as the brother of one of the victims in the feud, Rasim Shabaj.
     As was clear  from  EH,  a  crucial  factor  in  establishing  whether
    internal relocation is a real possibility is the reach of the aggressor
    clan.  It was clear from the country and background evidence  that  the
    aggressor clan  in  the  appellant's  case  included  powerful  actors,
    including the head of the municipality of Postribe.  In finding that it
    was noteworthy that the Shabaj family's influence  did  not  appear  to
    extend to securing police  action  against  Ismet  Braqi,  despite  the
    murder of Rasim Shabaj, the judge overlooked the country evidence of  a
    parallel system of justice.  Country evidence before the  judge  showed
    that individual police officers were reluctant to get involved in blood
    feuds.  Finally, in finding that there was no  explanation  as  to  why
    reconciliation between the families could not continue, the judge erred
    as the appellant was not asked about this matter.  He ought not to have
    taken it into account as an adverse factor.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted on 21st October  2013,  on  the  basis
    that the weight given by the judge to  the  discrepancy  regarding  the
    killing of Bashkim Shabaj and the (insufficient) weight  given  to  the
    supporting documentary evidence, regarding Bashkim's murder,  may  have
    given rise to errors of law.  The  Secretary  of  State  made  rule  24
    response on 5th November 2013, opposing the appeal.   She  proposed  to
    submit that the judge directed himself  appropriately,  considered  the
    evidence and arrived at conclusions which were open to him.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Mr Khan adopted the written grounds.  The appellant gave  evidence  ten
    years after the events which led to his flight from Albania.  The judge
    had this  fact  in  mind,  as  was  clear  from  paragraph  15  of  the
    determination, and he properly gave the appellant the  benefit  of  the
    doubt in certain respects.

8.   There was an apparent contradiction  regarding  the  death  of  Bashkim
    Shabaj, which occurred a few hours  after  the  murder  of  Ismet,  the
    appellant's cousin, by the appellant's account.  A letter from an  NGO,
    referred to by the judge at paragraph 16, placed the second death a few
    days  after  the  first.   The  judge  found  this  to  be  a  material
    inconsistency.  However, the appellant's  account  was  concerned  with
    when Bashkim Shabaj  was  "killed",  whereas  the  latter  referred  to
    Bashkim as having been "found killed".  Given that the  judge  extended
    the benefit of the doubt to the appellant, as the events occurred while
    he was a child, he ought to have given him the benefit in this context.



9.   In assessing risk on return at paragraph 17 of the  determination,  the
    judge found that the appellant's brother appeared not  to  be  at  risk
    from the Shabaj family.  The brother was born in 1998.  The judge ought
    not to have given weight to this factor as,  as  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing, the appellant's brother was not 16 years old, a  material  age
    in the context of blood feuds.  Nor did the judge  properly  weigh  the
    evidence regarding the Shabaj family's influence, Faz Shabaj being  the
    mayor of the town.  The appellant's evidence was that the Shabaj family
    decided to take revenge themselves, rather than going to the police and
    this was consistent with the country evidence contained in the  article
    before the judge.

10.  What was missing, as set out in the written grounds, was an  assessment
    of the influence of the Shabaj family, in the  light  of  the  evidence
    that one member was the mayor of  the  municipality.   The  appellant's
    bundle had relevant evidence on this  matter,  at  pages  6  and  7  in
    particular.

11.  So far as the third ground was concerned, Mr Khan said that  the  judge
    rejected the NGO letter on the basis of guidance from EH, to the effect
    that NGOs should not be treated "in general" as reliable  sources.   In
    the present appeal, however, there was other supporting evidence in the
    form  of  news  reports,  which  were  accepted  by  the  judge.    The
    appellant's own  account  was  broadly  consistent  with  this  country
    material.  At the end of paragraph 16, the only fact which appeared  to
    have been rejected by the judge as not shown in the  evidence  was  the
    murder of Bashkim Shabaj.  The rest of the  blood  feud  he  seemed  to
    accept.  Overall, the assessment was unsafe.

12.  Mr Jack said that so far as ground 1 was concerned, the weight  due  to
    be given  to  the  newspaper  article  was  a  matter  for  the  judge.
    Moreover, there were clear discrepancies in the  appellant's  evidence.
    The judge considered these at paragraphs 12 to 14 of the  determination
    and summarised only some of the reasons for the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to remove the appellant and to disbelieve  his  asylum  claim.
    There were clear discrepancies between the contents  of  the  newspaper
    article itself and the appellant's account, as was clear from pages  F1
    and F2 in the respondent's bundle and paragraph 8 of the determination.
     The fact that the judge gave the appellant the benefit of the doubt in
    view of his age, at paragraph 15, showed that he determined the  appeal
    in a fair and a balanced way.  The source of the information  contained
    in the press article was not disclosed.  Overall, the judge did not err
    in deciding to place little weight on the press article.

13.  Mr Jack said that a similar analysis applied in relation to the  second
    ground.  This concerned the weight to be given to the letter  from  the
    NGO.  The judge correctly found that guidance given in EH was that such
    sources should not, in general, be relied upon.  The  country  evidence
    before the Upper Tribunal in that case showed that attestation  letters
    were unlikely to prove to be determinative of an appeal and that  there
    was only a small number of live blood feuds in Albania now.

14.  The Peace Missionaries letter did state that Faz Shabaj  was  the  head
    of a municipality, which was a smaller unit than a district.  That  did
    not necessarily lead to any firm conclusion regarding the reach of  the
    family, sufficient to exclude relocation as a  reasonable  possibility.
    At paragraph 16 of the determination, the judge drew attention  to  the
    lack of evidence regarding the murder and the absence  of  evidence  of
    the sources of information.  The judge was entitled  to  find  that  no
    weight should be  given  to  the  letter.   The  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence at paragraph 15 of the determination and the assessment of the
    newspaper article in the following paragraph entitled the judge to make
    the assessment he had.  The weight to be given to the  evidence  was  a
    matter for him.

15.  The documents at pages 6 and 7  of  the  appellant's  bundle  were  not
    translated into English, and so rule 52 of the Procedure Rules fell  to
    be applied.  There was no error by the judge in not  taking  them  into
    account.

16.  The final ground appeared to amount to  a  suggestion  that  the  judge
    should have asked more questions.  All he was finding was that  he  was
    not satisfied that Bashkim Shabaj had been killed and  that  the  blood
    feud continued as a result.  The  newspaper  article  did  not  discuss
    threats.  The only evidence in this regard supporting  the  appellant's
    case appeared to be the letter from the NGO.  The judge was entitled to
    treat this item with caution.

17.  In a brief response, Mr Khan said that it was not  correct  that  there
    was a lack of  evidence  of  Bashkim  Shabaj's  murder.   The  evidence
    included the  appellant's  own  account.   The  newspaper  article  did
    support this, even taking  into  account  the  apparent  contradiction.
    Again, the appellant's evidence was that the second murder  occurred  a
    few hours after the first, consistent with the body being found  a  few
    days later.  So  far  as  the  documents  at  pages  5  and  6  of  the
    appellant's bundle were concerned, one of these was in English and fell
    to be taken into account.  It described the Shabaj family member as the
    mayor but  the  judge  did  not  engage  with  this  material  and  the
    determination contained no assessment of it.

18.  At paragraphs 15 to 17 of the determination, it was not clear that  the
    judge did, in fact, reject the newspaper article.  His finding was that
    it did  provide  some  independent  corroboration  of  the  appellant's
    account although it did not include reference to infidelity  which  led
    to the separation of Kujtime Shabaj from her husband.

19.  Critical was an assessment of the range and influence of the  aggressor
    clan and missing in the determination  was  consideration  of  all  the
    evidence regarding this factor, including the evidence that Faz  Shabaj
    was the mayor of the municipality.

Conclusions on Error of Law

20.  The determination has  been  prepared  with  care,  by  an  experienced
    judge.  Mr Jack drew attention, in his able submissions,  to  parts  of
    the determination which  showed  that  the  judge  adopted  a  balanced
    approach in determining the appeal.

21.  It is clear that a salient feature of  the  appellant's  case  was  the
    range and influence of the Shabaj family.   The  judge  summarised  the
    appellant's core claims at paragraph 8 of the determination and  it  is
    there that mention is made of Faz Shabaj, described as the head of  the
    Postribe municipality "for in excess of twenty  years".   As  noted  in
    paragraph 6 of the grounds,  there  was  no  further  mention  of  this
    individual thereafter.  It is clear that the judge has properly focused
    on the influence of the Shabaj family, as is clear from  paragraphs  16
    and 17.   In  the  latter  paragraph,  the  judge  noted  that  it  was
    "important to consider carefully the evidence relative  to  the  intent
    and power of the Shabaj family."  Some of the evidence in this  context
    was taken into account by the judge expressly, including the  newspaper
    article dated 14th June 2003 and the Peace Missionaries letter of  13th
    August 2012.

22.  What is missing from the determination,  however,  is  any  mention  or
    assessment of the evidence which appeared at  pages  5  and  6  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  Mr Jack properly reminded me of  rule  52  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  The author  of
    the grounds accepted that one of the documents was untranslated and  so
    the judge was not obliged to take it into account.  The other document,
    however, consisting of a download from the internet about the  Postribe
    municipality, and confirming that Faz Shabaj  was  the  mayor,  was  in
    English and was, I find, material evidence in relation to the range and
    influence of the Shabaj family.

23.  The judge properly took into account discrepancies and  inconsistencies
    in the appellant's account but, as Mr Khan submitted, the determination
    shows that he also  recognised  that  there  was  supporting  evidence,
    including the newspaper article.  The country  evidence  regarding  Faz
    Shabaj's appointment as mayor of the municipality fell to be taken into
    account in the judge's assessment of the influence  and  power  of  the
    Shabaj family, which he recognised was an important factor.

24.  The other grounds have less merit and Mr Jack was correct  to  describe
    them as amounting to little more than a disagreement with  the  judge's
    findings.  However, the absence of any  mention  of  Faz  Shabaj  after
    paragraph 8 of the determination, where he appears as  a  major  actor,
    and the absence of any express  consideration  of  supporting  evidence
    regarding his position as mayor of the municipality,  relevant  in  the
    assessment of the risk faced by the appellant on return,  leads  me  to
    conclude that the  judge  did  materially  err  in  law.   The  overall
    assessment he made was unsafe by reason of the absence of consideration
    of this evidence or, alternatively, was insufficiently reasoned.

25.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and falls to be set aside and remade.  The next question is whether
    it is appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.   It
    is clear from paragraph 17 of the determination that  the  judge  found
    the absence, as he saw it, of evidence of the range  and  influence  of
    the Shabaj family to be a very important factor.  There is no  sensible
    prospect of disentangling the particular findings made and  seeking  to
    preserve some of them, in view of the  error  identified.   The  safest
    course is to set aside all the findings and for fresh  findings  to  be
    made in the remaking of the decision.  Taking into account paragraph  7
    of the Presidential Practice Statement, I remit the case to the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be reheard afresh, under section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
    Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

26.  As the venue for the First-tier Tribunal hearing was Hatton  Cross  and
    as there has been no application for a transfer order of any  sort,  it
    is  appropriate  to  remit  the  appeal  for  rehearing  there.    Case
    management stage and listing will then  follow.   The  appeal  will  be
    listed for hearing by a judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Prior.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law  such  that
it falls to be set aside and remade.  The decision shall be  remade  in  the
First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross, before a judge  other  than  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Prior.

ANONYMITY

The judge made no anonymity direction and there has been no application  for
anonymity in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  these  circumstances,  I  make  no
direction on this occasion.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


