
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  AA/07248/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 22 April 2015                      |                On 14 August 2015    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     AA
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Martin, Jain, Neil & Ruddy Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal
   Balloch dismissing an appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2) The appellant was born in 1986 and is a national of Iran.  He arrived  in
   the UK in 2008 and claimed asylum.  This  was  refused  in  2010  and  an
   appeal in the same year was dismissed.  Permission to appeal was refused.
    Further submissions made in 2011 were refused without a right of appeal,
   as were further representations made the following year.  Following a pre-
   action protocol letter the respondent issued  a  further  refusal  letter
   dated 9 September 2014 with a right of appeal.

3) In broad terms the basis of the  appellant's  asylum  claim  is  that  he
   distributed propaganda materials for KDPI, of which  his  brother  was  a
   member.  It is not disputed that the appellant is an  Iranian  Kurd.   In
   his first appeal in 2010  the  Judge  at  that  time  accepted  that  the
   appellant "may have been involved to some extent at a very low level with
   the KDPI" but the Judge did not accept that he had come  to  the  adverse
   attention of the authorities, or that there was any reason to believe the
   authorities would be looking for him if he were to be returned.

4) In the present appeal the Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal had regard  to
   the 2010 determination as a starting point, in terms of Devaseelan [2003]
   Imm AR 1.  The Judge also had regard to the respondent's  latest  reasons
   for refusal letter,  of  9  September  2014.   At  paragraph  31  of  the
   determination the Judge recorded  that  in  this  letter  the  respondent
   wrote:-

      "Immigration Judge Wallace fully considered your  client's  claim  and
      whilst she found that your client had been a member of  the  KDPI,  it
      was  only  at  a  low  level.   Furthermore  she  concluded  that  the
      authorities in Iran had no interest in your client."

5) At page 32 Judge Balloch went on to find that there was clearly an  error
   on the part of the author  of  the  refusal  letter  and  this  had  gone
   uncorrected  at  the  case  management  review  hearing  prior   to   the
   substantive  hearing.   There  was  no  finding  of  fact  made  in   the
   determination by Judge Wallace that the appellant was a member  of  KDPI.
   Indeed, in paragraph 7 of his witness statement the appellant had  stated
   he was uncertain as to his status within KDPI and in his oral evidence he
   reiterated that he was not sure as to whether he had been made  a  member
   or not.  Judge Wallace could not have gone on to make a finding that  the
   appellant was a member of KDPI when his evidence before her was  that  he
   did not know himself whether he was a member or not.  Judge  Wallace  did
   not make such a finding.  Judge Balloch then  stated,  at  paragraph  37,
   that all the findings of Judge Wallace should stand.   She  proceeded  to
   consider further evidence lodged on behalf of the appellant but  attached
   little weight to this.

6) The principal point on which permission to appeal was  granted  was  that
   the Judge without giving notice of an intention to do so  went  behind  a
   concession in the most recent refusal  letter  to  the  effect  that  the
   appellant was a member of KDPI.  This was an arguable error.

7) In the application for permission  to  appeal  a  further  challenge  was
   brought to the findings made by the Judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal  in
   respect of the consequences of illegal exit from Iran  and  the  risk  on
   return to the appellant, given his history of involvement with the  KDPI.
   In accordance with the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  RT  (Zimbabwe)
   [2012] UKSC 38, the appellant should not be expected on return to Iran to
   conceal his involvement with the KDPI in order to avoid persecution.  The
   further grounds were considered arguable.




Submissions

8) At the hearing  before  me  Mr  Martin  relied  on  the  grounds  of  the
   application for permission to appeal.  He submitted  that  Judge  Wallace
   had found the appellant was  a  low  level  member  of  KDPI.   This  was
   recorded in the reasons for refusal letter at page 3.  Judge Balloch  was
   not entitled to go beyond this  concession  in  her  determination.   The
   concession had been mentioned at the case management review hearing.   Mr
   Martin acknowledged there might be an issue of materiality in relation to
   the concession.

9) Mr Martin further submitted that the appellant did not have to  establish
   membership of KDPI in order for his appeal to succeed.  He need only show
   low level involvement, which would be sufficient under HJ  (Iran)  [2010]
   UKSC 31 and RT (Zimbabwe).  This case  law  post-dated  the  decision  by
   Judge Wallace.

10) Mr Martin continued that in order for the appellant to succeed  he  need
   not have a high profile.  It was acknowledged  that  he  was  an  Iranian
   national of Kurdish ethnicity.  He had left Iran illegally.  He had  been
   involved with the KDPI, which was  accepted  by  Professor  Wallace.   In
   terms of SB (risk on return, illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053  he
   would face scrutiny on return as a failed asylum seeker who had left Iran
   illegally.  Illegal exit was not itself a significant risk factor but  it
   would bring him to the attention of the authorities.  He would  be  asked
   why he left Iran and claimed asylum.  There was no legal proposition that
   required him to lie.  The decision in RT (Zimbabwe) did not  depend  upon
   the extent of a person's involvement in opposition activities.   Although
   the appellant had not previously come to the attention of the authorities
   he would do so on return.  There was a reasonable degree of likelihood of
   persecution.  There was no question  about  the  nature  of  the  Iranian
   regime and in terms of SB the appellant would  be  questioned  about  his
   departure.  There was no expectation that he should  conceal  established
   facts and acknowledging these facts would place him at risk.

11) For the respondent,  Mr  Matthews  acknowledged  that  there  were  some
   findings in favour in the appellant but submitted  that  the  case  being
   advanced on behalf of the appellant did not amount to very  much.   Judge
   Wallace found there was no reason to believe  the  authorities  would  be
   looking for the appellant  on  return.   The  appellant  would  not  have
   anything to lie about.  Judge Wallace did not accept that  the  appellant
   had fled from Iran because of a fear of persecution.  She did not believe
   his account of why he left when he did.  It would not be  enough  to  put
   him at risk that he handed  out  leaflets  on  two  occasions  six  years
   previously.  Any involvement with KDPI was at a low level.  The appellant
   had essentially no interest in KDPI and he had not been involved in  this
   organisation in the UK.  There was no evidence of any  political  beliefs
   by the appellant at the time of the hearing before  Judge  Balloch.   The
   case of RT (Zimbabwe) concerned  a  situation  where  a  person  with  no
   political beliefs was required to express support for the  government  to
   avoid persecution, even though the  person  did  not  subscribe  to  this
   opinion.  There were no findings to show the appellant subscribed to  any
   political views.  There  was  a  distinction  between  holding  political
   beliefs and incriminating oneself.  Why should the appellant  incriminate
   himself if this would lead to harm?  As found by Judge Wallace, he was of
   no interest to the Iranian authorities.

12) Mr Matthews submitted that it was the lack of interest in the  appellant
   by the authorities which was the real issue in the appeal.  The  supposed
   concession in the refusal letter was a side issue and its materiality was
   questionable.  The respondent had referred to  Judge  Wallace  as  having
   found the appellant was a member of KDPI but it was not within  the  gift
   of the respondent to find this.  It was not in fact a  finding  by  Judge
   Wallace.  There was no new  evidence  accepted  by  Judge  Balloch.   The
   respondent's reasons for refusal letter could  not  change  the  findings
   made by Judge Wallace without further evidence.  The matter  should  have
   been addressed at the  case  management  review  hearing  but  there  was
   clearly no disadvantage to the appellant.  It was raised at  the  hearing
   in a submission by the Presenting Officer, recorded at  paragraph  22  of
   the determination and was properly a matter for submissions.  The reasons
   for refusal letter had not been drafted by a  judge  or  a  lawyer.   The
   findings made by Judge Balloch did not bring  the  appellant  within  the
   terms of SB and the appellant could not show a risk on return.

Discussion

13) In his submission before me Mr  Martin  appeared  to  state  that  Judge
   Wallace had found that the appellant was a low level member of  KDPI  and
   this finding had been re-stated in the reasons for refusal  letter  of  9
   September 2014.  If this was Mr Martin's submission, I cannot accept  it.
   The finding made by Judge Wallace at paragraph 57  of  her  determination
   was only to the effect that the appellant was involved to some extent  at
   a very low level with the KDPI.  As Judge  Balloch  pointed  out  in  her
   determination, the appellant did not himself in his evidence before Judge
   Wallace know whether or not he was a member.   Indeed,  the  question  of
   whether he was a member was unlikely to be of any great significance,  as
   has been accepted  by  both  parties  in  their  submissions  before  me.
   Assessment of the risk of persecution would depend not  upon  whether  or
   not the appellant was a member but on the nature  of  the  activities  he
   undertook on behalf of KDPI, and whether this  had  brought  him  to  the
   attention of the authorities.  The finding  of  Judge  Wallace  was  that
   these activities had not brought him to the attention of the authorities.



14) The finding of Judge Balloch, at paragraph 32 of her decision, was  that
   clearly there was an error in the refusal letter where it was stated that
   the appellant was a member of KDPI.  This was not the  finding  of  Judge
   Wallace and there was no basis on which a finding to  this  effect  could
   have been made in the refusal letter.

15) Nevertheless, a point does arise about fairness to  the  appellant.   As
   Mr Matthews acknowledged, this is a matter which should have  been  dealt
   with more  fully  at  the  case  management  review  hearing  and  it  is
   regrettable that it  was  not.   As  Mr  Matthews  further  pointed  out,
   however, the point was addressed in the submission made orally on  behalf
   of the respondent by Ms Aitken  at  the  hearing  before  Judge  Balloch.
   Judge  Balloch  recorded  this  submission  at  paragraph   22   of   her
   determination.  It was pointed out by Ms Aitken in her submission that in
   the previous appeal the appellant was not found to be a KDPI member.

16) Before Judge Balloch Mr Martin made his  submission  on  behalf  of  the
   appellant after Ms Aitken had made hers, in accordance  with  the  normal
   procedure.  In his submission Mr Martin accepted that the starting  point
   in terms of Devaseelan was the determination of 2010  by  Judge  Wallace.
   This point is recorded at paragraph 24 of Judge Balloch's  decision.   Mr
   Martin further accepted that the "matters of  fact  have  been  settled".
   The previous determination referred  to  the  appellant's  low  level  of
   involvement with KDPI.  Mr Martin then submitted that according to page 3
   of the refusal letter the appellant had been found  on  appeal  to  be  a
   member of KDPI and  this  letter  was  relied  upon  by  the  respondent.
   Somewhat contradictorily, Mr Martin then appears to have  submitted  that
   the appeal before Judge Balloch had "nothing to do with the  reassessment
   of the  facts  or  credibility",  according  to  paragraph  25  of  Judge
   Balloch's determination.

17) Admittedly in her submissions, as recorded  at  paragraph  20  of  Judge
   Balloch's decision, Ms Aitken relied upon the reasons for refusal letter.
    She then implicitly  qualified  this  as  her  submission  proceeded  by
   pointing out that it was not found by Judge Wallace  that  the  appellant
   was a KDPI member.  Mr Martin must have been present when this submission
   was made and he had the opportunity of responding to it.  He did  not  do
   so directly.  At any point following Ms Aitken's submission he could have
   made an application to the Judge for whatever measures to be taken  which
   he thought were appropriate if he considered that  the  fairness  of  the
   proceedings were in jeopardy.  He did not do so.  Instead  he  sought  to
   rely on what was clearly an error in  the  refusal  letter.   While  this
   error is unfortunate, it does not provide a basis for Mr Martin to extend
   the scope of Judge Wallace's findings beyond what he should have known to
   be their limited extent.

18)  In  these  circumstances  I  cannot  perceive  any  unfairness  to  the
   appellant  arising  from  Judge  Balloch's  treatment  of  the  apparent,
   although  unfounded,  concession  in  the  respondent's  refusal   letter
   regarding the appellant's supposed membership of KDPI.  This  matter  was
   thoroughly addressed both in the submission on behalf of  the  respondent
   at the hearing before Judge Balloch and in Judge Balloch's own  decision.
   If Mr Martin, on behalf of the appellant, chose not to  respond  directly
   to the point made by Ms Aitken in her submission, that was a  matter  for
   Mr  Martin's  judgement  at  the  time.   He  cannot  subsequently  claim
   unfairness when he did not respond to the point at the  hearing  when  he
   had every opportunity to do so.  As far as I am concerned,  there  is  no
   issue  of  substance  in  Judge  Balloch's  treatment  of  the   supposed
   concession and no error of law arising from it.

19) There remains a  further  issue  relating  to  the  application  of  the
   decisions in HJ (Iran) and RT (Zimbabwe).  Mr  Martin  pointed  out  that
   these decisions were not in existence at the time Judge Wallace gave  her
   decision.  Judge Balloch did, however, consider submissions in respect of
   them.

20) First of all at paragraph 45 of her decision Judge  Balloch  noted  that
   in SB  it  was  found  that  having  exited  Iran  illegally  was  not  a
   significant risk factor but if a person would face difficulties with  the
   authorities for other reasons, it could add to the difficulties likely to
   be faced.  She found the appellant did not fall within the  risk  factors
   set out in SB.  She acknowledged that country  information  provided  for
   the hearing before her demonstrated that abusive and repressive behaviour
   by the  authorities  continued  in  Iran,  notwithstanding  a  change  of
   government.  The evidence in respect of risk on return did not appear  to
   have materially changed since the previous hearing.

21) Judge Balloch then  stated,  at  paragraph  46,  that  the  case  of  RT
   (Zimbabwe) supported the principle developed in HJ (Iran) that  a  person
   with political beliefs ought not to be obliged to conceal them  in  order
   to avoid persecution.  The right  to  freedom  of  thought,  opinion  and
   expression protected non-believers as well as believers and  extended  to
   the freedom not to hold, and not to have to express, opinions.

22) The Judge then noted that the appellant was not found to be a member  of
   KDPI although he was involved to some extent at a very low level.   Judge
   Balloch then attempted to draw a distinction between a  finding  that  he
   was involved with KDPI and a finding that he may have been  involved.   I
   do not consider that this is a helpful distinction, having regard to  the
   low standard of proof in asylum appeals.  The finding by  Judge  Wallace,
   although expressed in terms that the appellant may  have  been  involved,
   was in effect a finding that he was involved, having regard to  this  low
   standard of proof.

23) Judge Balloch referred at paragraph 49 to BA (Demonstrators  in  Britain
   - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 00036.  In this case it  was  noted
   that Iranians returning to Iran were  screened  on  arrival  and  that  a
   returnee who met the profile of  an  activist  might  be  detained  while
   further searches were made.   Students,  particularly  those  with  known
   political profiles, were likely to be questioned as well as those who had
   exited illegally.  Judge Balloch then found that the  appellant  did  not
   meet any of the risk factors in SB or BA  other  than  having  left  Iran
   illegally.  There was no evidence that  he  had  taken  any  interest  in
   politics while in the UK or had taken part  in  any  activities  of  this
   nature.  He had not shown any interest in KDPI. It was accepted, however,
   that he was of Kurdish ethnicity and the country information showed  that
   the Iranian regime could be harsh in its treatment of Kurds as  of  other
   minority groups.

24) The question for me, accordingly,  is  whether  Judge  Balloch  properly
   applied the principles in HJ (Iran) and RT (Zimbabwe).  In RT  (Zimbabwe)
   the Supreme Court set out a number of principles.  The first of these was
   that the principle in HJ (Iran) applied to any person who  had  political
   beliefs and was obliged to conceal them in order to avoid persecution  as
   a result of revealing them.  Secondly there  was  no  distinction  to  be
   drawn between a "committed" political non-believer and an indifferent  or
   neutral political believer.  The right not to hold a protected belief was
   a fundamental right.  Refugee law did not require  a  person  to  express
   false support for an oppressive regime, any  more  than  it  required  an
   agnostic to pretend  to  be  a  religious  believer  in  order  to  avoid
   persecution.  There was nothing in HJ (Iran) to lend support to the  idea
   that it was relevant to determine  how  important  a  right  was  to  the
   individual.  An individual might be at risk of persecution on the grounds
   of imputed political opinion and it was nothing to  the  point  that  the
   person did not in fact hold that opinion.

25) The case of RT (Zimbabwe) was, of course, concerned with the  particular
   situation in Zimbabwe,  where  those  returning  were  expected  to  show
   positive support for the regime.  In essence, the appellant in that  case
   was able to establish that he was not required to lie to show support for
   the regime in order to avoid persecution.

26) The position of this appellant  is  different  but  he  may  still  come
   within the same principle.  The argument for the  appellant  is  that  in
   order to avoid persecution he would  have  to  deny  his  involvement  in
   political activities if he were to be questioned either about his  asylum
   claim or about his activities before he left Iran.  If he were questioned
   about the basis of his asylum claim on return to Iran as a failed  asylum
   seeker, what would he say?  He might say "I claimed that I  was  involved
   with the KDPI".  This would lead to an obvious enquiry as to  whether  he
   was.  The focus of attention would then be on his  activities  before  he
   left Iran.  In order to protect himself would he be required to deny that
   he ever undertook any activities on behalf of KDPI?  The answer  from  RT
   (Zimbabwe) is that he would not be expected to lie.

27) Mr Matthews submitted that even though there was a  finding  as  to  the
   appellant's involvement, the appellant had no real interest in  KDPI  and
   certainly no current interest, as demonstrated by his lack of  engagement
   in the UK over a period of six years.  Although this is relevant  to  the
   Iranian authorities' perception of the appellant's political profile,  in
   terms of the application of RT (Zimbabwe) it is of little relevance.  The
   appellant does not have to show that he is a committed supporter of KDPI.
    It would be enough simply that the opinion would be imputed to him as  a
   result of his earlier activities, if he was questioned  about  these  and
   admitted them.  He does not have to be a current or  committed  supporter
   in order to face a real risk of persecution on the grounds of an  imputed
   political opinion.

28) In  her  determination  Ms  Balloch  accepted,  at  paragraph  49,  that
   Iranians returning to Iran are screened on arrival and  that  a  returnee
   who meets the profile of  an  activist  may  be  detained  while  further
   searches are carried out.  Judge Balloch  found  though  that  there  was
   nothing to show that the appellant met the  profile  of  those  who  were
   likely to face difficulties with the authorities.

29) This point  was  considered  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  BA.   It  was
   acknowledged that Iranians are screened on return.  However, there was no
   real risk of persecution for those who had exited Iran illegally or  were
   merely returning from Britain.  It was important to consider the level of
   political involvement before considering the likelihood of the individual
   coming to the attention of the authorities  and  the  priority  that  the
   Iranian regime would give to tracing them.  It was only after considering
   these factors that the issue of whether or not there was a real  risk  of
   the  person  facing  persecution  on  return  could  be   assessed.    In
   particular, in respect of sur place activities it was necessary  to  look
   at the person's role in demonstrations and their  political  profile,  as
   well as the surveillance of demonstrations.  It should be  asked  whether
   the  person  was  known  as  a  committed  opponent  or  someone  with  a
   significant political profile or fell within a category which the  regime
   regarded as especially objectionable.

30) In BA the risk factors in SB were  accepted.   These  included  being  a
   person who left Iran when facing court proceedings, or a  person  who  is
   accused of anti-Islamic conduct.

31) In the present appeal, Judge Balloch found  there  was  nothing  in  the
   appellant's history to bring him to the attention of the  authorities  on
   return.  She considered his Kurdish ethnicity but found that  this  would
   not be enough by itself.  He had never previously come to  the  attention
   of the authorities on the basis of his  activities  on  behalf  of  KDPI,
   according to the findings made by Judge Wallace  and  accepted  by  Judge
   Balloch.  His activities, were, moreover, undertaken more than six  years
   ago and there was no evidence of any activities undertaken in the UK.

32) The protection afforded by HJ  (Iran)  and  RT  (Zimbabwe)  only  arises
   where there is evidence establishing a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
   person concerned would be questioned about their political views  or  any
   relevant political activities on return to their country of  origin.   In
   this appeal, although it is acknowledged  that  the  appellant  would  be
   identified on return to Iran as someone who  had  exited  illegally,  the
   evidence does not show a reasonable likelihood that  the  appellant  fits
   the  profile  of  somebody  who  would  be  questioned  on  return  about
   involvement in opposition activities or about opposition political views,
   according to the findings in SB.  On the basis of the  evidence  and  the
   Country Guideline  cases  before  her,  Judge  Balloch  was  entitled  to
   conclude that  the  appellant  would  not  be  of  any  interest  to  the
   authorities on return to Iran and  would  not  be  questioned  about  his
   political views.  This was a decision the Judge was entitled to reach and
   accordingly I find no error of law in this regard in her determination.

Conclusions

33) The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

34) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

35) The First-Tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.  Given  the
   subject  matter  of  the  appeal,  however,  and  the  finding  that  the
   authorities in Iran would have no reason to suspect the appellant of  any
   opposition activities were he to return there, I consider it  appropriate
   to make an order for anonymity in the following terms.

36) Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
   2008 I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  court
   directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
   communication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
   appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.   Any
   failure to comply with this direction could  give  rise  to  contempt  of
   court proceedings.




Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
