
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07869/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 March 2016                     |On 11 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     KB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, counsel instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Parkes hereinafter referred to as the FTTJ), promulgated on 26  January
    2016 2014, in which he  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a
    decision to refuse to  grant  him  asylum.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted First-tier Tribunal Judge JM Holmes on 11 February 2016.

Background


 2. The appellant left Sri Lanka during September  2014,  arriving  in  the
    United Kingdom a month later. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim
    is that he was a low  level  LTTE  member  during  June  2014,  he  was
    arrested by army officers on suspicion of being a member of  the  LTTE.
    During nearly three months of detention, the appellant was ill treated;
    confessed that he was planning to re-form the LTTE and  that  his  late
    father was an LTTE member. He was able to leave  detention,  after  the
    intervention, via bribery, of his mother and uncles.

 3. The appellant's account of only coming to the adverse attention of  the
    Sri Lankan authorities was rejected by the Secretary of State as  being
    inconsistent with background information showing  that  the  government
    actively  pursued  members  of  the  LTE  and   had   a   sophisticated
    intelligence network. The photographs of  the  appellant's  upper  body
    were not accepted as amounting to evidence of torture;  the  suggestion
    being that they showed everyday injuries.

 4. During the course  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    evidence was heard from the appellant and  two  witnesses.  Psychiatric
    and scarring reports were also  submitted  on  the  appellant's  behalf
    along with evidence said to emanate from Sri Lanka. The FTTJ  dismissed
    the appeal on credibility grounds as well as concluding  that  none  of
    the requirements of the Rules, in relation to the  appellant's  private
    life had been met and that Article  8  was  not  engaged,  outside  the
    Rules.

Error of law


 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on the basis that
    it was arguable that the FTTJ's assessment of  credibility  was  flawed
    owing to not taking into account the psychiatric report of  Dr  Dhumad,
    who diagnosed the appellant with PTSD; furthermore  the  FTTJ  had  not
    confronted the need to treat the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness
    owing to the said diagnosis and he had  misunderstood  or  misconstrued
    the evidence of Dr Martin who provided the scarring report, in  failing
    to correctly record the gradation of the  consistency  attributed.  The
    FTTJ was also said to have wrongly considered that Dr  Martin  did  not
    discount the  possibility  of  self-infliction  by  proxy.  The  FTTJ's
    findings as the plausibility of the  appellant's  account  were  termed
    "pure speculation." Comment was made that the Secretary  of  State  had
    failed to attempt to verify the evidence from a lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka,
    which had been rejected by the FTTJ.

 6. The FTTJ granting permission did so on the basis that it  was  arguable
    that the FTTJ either failed to appreciate the  difference  between  the
    terms "consistent", "highly consistent" and "typical," or misunderstood
    that evidence. It seemed to FTTJ JM Holmes that this complaint was  the
    strongest and went to "the heart of  the  reliability  of  the  adverse
    credibility findings," but that all the grounds may be argued.

 7. The Secretary of State's response  of  27  February  2016  opposed  the
    appeal and stated that the FTTJ gave "anxious and detailed scrutiny" to
    the medical report. It was argued that  the  FTTJ  had  not  failed  to
    understand the assessment required and  had  correctly  looked  at  the
    evidence as a whole.  It was said that the grounds  had  no  merit  and
    that the FTTJ had considered all the evidence  that  was  available  to
    him.

The hearing


 8. At the outset, Mr Bramble confirmed that the  Secretary  of  State  was
    still opposing the appeal, however he accepted that there  had  been  a
    failure by the FTTJ to refer to the psychiatric report of Dr Dhumad.

 9. Mr Jaisri  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  concentrated  his
    submissions on the FTTJ's treatment of  the  scarring  report  and  the
    complete absence of any mention of the psychiatric report. With  regard
    to the appellant's scars,  not  one  of  them  had  been  described  as
    "consistent with" the manner in which the appellant had said they  were
    caused. However, at [14], the FTTJ had erroneously found that Dr Martin
    had reached that conclusion. In fact, all the scarring was described as
    either "highly consistent with" or "typical." He did  not  accept  that
    these errors were rescued by the FTTJ's reference to the term "typical"
    at [15] of the decision. Mr Jaisri also argued that at  [22]  the  FTTJ
    did not do justice to the  lawyer's  letter,  which  covered  far  more
    ground that reflected in the said paragraph.

10. Mr Bramble accepted that the FTTJ fell into error in  relation  to  the
    wording of the scarring report, but his conclusions were,  nonetheless,
    essentially correct. He drew my attention to [15] of the decision where
    the FTTJ had stated; "the evidence has to be considered  as  a  whole,"
    and he argued that the judge had done just that. He further argued that
    the failure to consider the psychiatric report was not material because
    the FTTJ had not found the appellant's evidence to  be  incredible  and
    there were no discrepancies in that evidence. There was, therefore,  no
    need to factor in the psychological state of the appellant. With regard
    to the letter relied upon, the FTTJ had been right to say that this was
    a repetition of  the  appellant's  claim  and  that  it  was  merely  a
    photocopy. He urged me to uphold the decision.

11.  In  reply,  Mr  Jaisri  contended  that  the  FTTJ  had  attacked  the
    credibility of the appellant's account and undermined it. The errors of
    law were therefore material

Decision on error of law

12. The FTTJ made a material error of law. His decision is  set  aside,  in
    its entirety, for the following reasons.

13. The strongest ground, in my mind, was the complete failure of the  FTTJ
    to take the psychiatric report into  consideration  before  reaching  a
    conclusion in this  case.  Mr  Bramble  attempted  to  argue  that  the
    psychiatric report was immaterial as there were no  credibility  issues
    with the appellant's evidence. This is patently not the case. While the
    FTTJ did not comment directly on the appellant's oral evidence,  it  is
    apparent from his conclusions at [29]  that  he  rejected  the  salient
    aspects of the appellant's claim; that is that he was  of  interest  to
    the Sri Lankan authorities and that  he  had  been  detained  and  ill-
    treated.

14. The report of Dr Dhumad states that the appellant  was  suffering  from
    symptoms of PTSD as well as moderate depression. These  disorders  were
    attributed, by the appellant, to his recent detention and  torture.  Dr
    Dhumad's opinion was as follows; "Mr (KB) alleges that  the  Sri  Lanka
    authorities tortured him in 2014. He reported no mental health  problem
    prior to the torture. His mental health worsened after the  refusal  of
    his asylum application due to fear of deportation and  torture  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities. His psychological symptoms, in my opinion,  are
    consistent with response to exceptionally threatening life events  such
    as torture."

15. Elsewhere in the psychiatric report, Dr Dhumad  addresses  the  current
    risk of suicide, which he described as moderate at the time of  writing
    the report. He adds that the said risk was likely to  increase  in  the
    context of "deportation" and opines that steps would need to  be  taken
    to liaise with psychiatric services in Sri Lanka in  order  to  arrange
    the appellant's admission on arrival.

16. It is abundantly clear from reading the decision  that  in  failing  to
    address the psychiatric report at all, the FTTJ failed to consider  all
    of the evidence  in  the  round  prior  to  making  findings  of  fact,
    Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] INLR 122 applies. He also failed  to  address
    the issue of suicide risk, which was addressed in  some  detail  in  Dr
    Dhumad's report.

17. The FTTJ's lack of any consideration of the psychiatric report  amounts
    to a material error of law.

18. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there are errors of law such
    that the decision be set aside, to be remade. None of the  findings  of
    the FTTJ are to stand.

19. I considered listing this matter to be heard in the Upper Tribunal,  in
    view of  practice  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010 (as amended), however the appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of his asylum appeal at the First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  deprive  him  of   such
    consideration.

20. Further directions are set out below.

    An anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ. I consider it  appropriate
    for  anonymity  to  be  continued  and  therefore  make  the  following
    anonymity direction:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. "

Conclusions


     The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
     making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision to be re-made.





    Directions


       . This appeal is remitted to be heard  de  novo,  by  any  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge (except FTTJ Parkes).

       . The appeal is to be listed for a hearing at Taylor House.

       . An interpreter in the Tamil language is required.

       . Time estimate is 4 hours.


Signed      Date: 19 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

