
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07131/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination sent           |
|On 20th August, 2013                          |On 27th September, 2013      |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                           Mr tapiwa mason musiiwa
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Selway, Solicitor with Selway Reeves Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr J Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born  on  29th  October,
    1979.



Immigration History

2.   The  appellant's  immigration  history  is  unclear.   He  either  left
    Zimbabwe on 26th April, 1997 and travelled to the United  Kingdom  with
    his father, arriving at Gatwick Airport the following  day,  travelling
    on his own passport (at the time Zimbabwean citizens  did  not  need  a
    visa to enter the United Kingdom, or alternatively,  having  previously
    visited the United Kingdom between February and March  1997,  to  visit
    his sister, he then applied for  a  student  visa  which  was  granted,
    between 1999 and 2000.  He had no valid leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom when his leave expired.

3.   The appellant applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom under the Long Residency Concession in January 2003,  but  this
    application was refused with no right of appeal in November 2003.

4.   He applied for an EEA residence card in January 2007; however this  was
    refused on 21st March, 2007.  The appellant claimed to  have  lost  his
    passport and his Zimbabwean identity card in either 2008 or  2010.  The
    appellant reported his loss to the police in the  United  Kingdom.   He
    made an appointment to claim asylum on  17th  April,  2012  and  clamed
    asylum on 1st June, 2012. On the same day he was served with IS151A  as
    he had failed to regularise  his  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  since
    submitting his application for an EEA residence card in 2007.

5.   The respondent considered the appellant's claim  but  refused  it.   On
    26th July 2012 the respondent decided to remove  the  appellant  as  an
    illegal entrant.  It was  against  that  decision  that  the  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Balloch
    who, in a determination promulgated on 18th September, 2012,  dismissed
    his asylum and humanitarian protection appeals  and  his  human  rights
    appeal.

7.   On 12th December 2012 Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:-

         "Although I give permission to  argue  each  ground  of  appeal  my
         concern here is that the First-tier Tribunal has not addressed  the
         risks associated with the  need  to  show  loyalty.   Although  the
         decision in RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083 is old it
         is the appropriate  country  guidance  case  to  consider  when  an
         appellant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe  and  it  should  be  followed.
         Clearly the First-tier Tribunal has tried to  give  proper  reasons
         for reaching a conclusion contrary to that  suggested  by  RN  but,
         arguably, the reasons given are based on speculation   rather  than
         evidence."

8.   In addressing me Mr Selway, very properly in my view, stated  that  the
    decision of the  Tribunal  in  CM  (EM  country  guidance;  disclosure)
    Zimbabwe CG [2003] UKUT 00059 had rather overtaken matters.   Paragraph
    3 of the grounds assert that the  judge erred by looking at the  number
    of followers of  his  'Facebook'  pages,  rather  than  the  number  of
    visitors to the pages.  Mr Selway suggested that the appellant  may  be
    in difficulty with that challenge,  because  there  had  only  been  28
    visitors to the website.  So far as the fifth challenge is occurred, Mr
    Selway suggested that it was not the case that credibility  is  not  in
    issue.  He acknowledged that there was very little in the documents  on
    the appellant's Facebook page which could be said to put  Mugabe  in  a
    bad light, since the documents are already in the public domain and are
    taken from other published sources. The principal challenge, Mr  Selway
    suggested, was that failure to consider whether or  not  the  appellant
    could demonstrate loyalty to the regime as per RN (Returnees)  Zimbabwe
    CG [2008] UKAIT 00083.

9.   He confirmed that the appellant lived  in  Warren  Park,  a  suburb  of
    Harare, which the appellant confirmed,  is  a  high  density  populated
    area.

10.  I indicated to Mr Kingham that I did not need him to address me.

11.  In CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2003]  UKUT  00059
    the Tribunal said:

         215. It is therefore convenient at this point to set  out  (i)  the
             Country Guidance in EM, as so modified; and (ii) a summary  of
             the country information on Zimbabwe as at October 2012.
             (i) Country Guidance in EM, as modified
             (1)  As a general matter, there is significantly less
             politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared with the
             situation considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the
             evidence does not show that, as a general matter, the return
             of a failed asylum seeker from the United Kingdom, having no
             significant MDC profile, would result in that person facing a
             real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.
             (2) The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the
             case of a person without ZANU-PF connections, returning from
             the United Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural area
             of Zimbabwe, other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland
             South. Such a person may well find it difficult to avoid
             adverse attention, amounting to serious ill-treatment, from
             ZANU-PF authority figures and those they control.  The adverse
             attention may well involve a requirement to demonstrate
             loyalty to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of serious harm in the
             event of failure.  Persons who have shown themselves not to be
             favourably disposed to ZANU-PF are entitled to international
             protection, whether or not they could and would do whatever
             might be necessary to demonstrate such loyalty (RT
             (Zimbabwe)).
             (3) The situation is not uniform across the relevant rural
             areas and there may be reasons why a particular individual,
             although at first sight appearing to fall within the category
             described in the preceding paragraph, in reality does not do
             so. For example, the evidence might disclose that, in the home
             village, ZANU-PF power structures or other means of coercion
             are weak or absent.
             (4)  In general, a returnee from the United Kingdom to rural
             Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to
             face significant difficulty from ZANU-PF elements, including
             the security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or
             supporter. A person may, however, be able to show that his or
             her village or area is one that, unusually, is under the sway
             of a ZANU-PF chief, or the like.
             (5) A returnee to Harare will in general face no significant
             difficulties, if going to a low-density or medium-density
             area. Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density
             areas is more challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF
             connections will not face significant problems there
             (including a "loyalty test"), unless he or she has a
             significant MDC profile, which might cause him or her to
             feature on a list of those targeted for harassment, or would
             otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely to
             engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to
             the adverse attention of ZANU-PF.
             (6)  A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces,
             even if he or she has a significant MDC profile.
             (7)  The issue of what is a person's home for the purposes of
             internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact and
             is not necessarily to be determined by reference to the place
             a person from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.
             As a general matter, it is unlikely that a person with a well-
             founded fear of persecution in a major urban centre such as
             Harare will have a viable internal relocation alternative to a
             rural area in the Eastern provinces. Relocation to
             Matabeleland (including Bulawayo) may be negated by
             discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.
             (8) Internal relocation from a rural area to Harare or
             (subject to what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in general,
             more realistic; but the socio-economic circumstances in which
             persons are reasonably likely to find themselves will need to
             be considered, in order to determine whether it would be
             unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect them to relocate.
             (9) The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly improved since the
             period considered in RN. The replacement of the Zimbabwean
             currency by the US dollar and the South African rand has ended
             the recent hyperinflation. The availability of food and other
             goods in shops has likewise improved, as has the availability
             of utilities in Harare. Although these improvements are not
             being felt by everyone, with 15% of the population still
             requiring food aid, there has not been any deterioration in
             the humanitarian situation since late 2008. Zimbabwe has a
             large informal economy, ranging from street traders to home-
             based enterprises, which (depending on the circumstances)
             returnees may be expected to enter.
             (10) As was the position in RN, those who are or have been
             teachers require to have their cases determined on the basis
             that this fact places them in an enhanced or heightened risk
             category, the significance of which will need to be assessed
             on an individual basis.
             (11)   In certain cases, persons found to be seriously lacking
             in credibility may properly be found as a result to have
             failed to show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they would
             not, in fact, be regarded, on return, as aligned with ZANU-PF
             and/or (b) that they would be returning to a socio-economic
             milieu in which problems with ZANU-PF will arise. This
             important point was identified in RN ... and remains valid.
             (ii) Summary of the country information on Zimbabwe as at
          October 2012
        216.  We reiterate that what we have to say in this regard is not
             Country Guidance. The picture  presented by the fresh evidence
             as to the general position of Zimbabwe as at October 2012 does
             not differ in any material respect from the Country Guidance in
             EM. Elections are due to be held in 2013; but it is unclear
             when. In the light of the evidence regarding the activities of
             Chipangano, judicial-fact finders may need to pay particular
             regard to whether a person, who is reasonably likely to go to
             Mbare or a neighbouring high density area of Harare, will come
             to the adverse attention of that group; in particular, if he or
             she is reasonably likely to have to find employment of a kind
             that Chipangano seeks to control or otherwise exploit for
             economic, rather than political, reasons. The fresh evidence
             regarding the position at the point of return does not indicate
             any increase in risk since the Country Guidance was given in
             HS. On the contrary, the absence of reliable evidence of risk
             at Harare Airport means that there is no justification for
             extending the scope of who might be regarded by the CIO as an
             MDC activist."

12.  The decision in CM postdates the  judge's  determination  and  reflects
    the changed situation in Zimbabwe since RN was decided.

13.  The grounds assert that the judge erred in departing  from  RN  and  in
    considering the risks caused by the  appellant's  website  incorrectly.
    It was suggested in paragraph 3 that at paragraph  80  of  the  judge's
    determination the judge considered  the  number  of  followers  on  the
    appellant's Facebook, rather than the number  of  views  it  had.   The
    challenge suggested that the number of views and how the  page  can  be
    viewed or found is material and not simply the number of  followers  or
    friends.  It was asserted that the judge failed to  give  weight  to  a
    material issue.

14.  At paragraph 80 what the judge actually said  was  that  the  appellant
    appeared to have, "had few visitors to his page".   Mr Selway confirmed
    that there 28 visitors to the appellant's Facebook page. The judge went
    on to suggest that the documentation provided by the appellant  on  his
    Facebook page demonstrated very little response to what  the  appellant
    had posted.  There was no evidence of any response  or  attention  from
    anybody in Zimbabwe and as Mr Selway  correctly  indicated,  there  was
    very little documentation which puts President Mugabe in a  bad  light.
    The judge indicates that  the  situation  in  Zimbabwe  has  been  well
    documented and highlighted over the years.  Links on the Facebook  page
    to videos are videos made by other people or are a  recycling  of  news
    reports.

15.  I do not accept that the judge failed to  give  weight  to  a  material
    issue. She considered the evidence  and  properly  assessed  the  risk,
    finding that there was no  real  risk  to  the  appellant.  The  fourth
    challenge suggested that  it  was  immaterial  whether  the  Zimbabwean
    authorities had responded to comments posted on the Facebook page.  The
    issue was whether the appellant would  face  persecution  in  Zimbabwe.
    However, the judge did not simply say that there had been  no  response
    from the authorities in Zimbabwe; she made it clear that there had been
    no response from anybody in Zimbabwe  and  very  few  visitors  to  his
    Facebook page.  She was correct to  assess the risk to the appellant as
    not being a serious or  real  one.   The  fifth  challenge  appears  to
    criticise a First-tier Tribunal Judge who refused permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal and makes no criticism of the  determination  and
    the sixth challenge again suggests that the Tribunal failed to consider
    whether the appellant can demonstrate loyalty to the regime as per RN.

16.  The judge examined the objective  evidence  before  her  and  concluded
    that the current situation in Zimbabwe did  not  demonstrate  the  same
    level of violence and harassment as had been the position in 2008  when
    was RN decided.  That decision merely reflects the change in  situation
    in Zimbabwe which is reflected also in CM. Given that the appellant  is
    actually from a suburb of Harare, I have concluded  that  there  is  no
    real risk that this appellant will have  to  demonstrate  loyalty.   He
    will be of no interest to the Zimbabwean authorities on his  return  to
    Zimbabwe at the airport and if he returns to live in Harare, where  his
    home was, he is not at any real risk  of  being  asked  to  demonstrate
    loyalty to the ZANU-PF, or the current regime  in  Zimbabwe.   For  all
    these reasons I have concluded that  the  judge  did  not  err  in  her
    determination and  it  is  upheld.   The  appellant's  refugee  appeal,
    humanitarian appeal and human rights appeal are all dismissed.





Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
