
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/07132/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10 November 2015                  |On 23 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE PHILLIPS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Gilbert of Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer
Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity  direction  that  no  report  or
    other publication of these proceedings or any part  or  parts  of  them
    shall name or directly or indirectly identify the claimant.  Failure by
    any person, body or institution whether corporate or  incorporate  (for
    the avoidance of doubt to include  either  party  to  this  appeal)  to
    comply with this direction may lead  to  a  contempt  of  Court.   This
    direction shall continue in force until the Upper Tribunal (IAC) or  an
    appropriate Court lifts or varies it.

 2. The appellant is a national of Iraq. He arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    on the 2 October 2006 using a false passport and on the 3 October  2006
    he claimed asylum, asserting that his was his life  was  in  danger  in
    Iraq, as militant groups were killing high ranked members of the Ba'ath
    party and those who had worked for the government.

 3. On the 3 January 2013 the respondent refused the appellant's claim  for
    asylum, determining that there was serious reasons for considering that
    the appellant's actions and activities as part  of  the  Ba'ath  regime
    would have made him aware of and involved  in  war  crimes  and  crimes
    against humanity, namely, the violent suppression of the Shia uprisings
    in the early 1990s during which time the Iraqi  security  forces  fired
    indiscriminately into Shia residential areas. The respondent  therefore
    found that Article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention  applied,  excluding
    the appellant from the provisions of that  Convention.  That  provision
    reads as follows:

         "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to  any  person
         with respect to whom there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering
         that:

         (a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime
         against humanity, as  defined  in  the   international  instruments
         drawn up to make provision in respect of such crimes ..."

 4. That decision was subsequently withdrawn during the appeal process. The
    appellant was invited for a second asylum  interview,  conducted  on  8
    August 2013. In that interview, the appellant :

      a. asserted that the highest rank he achieved in the Ba'ath Party  was
         Udo Shu'aba, a middle rank, neither the lowest, nor the highest. In
         2001 he became responsible for a military base, in  command  of  25
         men.

      b. gave an account of the change in his rank from 1989  and  1995  and
         also gave further details as to the level of activity in  his  role
         during this period. He stated he was not allowed to  take  part  in
         any military activity such as combat operations, instead  receiving
         further training. Between November 1991 and 1995, his job consisted
         of mainly administrative duties due to the no-fly zone in place  at
         that time.

      c. claimed that he never ordered  any  officers  to  attack  civilians
         within Iraq. He never became involved in the military  combat,  and
         the invasion of Kuwait. He did not participate in any  combat,  and
         never killed anyone.

 5. On 8 April 2015 the  respondent  made  a  new  decision,  refusing  the
    appellant's asylum claim. The respondent did  not  accept  the  factual
    basis of the appellant's claim concerning his role in the Ba'ath  party
    or any other role he had.  The respondent further stated that, even  if
    the appellant's version of events was accepted, he  would  not  qualify
    for asylum, as he would be excluded from the Refugee  Convention  under
    Article 1F (a) for crimes against peace, war crimes all crimes  against
    humanity.

 6. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Upson)  on  2  July  2015  and  the  decision  was
    promulgated on 13 July 2015.  The judge  recorded  that  the  appellant
    claimed  asylum,  alternatively  Humanitarian  Protection,   and   also
    advanced human rights claims, requiring consideration of article 3.

 7. In relation to the asylum claim, the  judge  rejected  the  appellant's
    contention, repeated in a witness statement and in oral evidence,  that
    he was only a middle-ranking member of the Ba'ath Party. The judge  was
    satisfied that his initial account given on 3 October 2006, that he was
    a high ranking member of the  Party,  was  correct,  and  gave  further
    reasons for reaching this view based on his circumstances and those  of
    his family members. The judge was further satisfied that the  appellant
    had been involved in the suppression  of  resistance  to  the  Army  by
    firing rockets.

 8. The judge therefore concluded that the appellant had committed acts  of
    violence in a military capacity, whilst he was a high-ranking member of
    the Ba'ath party, amounting to war crimes within Article 1F(a). Even if
    (which the judge did not accept), the appellant was only ever  involved
    in surveillance, the judge was satisfied that that would be  sufficient
    to bring him within the exclusion under article 1F(a) because he  would
    have had a high rank, standing and influence, and  therefore  knowledge
    of the crimes being  committed  and  personal  involvement.  The  judge
    accordingly found that the appellant was excluded from relying  on  the
    Refugee Convention.

 9. The judge  further  found  that  the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to
    Humanitarian Protection under Article 15(c), applying the  decision  in
    HM & others Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC) where  it  is  stated  that
    there is nothing to suggest that the conflict  is  now  bad  enough  to
    place every civilian in the country at real risk of harm within Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive. He also rejected the  appellant's
    claim under Article 8 ECHR, but gave no express  consideration  to  the
    application of Article 3. The appeal was  therefore  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

10. On 6 August 2015 the First-tier Tribunal granted permission  to  appeal
    solely on the ground that Judge Upson's consideration of article 3  had
    been flawed. On 18 September 2015 the Upper Tribunal gave permission to
    appeal on the further ground that Judge Upson had not made sufficiently
    particularised findings as to the Appellant's personal  involvement  in
    committing war crimes.

11. Dealing first with  the  application  of  Article  1F(a),  it  is  well
    established that, in considering an individuals' criminal complicity it
    is necessary to consider to "concentrate on the actual role played by a
     particular person, taking all  material  aspects  of  that  role  into
    account as to decide whether the required degree  of  participation  is
    established": JS (Sri Lanka)  [2010] UKSC 15 per Lord Kerr at para  55.
    In the same case Lord  Brown  identified  the  determining  factors  as
    follows:

         Rather, however, than be deflected into first attempting some  such
         subcategorisation of the organisation, it is surely  preferable  to
         focus from the outset on what  ultimately  must  prove  to  be  the
         determining factors in any  case,  principally  (in  no  particular
         order) (i) the nature and (potentially of some importance) the size
         of the organisation and particularly that part of it with which the
         asylum-seeker was himself most  directly  concerned,  (ii)  whether
         and, if so, by whom the organisation was proscribed, (iii) how  the
         asylum-seeker came to be recruited, (iv)  the  length  of  time  he
         remained in the organisation and what, if any, opportunities he had
         to leave it, (v) his position, rank, standing and influence in  the
         organisation, (vi) his knowledge of the organisation's  war  crimes
         activities, and (vii) his own personal involvement and role in  the
         organisation including particularly whatever contribution  he  made
         towards the commission of war crimes.

12. Whilst the judge referred to JS (Sri Lanka), we are satisfied  that  he
    did not  follow  the  approach  advocated  by  the  Supreme  Court.  In
    particular, the Judge failed to consider the position  and  involvement
    of the appellant in the Ba'ath party at the time  of  the  alleged  war
    crimes. The judge appears to have considered only the appellant's final
    role and rank in the Ba'ath Party in 2001  to  2003,  not  the  crucial
    question of his role at the time of the War Crimes in the early  1990s,
    when he clearly held a significantly more junior position. Mr Whitwell,
    appearing for the respondent, candidly accepted that the judge had  not
    considered the timeline and that he (Mr Whitwell) could not "square the
    circle". We consider that it was incumbent on the judge to  make  clear
    findings as to his rank and involvement in the context of  the  country
    evidence and materials and that this evaluative  task  was  not  either
    undertaken or apparent from his assessment.  Consequently, we find that
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error of  law
    in its approach to the Article 1F issue.

13. As regards Article 3 ECHR, this was a separate and distinct  claim  and
    we consider that, having found that the Appellant was  a  high  ranking
    member of the Ba'ath party who had been involved in war crimes, it  was
    incumbent on the judge to have considered the risk to the appellant  of
    ill-treatment contrary to article 3 on return to Iraq on that  specific
    basis, not merely on the  basis  of  the  general  risk  to  returnees,
    including those with a connection to the  Ba'ath  Party.   Mr  Whitwell
    suggested  that  the  judge's  consideration  of  Article   15(c)   was
    sufficient for these purposes, but we are satisfied that there  was  an
    error of law in failing to give specific consideration  to  article  3,
    both because it is a separate category of risk and also because it must
    be considered on  the  basis  of  the  specific  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant, and in the light of the findings of fact reached.

14. Thus we have reached the decision that the appropriate  course  is  for
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside.   Due  to  the
    nature of the error of law, the Tribunal will be required to  hear  the
    oral evidence of the Appellant and for findings of fact to be  made  on
    all the factual issues and matters of credibility in the light  of  the
    country  materials.  In  that  context,  we  are  satisfied  that   the
    appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for there to be an assessment of the evidence.  Whilst  it  is
    not the ordinary practice of the Tribunal to remit cases to the  First-
    tier Tribunal, there are reasons why in this case such a course  should
    be adopted, having given particular regard to the overriding  objective
    of the efficient disposal of appeals and that there are issues of  fact
    that are central to this appeal that require determination  which  have
    not been assessed when the case was before the First-tier Tribunal.

15. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, none of
    the findings shall stand and the case is to be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  for a hearing in accordance with Section 12(2)(b) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act at paragraph 7.2 of the  practice
    statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).

Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law; the decision is set aside and the case is to be remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal  at  Bradford  for  a  hearing  in  accordance  with
Section 12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  at  paragraph
7.2 of the practice statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

The appellant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings, unless  and
until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise.   No  report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed
                               Mr Justice Phillips


                               Dated
