
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07075/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th November 2015                |On 4th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

                             mr mohammad mehrabi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Siddique Solicitor of Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of Iran (born  24th  July  1985)  appeals  with
    permission against the decision of a First-tier  Tribunal  which  in  a
    decision promulgated on 16th July 2015 dismissed his appeal against the
    Respondent's decision of 30th March 2015 refusing to grant him  asylum,
    Humanitarian Protection and refusing his human rights claims.

 2. The Appellant's claim to asylum was  based  on  his  claimed  political
    activities as a supporter of a little known  political  group  in  Iran
    called Eslah Taleban Khate Sevom (ETKS). The claim is that  ETKS  is  a
    pro-reform group which is perceived as engaging in or supporting  anti-
    government activities.

 3. At the hearing before the FtT, the Appellant  relied  in  part  upon  a
    report from a Country Expert, Dr Kakhki who reported on  the  existence
    of this group and in doing so  specifically  referred  to  a  CNN  News
    report confirming the  group's  existence.   Dr  Kakhki  also  provided
    references for information about the group taken  from  Farsi  websites
    and referenced this in footnotes to his report.

 4. The FtT in an otherwise carefully constructed decision  found  that  it
    comprehensively disbelieved the Appellant's claim to be a supporter  of
    ETKS.  However at [10] the FtT went on to say:

         "Claimed political activities. The appellant claimed to support and
         to be active in a little-known political group by the name of Eslah
         Taleban Khate Sevom. I was pointed to no credible English  language
         information about the  group,  not  even  in  the  expert's  report
         appended to the appellant bundle. The report mentioned there  being
         only a few news items in English about it, yet its author submitted
         no supporting information or references. He also stated that  there
         were a great number  of  references  in  the  Farsi  language,  yet
         submitted not a single translation. I cannot be satisfied as to the
         existence of this group. This apart, I have numerous concerns about
         the appellant's general credibility, along with his proclaimed role
         and motivation in this group."

    The FtT went on to dismiss the appeal.

UT Hearing/Error of Law

 5. Having heard submissions from both representatives, I am satisfied that
    the FtT's decision must be set aside, for the  following  reasons.  The
    FtT In analysing the evidence before him the FtT Judge  comprehensively
    disbelieved  the  Appellant's  account   of   his   claimed   political
    activities. Good reasons were given for  that  disbelief  and  had  the
    Judge confined itself to simply giving those reasons then  the  outcome
    of this appeal may well have been different.

 6. However he went on to make a finding that he could not be satisfied  as
    to the existence of ETKS. There was no analysis of the references in Dr
    Kakhki's report which provided sourced information about the group. The
    Respondent herself in her refusal letter at [22] and [27] accepted that
    the Appellant's knowledge of the movement was consistent  with  someone
    who had supported it and was involved in  it.  None  of  that  evidence
    appears to feature and weigh into the finding made that the group  does
    not exist.

 7. That is an error on the part of the  FtT  and  it  is  a  material  one
    because the issue of membership of this political group is  central  to
    the Appellant's case. It is conceivable that the error taints the whole
    of the factual  matrix  upon  which  the  FtT  based  its  decision  on
    credibility. In these circumstances I find there is no alternative  but
    to set aside the FtT's decision. There will  have  to  be  a  full  re-
    hearing with all issues at large. Since full fact finding is  necessary
    it is appropriate  that  the  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the matter to be determined afresh.

Decision

 8. The Appellant's appeal is  allowed,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside and the appeal remitted for the decision to be re-
    made by a Judge other than Judge MJH Wilson.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature     Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

