
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07100/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th March 2016                   |On 18th May 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                            MR MEHMET zEKI KILINC
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C T Cole a solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Turkey  born  on  23  April  1993.   He
    arrived in the UK on 27 March 2015 and claimed asylum and  humanitarian
    protection in the UK.  He also claimed that his human rights, which are
    protected by the European Convention on Human Rights  (ECHR)  would  be
    infringed if he were returned to Turkey.

2.   The respondent refused  his  application  and  decided  to  remove  the
    appellant from the UK on 16 April 2015.  The appellant had a  right  of
    appeal under Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  He subsequently utilised that right.  His appeal came before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Myers, who,  following  a  hearing  at
    Bradford on 12 August 2015, dismissed the appeal on  all  grounds.   He
    made no direction for anonymity and no fee award.

The Upper Tribunal Appeal

3.   The appellant prepared grounds of appeal on 2 September  2015,  arguing
    that the Immigration Judge had made an error of law in  his  assessment
    of the evidence, failed  to  take  into  account  when  assessing  that
    evidence that the appellant was "stressed from his journey" having been
    discovered in the back of a lorry  in  Dover  on  27  March  2015.   In
    addition, the appellant's interview had taken place  approximately  two
    and a half weeks after his arrival in the  UK  and  the  appellant  was
    still "stressed" by the experience.  The  appellant  had  explained  in
    interview why he found it hard to recount the relevant  events.   There
    had been a number  of  expressions  of  concern  over  the  appellant's
    psychological state which were made clear to the  respondent  when  the
    interview had concluded.  Notwithstanding these facts  the  Immigration
    Judge had gone  on  to  reject  the  appellant's  explanation  for  any
    omission in his asylum interview.  The judge had been wrong  to  regard
    the case as incredible.

4.   The appellant had been part of a blood feud arising out  of  a  Turkish
    land feud in which one family had been  killed  and  the  rival  family
    needed revenge.  However, the incidents went back over twenty years  it
    was not possible to assess credibility without taking into account  the
    country guidance material.  Unfortunately, the judge had not taken full
    account of the country guidance material and had reached a  precipitate
    view  of  the  country  information.   It  was  essential   that   this
    information  was  properly  considered  to  reach  a  proper  view   of
    credibility.  Unfortunately, blood feuds regularly took place in Turkey
    and sometimes lasted for years.

5.   The Immigration Judge had also been wrong to reject certain  documents.
     At paragraph 26 of his decision it was submitted that they provided  a
    cogent explanation that the appellant's family were indeed involved  in
    an incident which occurred on 20 December 2014.  The appellant's  uncle
    (Ahmet Kilinc) was shot and injured in an incident which  was  detailed
    in a document, namely an indictment from the Chief Prosecutor's  office
    in Gaziantep.  The document refers to a "prior feud" and "fighting".

6.   Despite this "cogent evidence", which had apparently been  accepted  by
    the Immigration Judge as being "genuine", he  went  on  to  reject  the
    claim.  The Immigration Judge did  not  accept  the  feud  between  the
    appellant's family and a rival family.

7.   The Immigration Judge had failed to assess the appellant's claim  of  a
    blood feud and any inconsistencies spotted  by  the  Immigration  Judge
    were based on errors.  It was  submitted  that  the  errors,  including
    factual errors, undermined the whole  decision.   The  decision  should
    have been that the country guidance information and background evidence
    was sufficient to show the appellant to be at risk from  a  blood  feud
    which would have violent consequences if he returned to Turkey.

8.   The judge granting permission (Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley)  found  a
    number of arguable errors of law on  27  October  2015.   Specifically,
    Judge Lindsley noted the various arguments set out in the  grounds  and
    the fact that it was said that a genuine indictment had  been  produced
    from the Chief Prosecutor's office which made specific reference to the
    blood feud.  The  grounds  in  Judge  Lindsley's  view  were  at  least
    arguable as the appellant appeared to fail to have due  regard  to  the
    incidents alleged and the possible risk to  the  appellant  on  return.
    However, Judge Lindsley did note that the appellant would need to  show
    that there was no available safe internal flight alternative to seeking
    international protection.  Judge Lindsley noted that  paragraph  28  of
    the decision appeared to deal with this.

9.   In response to the  appeal  and  the  grant  of  permission  Mr  Melvin
    prepared a response under Rule 24  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (Upper Tribunal Rules).  In his Rule  24  response
    Mr Melfein points out that the respondent is in possession  of  records
    to show that the appellant arrived in the UK on 27 March 2015  and  his
    asylum interview was conducted on 14 April 2015.  At that time  he  was
    found to be "fit and  well".   The  respondent  said  in  her  Rule  24
    response that the appellant sought to raise forensic  criticisms  of  a
    number of findings whilst ignoring the essential legal test that he had
    to satisfy (by reference to VHR (unmeritorious grounds) [2014] UKUT 367
    (IAC)).  Mr Melvin indicated that his client would be  submitting  that
    the blood feud, based on the evidence, had been  settled  twenty  years
    previously by the appellant's  grandfather.   The  adverse  credibility
    finding at paragraph 24 was open to the  judge  in  the  light  of  the
    evidence.  Further, the Immigration Judge only had a faxed  copy  of  a
    police report and was entitled to have doubts as to the credibility  of
    this  document.   The  Immigration  Judge  gave  reasons  for  this  at
    paragraph 26 of her decision.  Finally, the respondent  submitted  that
    the grounds amounted to no more than an attempt to re-argue the  appeal
    and the internal relocation finding stood, as Judge  Lindsley  said  at
    paragraph 4 of the grant of permission in this case.

The Hearing

10.  At the hearing  I  heard  submissions  by  both  representatives.   The
    appellant's representative, Mr Cole, began by  outlining  his  grounds.
    He did not have "a huge amount" to add to the grounds summarised  above
    and the renewed grounds  which  are  set  out  in  an  application  for
    permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  dated  13  October  2015.
    These state that the reasons the First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  gave  for
    initially refusing permission were not cogent because  the  Immigration
    Judge  had  made  a  mistake  over  the  length  of  time  between  the
    appellant's arrival into the UK, when he was said to have been fatigued
    by the journey, and the conduct of the interview.  This was  clearly  a
    material  error.   Furthermore,  the  judge   who   initially   refused
    permission to appeal (FtTJ Foudy) was wrong to characterise the grounds
    as being "nothing more than a disagreement  with  the  findings  made".
    They were clearly principled grounds of objection  to  the  credibility
    and other adverse findings.  It was submitted that the judge had  erred
    in law and not simply disagreed with the submissions made on behalf  of
    the appellant.

11.  Mr Cole referred me to paragraph 23 of the decision  which  contains  a
    finding of inconsistency between the oral evidence given before the FtT
    on 12 August 2015 and the appellant's answers to questions in interview
    (it appears on 14 April 2015).  There, the Immigration  Judge  suggests
    that the appellant did not mention that his brother had been  disabled.
    Yet this formed part of the answers he had given to  questions  at  the
    hearing.  In particular, he  had  claimed  at  that  hearing  that  his
    brother had been disabled in a car accident about four  or  five  years
    previously.  The appellant was asked to explain the discrepancy. He put
    this down to stress during the interview.  This,  it  was  said  by  Mr
    Cole,  was  consistent  with  the   appellant   finding   the   process
    "psychologically demanding".  Furthermore, the appellant was recovering
    from a long journey conducted only two and a half weeks previously.  My
    attention was drawn to the answer the appellant gave to question 135 in
    interview where he indicated  that  the  process  had  had  an  adverse
    psychological effect on him.  Secondly, I was referred to the answer he
    gave to question 155 where he was asked whether he was satisfied he had
    told the interviewing officer of his reasons for  claiming  asylum  and
    the fact that he had said yes but had gone on to say that  he  was  not
    well psychologically.  My attention was also drawn to page  B7  in  the
    screening  interview  where  the  appellant   pointed   out   that   he
    acknowledged he was having a "negative effect" but this was due to  his
    psychological state.  The appellant said that  he  had  not  registered
    with a nurse but he needed to get to see a doctor  quickly.   This  was
    his explanation for inconsistencies.  They should have been accepted by
    the Immigration Judge but were not.

12.  Mr Cole then went on to outline why he  said  the  Immigration  Judge's
    failure to take account of country guidance evidence  was  a  "material
    error".  He said that there was sufficient country guidance information
    available that blood feuds did not "go  quiet".   He  referred  to  the
    appellant's bundle  of  documents  at  page  21  which  refers  to  the
    "enduring and violent" nature  of  these  family  tussles  which  often
    involve deaths as in the case of an  incident  in  Tarsus.   There  are
    incidents where persons are "shot in cold blood".  The  fact  that  the
    blood feud was twenty years old did not mean that there  would  not  be
    another incident.  There had been cases  where  blood  feuds  had  only
    ended after 49 years.  The Immigration Judge had not  give  a  credible
    reason for deciding that the history of blood feuds was at  an  end  in
    this case.  This was clearly an error of law.

13.   Judge  Lindsley  found  the  grounds  arguable  but  had  queried  the
    materiality of the  deficiencies  unidentified  given  the  finding  of
    safety through internal flight being available.

14.  At paragraph 28 of the decision the Immigration Judge  had  found  that
    there was recent evidence  of  blood  feuds  in  his  "home  area"  and
    prejudice  against  Kurds  generally.   However,  the  appellant  could
    relocate from his home area if this were necessary.  Mr Cole criticised
    this finding because he said "he would be tracked down in Istanbul."

15.  Finally, Mr Cole submitted that because  of  the  absence  of  adequate
    credibility findings and adequate consideration of the country guidance
    material the case needed to be "remitted back  to  the  FtT"  to  start
    afresh.  I was invited to  preserve  no  findings  and  remit  to  that
    tribunal.

16.  Mr Diwnycz in response stood by his client's  Rule  24  response.   One
    small observation he wished to add was that at B1  in  his  bundle  the
    appellant had been introduced to the interpreter and had confirmed that
    he understood everything later.  He was content to  be  interviewed  in
    Turkish and described himself as feeling well enough to be interviewed.
     As the respondent pointed out, there was little else that she could do
    to ensure the appellant understood what he was being asked.  Mr Diwnycz
    apologised if anything  in  the  standard  interview  form  was  unduly
    simplistic.  Mr Diwnycz appeared to accept that if a material error  of
    law was found the case could go back to the FtT but he did  not  demure
    from the suggestion that  the  Upper  Tribunal,  being  seized  of  the
    matter, should go on and determine whether or not the appeal  succeeded
    or not in the event that it found an error of law.

17.  Finally, the appellant responded to say that much  of  the  information
    supplied to the FtT was historic in character and would  need  updating
    if a fresh decision was to be taken.  However, I made the point that it
    would be possible to have a fresh  hearing  to  examine  the  objective
    evidence if this became necessary.  Both parties agreed that  it  would
    only take an hour or so for this to be done.

18.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision  which  I  will  later
    give with my reasons.

Discussion

19.  The appellant, who is a Turkish Kurd, claims  that  there  is  no  safe
    place for him to live in Turkey and he travelled to the UK in the  back
    of a lorry "very frightened" with a view to claiming asylum in the  UK.
    This was on 27 March 2015.  The incidents he referred to go  back  over
    twenty years but in particular it is alleged that in 2012  the  ancient
    feud between the Kes tribe and his own family was revived when two  men
    Ahmed and Mikhail who were violent criminals, wanted to  seek  revenge.
    Having, somehow, obtained the appellant's telephone number it  was  the
    appellant who was the hapless victim of their intended blood lust.  The
    appellant gives an account of having been assaulted  so  the  appellant
    decided to flee from Gaziantep, where his family were from, and live in
    Istanbul where he was able to stay for about  six  months.   He  claims
    that he was found by Ahmed and Mikhail where the  assault  took  place.
    The appellant had to seek refuge in an empty building for  a  few  days
    before returning to his family in Gaziantep.  The  appellant  then  did
    his military service for two years  having  been  discharged  from  the
    military in eastern Turkey in January  2014.   Unfortunately,  when  he
    returned home a further incident occurred the following December  (i.e.
    in 2014) when the above-mentioned assailants were spotted. It  appeared
    that they shot the appellant's uncle, although he was  able  to  secure
    himself in "the house". This incident took place in Palika. The  police
    investigated the incident but  the  appellant  claimed  (in  answer  to
    question 113 of the interview) that "after a day, they released  (Ahmet
    and Mikhail)". This caused the appellant to  go  to  a  village  called
    Satirhouyuk, from which his mother came.  However, at the  village  PKK
    guerrillas invited him to join their organisation.  The  appellant  was
    too scared to star there due to its "terrorist  problem"  and  at  that
    point decided he was not safe anywhere in Turkey so he had to leave. He
    regretted saying that he had stayed at home for a month, then  gone  to
    "the village" and then the UK because this was not what  happened.  The
    appellant claims to be "really scared" of returning there believing the
    men, Ahmet and Mikhail - who should have been put in prison, would want
    to kill him.

20.  At the hearing I indicated that it appeared to the  Tribunal  that  the
    Immigration Judge had not set the adverse credibility findings  in  her
    decision against the  background  evidence  to  the  extent  which  was
    desirable.  I have now  had  an  opportunity  to  undertake  that  task
    following the hearing and will set out my conclusions below.

Conclusions

21.  I considered the other main ground of criticism of the decision of  the
    Immigration Judge, namely that she had failed to attach  proper  weight
    to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  complained   of   suffering   from
    "psychological stress" at the time of his interview.  This was said  to
    explain a number of the discrepancies which were identified by her.   I
    considered this  to  be  a  convenient  explanation  for  the  numerous
    inconsistencies which she found and noted the absence  of  any  medical
    evidence to support his alleged "psychological  stress".   Furthermore,
    it seems to me immaterial whether the appellant had arrived in  the  UK
    two and a half weeks or one month prior to the interview.  The fact was
    that there was a significant time gap between the  appellant's  arrival
    into the UK and the interview and the Immigration Judge was entitled to
    reach the view that his need to recover from his journey to the UK  was
    sufficient  explanation  for  the  discrepancies  in  his  account   in
    interview.   The  Immigration  Judge  found  the  appellant  to  be  an
    unreliable and inconsistent witness and that  was  a  finding  she  was
    entitled to come to on the evidence.  No medical  evidence  was  placed
    before the FtT.  As I indicated at the hearing, I am not  going  to  go
    behind the fact-findings of the Immigration Judge.

22.  I have reviewed the objective evidence in the appellant's  bundle  that
    blood feuds may last for many years and do not necessarily come  to  an
    end simply by the  elapse  of  time.   However,  having  reviewed  that
    evidence and set it against the Immigration  Judge's  findings  I  note
    that those findings include an outright rejection of a  number  of  the
    documents that have been  produced  in  support  of  the  appeal.   The
    Immigration Judge appears  to  me  to  have  carefully  considered  the
    documentary evidence at paragraphs 26 and 27 but for the  comprehensive
    and careful reasons she gave there rejected that evidence.

23.  The evidence of a shooting in 2012  was  found  to  be  incredible  and
    inconsistent at paragraph 25.  It was noted by  the  Immigration  Judge
    that the police had in fact detained  the  appellant's  attackers  (see
    paragraph 25) although the appellant later said the police "did nothing
    to help Kurds".  There was simply no cogent evidence that the appellant
    had recently become involved in the incidents he described  other  than
    the appellant's own oral evidence which was not cogent for the  reasons
    the Immigration Judge gave.

24.  The appellant faces the  additional  difficulty  that  the  Immigration
    Judge had rejected the appellant's evidence about having  been  tracked
    down to Istanbul and the Immigration Judge did not  accept  that  there
    was not an internal flight alternative to his claim  for  international
    protection.  This would make the errors of law identified, even if they
    were  correct,  immaterial.   The  appellant  had  not  shown  why  the
    appellant  could  not  safely  relocate  to  another  part  of   Turkey
    therefore.  This would  include  Istanbul,  an  international  city  of
    millions, but, as it was put to the appellant in interview (at question
    147) there may also be other areas of Turkey well away  from  his  home
    area where he would not be known or discoverable by Ahmet and  Mikhail.
    The  Immigration  Judge's  findings  here  have  not  been  effectively
    challenged on this and are not even raised in the grounds.  There is no
    application to amend the grounds and as  Judge  Lindsley  pointed  out,
    this would be fatal to the assertion that  the  Immigration  Judge  had
    made material errors of law.  The Immigration Judge  gave  careful  and
    sufficient reasons for this aspect of the decision as others have done.
     I am satisfied that she did  not  omit  to  deal  with  any  important
    aspects of the case that is material to her decision.

My Decision

25.  I find that there was no material error of law in the decision  of  the
    FtT.  That decision therefore stands.   Accordingly,  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse the appellant asylum or humanitarian protection  and
    to decide to find that the appellant had not engaged rights  under  the
    ECHR which have been violated stands.

26.  There is no  challenge  to  the  decision  not  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction or a fee award in this case.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

