
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07928/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2015                   |On 20 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                    Charitha Prabath Rangana Senevirathna
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Charitha Prabath Rangana Senevirathna, was  born  on  13
    September 1980 and is a male  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.   The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Holt)  against  a  decision
    dated 18 September 2014 of the respondent to remove him from the United
    Kingdom having rejected the appellant's asylum claim.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal.  First, the appellant asserts that the
    judge failed to understand the evidence adduced by him.  The  appellant
    in his written evidence had stated that he had "decided to  instruct  a
    lawyer to help me obtain a copy of the documents held in the Sri Lankan
    courts."  These documents related to an arrest warrant allegedly issued
    against the appellant.  At [28], Judge Holt recorded that:
         "In this case there was evidence from the appellant that he does in
         fact have contacts with the police because he  told  me  he  has  a
         friend whose father is a retired police officer.  It is his case to
         use these contacts  to  obtain  (what  he  claims  to  be)  genuine
         documentation which corroborates, he says, his suspicion that he is
         wanted on an arrest warrant."

 3. I can find nothing  in  the  written  evidence  or  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings (which gives an account of the  appellant's  oral  evidence
    tendered  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal)  that  indicate  that  the
    appellant has ever said that he used  a  contact  with  the  police  to
    obtain documents.   Judge  Holt  clearly  believed  [27]  that  it  was
    necessary to have a police contact in order to obtain an arrest warrant
    from the Sri Lankan court; she cites the COIS Report of 17  March  2012
    which indicates that this is  the  case.   She  appears  also  to  have
    accepted the respondent's submission (again I cannot find this  in  the
    Record of Proceedings) that the appellant used contacts with the police
    to obtain fabricated documentation  with  the  help  of  a  Sri  Lankan
    lawyer.  I stress that there is nothing in the papers to  indicate  the
    appellant ever made such a claim.  The judge clearly believed  that  it
    was significant that the appellant  had  used  the  police  contact  to
    obtain the documents because she refers it to again [30] when rejecting
    the appellant's documentary evidence as unreliable.  The  fact  remains
    that the appellant has stated throughout that he sought to  obtain  the
    documents not through his police contact but via services  of  the  Sri
    Lankan lawyer.  The judge has, therefore, not adequately  assessed  the
    appellant's claim but has rather assessed the appeal on a  basis  which
    the appellant never advanced to her.

 4. Secondly, the appellant's wife  gave  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Part of her account (see her written evidence)  corroborated
    that of the appellant.  Although the judge refers to  the  wife  having
    given  evidence,  there  has  been  no  assessment  whatever   of   the
    credibility of that evidence which the judge was  obliged  to  consider
    was part of the totality of the evidential material before her.

 5. I consider that both  of  the  errors  perpetrated  by  the  judge  are
    sufficiently serious to leave me to set aside  her  decision.   In  the
    light of the nature of the errors, I remit this matter  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  (not  Judge  Holt)  for  that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision. None of the findings of fact shall stand.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 12 December 2014
    is set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  (not
    Judge Holt) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane     4 November 2015
