
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07733/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2015                  |On 24 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, instructed by Vasuki Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698  as  amended)   in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the appellant who  claims  to  be  a  refugee.
    This order prohibits the disclosure directly or  indirectly  (including
    by the parties) of the identity of the appellant.   Any  disclosure  in
    breach of this order may amount to a contempt  of  court.   This  order
    shall remain in force unless revoked or varied by a tribunal or  court.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 9 January 1988.
     He entered the United Kingdom on 18 January 2011 with leave as a  Tier
    4 Student valid until 15 July 2011.  That leave  was  extended  on  two
    occasions such that his leave was valid until 31 December 2015.

 3. On 25 June 2014, the Secretary of State curtailed the appellant's leave
    as a student on the basis of unsatisfactory attendance at his  college.
    His leave was curtailed to 29 August 2014.

 4. On 19 August 2014, the appellant applied to vary his leave on the basis
    that his removal to Sri Lanka would breach the Refugee  Convention  and
    the ECHR.

 5. On 12 September 2014, the Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum, for humanitarian protection and under Articles  2,  3
    and 8 of the ECHR.  On that basis, on 12 September 2014  the  Secretary
    of State refused to vary the appellant's leave to  remain  and  made  a
    decision to remove him by directions under  s.47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 3 February 2015, Judge James dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 7. Whilst Judge James accepted that the appellant  had  been  a  low-level
    supporter of the LTTE and had been detained and  seriously  ill-treated
    by the Sri Lankan authorities in September 2010, the judge found  that,
    having been  released,  he  was  of  no  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities in particular as he had been  issued  with  a  passport  in
    order to leave Sri Lanka and also one subsequently in the UK by the Sri
    Lankan High Commission.  Applying the country guidance case of  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 317  (IAC),
    the judge found that the appellant would not be at risk on return as  a
    low-level LTTE supporter nor on the basis  of  his  claimed  sur  place
    activities in the UK.  As regards the former, the judge did not  accept
    that the appellant was subject to an arrest warrant and therefore would
    be on a "stop list" if returned to Sri Lanka.  As regards  the  latter,
    the judge did not accept that the appellant was or would  be  perceived
    as a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as  a  single  state  or  as
    someone who would be perceived to have played  a  significant  role  in
    relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within  the  diaspora  as  a
    result of his activities in the UK.

 8. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  the
    judge's adverse findings failed properly  to  have  regard  to  GJ  and
    Others.  In particular, the  judge  was  wrong  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant was of no interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  simply
    because he had been released from detention (as he claimed by a  bribe)
    and had been able to obtain a passport both in Sri Lanka and in the UK.
     The grounds argued that the appellant's account  was  consistent  with
    the evidence that bribery could result in release from  detention,  the
    obtaining of a passport  and  safe  passage  through  Colombo  Airport.
    Further, as regards GJ and Others, the appellant fell within  the  risk
    category set out in para 7(a) of  the  headnote  given  his  sur  place
    activities, including his membership of a proscribed  organisation  the
    TGTE and, on the basis of the evidence set out in Appendix C of GJ  and
    Others, that the appellant would be asked questions on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka which would require him to disclose his  LTTE  profile  including
    his  involvement  in  sur  place  activities.   The  judge  had  failed
    adequately to consider whether, as a result, he would be  perceived  as
    falling within the risk category of someone perceived to be a threat to
    the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state  or  as  someone  who  had
    played a significant role in post-conflict Tamil separatism in the  UK.



 9. On 5 March 2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Gibb)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

10. That appeal was initially listed before me  on  10  June  2015.   In  a
    decision dated 15 June 2015, I concluded that the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the  making  of  an
    error of law and the decision was set aside  to  be  remade.   My  full
    reasons are set out in that decision and it is  unnecessary  to  repeat
    them here.

11. Both representatives at that hearing, accepted that certain findings of
    the judge should be preserved as set out in para  2(i)  -  (v)  of  the
    grounds of appeal, namely that the appellant was an LTTE supporter; his
    brother and uncle were LTTE members;  the  appellant  was  arrested  in
    September 2010 and was detained and ill-treated; the appellant's arrest
    was as a result of him having provided accommodation for LTTE  members;
    and during the course of  his  detention  the  appellant  informed  the
    authorities as to the full extent of his involvement with the LTTE.

12. Both representatives acknowledged that at the resumed hearing,  on  the
    basis of the evidence, the issues included whether  the  appellant  had
    been subject to an arrest warrant and, as a result, was on a stop  list
    and what, if any, were the extent of his diaspora activities.  Finally,
    on the basis of the findings, the issue was whether the appellant  fell
    within the risk categories in GJ and Others bearing in mind  the  Court
    of Appeal's comments in MP and Others v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829  at
    [50] that an individual might be perceived as posing a  current  threat
    to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state  even  in  the  absence
    that he or she had been involved in diaspora activism.

13. The resumed appeal was listed before me on 2 September 2015.

The Resumed Hearing

14. The appellant was represented by Mr Paramjorthy and the  respondent  by
    Mr Richards.

15. Mr Paramjorthy relied upon the documentation submitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal but also sought permission under Rule 15(2A) of the  UT's
    Procedure Rules to rely upon a further bundle of documents ("Bundle B")
    which included an updated witness statement from the appellant dated 19
    August 2015, a letter from the appellant's mother dated 25 August  2015
    and, in translation, an extract from a web news report  dated  25  June
    2015  ("Tamilwin  News")  together  with   a   number   of   supporting
    photographs, in particular at page 7  which  was  included  within  the
    article and said to show the appellant  standing  on  a  street  corner
    soliciting signatures for a petition to prosecute the President of  Sri
    Lanka before the International Criminal Court.

16. On behalf of the respondent, Mr  Richards  made  no  objection  to  the
    admission of this evidence and in the interests of justice  I  admitted
    it under Rule 15(2A).

17. Mr Richards also sought to introduce an email exchange and  a  document
    headed "bio-data information" relating to the appellant's claim to have
    lost his documents in the  UK  and  to  be  seeking  replacements.   Mr
    Paramjorthy did not object to the admission of this evidence and I also
    admitted it in the interests of justice under Rule 15(2A).

18. In addition, the appellant gave oral evidence in which he  adopted  his
    statements of 6 January 2015 and 19 August 2015.

19. I will refer to the evidence, oral and  documentary,  as  necessary  in
    reaching my findings below.

The Law

20. The appellant relies upon the Refugee Convention.  The  appellant  must
    establish that there is a real risk that if returned to  Sri  Lanka  he
    will be subject to persecution for  a  Convention  Reason,  namely  his
    actual or perceived political opinion.

21.  Further,  the  appellant  relies  on  Article  3  and  must  establish
    substantial grounds for believing that there is a  real  risk  that  he
    would be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading  treatment  if
    returned to Sri Lanka.

The Issues

22. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards accepted  that  the  appellant
    had been detained  and  mistreated  in  September  2010.   However,  he
    submitted that the appellant had not established that  he  was  of  any
    interest to the Sri Lankan authorities in that  he  had  been  able  to
    obtain a passport on his release and had left  Sri  Lanka  without  any
    difficulty.  He invited me to reject the appellant's  account  that  he
    had left as a result of an agent and bribes being paid.  In any  event,
    this did not explain how he had been able successfully to apply  for  a
    further Sri Lankan passport in the UK in 2014 if he was of interest  to
    the authorities.  Mr Richards submitted that  it  was  clear  that  the
    appellant's claim for asylum was triggered by the  curtailment  of  his
    leave to remain as a  student.   He  had  not  claimed  asylum  earlier
    despite having come to the UK in January 2011.  Mr  Richards  submitted
    that nothing that the appellant had done prior  to  leaving  Sri  Lanka
    would cause him any difficulty on return now.

23. As regards the appellant's claimed sur place  activities,  Mr  Richards
    submitted that the appellant was not an  activist.   Even  if  it  were
    accepted that he had, as he claimed, stood on a  corner  and  collected
    signatures the only photograph he claimed was on the website (at page 7
    of Bundle B) only showed him from the side and it was not  likely  that
    he would be identified from it.  Mr Richards submitted that the  letter
    from  the  appellant's  mother,  which  claimed  that   following   the
    publication of  this  photograph,  the  authorities  had  come  to  his
    parents' home and threatened him as a result of that if he returned  to
    Sri Lanka was wholly lacking in credibility.

24. Mr Richards submitted that on the basis of GJ and Others the  appellant
    was not someone whom it would be perceived was a threat to the  unified
    state of  Sri  Lanka  or  had  been  involved  in  diaspora  activities
    sufficient to interest the Sri Lankan state.

25. He invited me to dismiss the appeal.

26. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Paramjorthy  relied  upon  his  skeleton
    argument which he elaborated upon in his oral submissions.

27. First, Mr Paramjorthy invited me to  accept  the  appellant's  evidence
    which, together with the preserved findings  of  fact,  Mr  Paramjorthy
    submitted put the appellant at risk.  Mr Paramjorthy submitted that  it
    was not implausible that the  appellant  had  been  able  to  obtain  a
    passport in Sri Lanka and leave the country without difficulty even  if
    he was of interest to the authorities.  He  referred  me  to  paragraph
    27.02 of the Country of Information Report for Sri Lanka where  it  was
    stated that  it  was  possible  to  obtain  genuine  (but  fraudulently
    obtained) passports in any name through  bribery.   It  was  consistent
    with the background evidence that an individual could leave  Sri  Lanka
    with the aid of an agent even if of interest to  the  authorities.   As
    regards the  appellant  having  obtained  a  passport  in  the  UK,  Mr
    Paramjorthy submitted that there was no evidence to show that the  High
    Commission has any links to the "stop" list for  those  wanted  in  Sri
    Lanka.  Mr Paramjorthy relied upon the email  exchange,  introduced  by
    the respondent at the hearing, to show  that  the  appellant  sought  a
    passport in order to obtain a replacement Biometric  Residence  Permit.
    On departing through the airport  in  Sri  Lanka  through  bribery,  Mr
    Paramjorthy referred me to [394]  in  GJ  and  Others  where  that  was
    recognised as a possibility.

28. Mr Paramjorthy submitted that I should find on the  evidence  that  the
    appellant was subject to an "arrest warrant" and, therefore,  would  be
    on a "stop list". Mr Paramjorthy  submitted  that  that  was  both  the
    evidence of the appellant and his mother which  I  should  accept.   He
    pointed out that it was accepted that  a  copy  of  an  arrest  warrant
    cannot be produced by an individual in usual circumstances.

29. Mr Paramjorthy  submitted  that  the  respondent's  reliance  upon  the
    appellant's delay  in  claiming  asylum  and  s.8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004  as  "damaging"  of
    his credibility, could  not  affect  the  judge's  findings  that  were
    preserved and their relevance seemed to be restricted to assessing  the
    appellant's sur place activities.

30. In relation  the  appellant's  sur  place  activities,  Mr  Paramjorthy
    submitted that the appellant  was  at  risk  applying  GJ  and  Others.
    First, it was not unreasonable that he should be involved genuinely  in
    the activities that he claimed including, but not restricted to,  being
    a member of the TGTE which is a proscribed organisation  in  Sri  Lanka
    and also collect signatures for a petition to bring  the  President  of
    Sri Lanka before the ICC.  Mr Paramjorthy relied upon the photograph at
    page 7 of Bundle B which had appeared on a Tamil website.  He  accepted
    that the most recent evidence of the appellant's mother  had  not  been
    tested by cross-examination, nevertheless he invited me to accept that,
    looking at all the evidence in the round, and to find that the home  of
    the appellant's parents had been visited by the authorities as a result
    of the publication of the  appellant's  picture  on  the  website.   Mr
    Paramjorthy submitted that on return to Sri Lanka the  appellant  would
    be questioned and he relied upon para 4 of Appendix C of GJ and  Others
    which highlighted that questions of an  individual  would  include  his
    LTTE background.  Mr Paramjorthy submitted that the appellant could not
    be expected to lie about his previous  involvement  or  his  sur  place
    activities.

31. On these bases, Mr Paramjorthy submitted that the appellant fell within
    the risk category in GJ and Others in  para  7(a)  of  the  head  note,
    namely a person who would be perceived as a threat to the integrity  of
    Sri Lanka as a single state because they are or are perceived to have a
    significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil  separatism  within
    the  diaspora  and/or  a  renewal  of  hostilities  within  Sri  Lanka.
    Further, the appellant fell within para 7(d) on the basis that  he  was
    on a "stop" list as a result of there being an  extant  arrest  warrant
    against him.

Discussion and Findings

32. It is accepted  on  the  basis  of  the  preserved  findings  that  the
    appellant is an LTTE supporter and that both his brother and uncle were
    LTTE members.  The background to that is that his uncle was killed  and
    his brother has been missing since 2009.  Further, it is accepted  that
    the appellant was arrested in 2010 and was detained and seriously  ill-
    treated,  indeed  tortured  whilst  in  detention  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  The background to that is  that  he  had  been  providing
    accommodation to two LTTE members in 2005.  He also had  provided  low-
    level support, including collecting money and information for the LTTE.
     It is not suggested that he has ever been an LTTE cadre.  When one  of
    the individuals was detained,  he  disclosed  that  the  appellant  had
    provided him with accommodation and as a result of that  the  appellant
    was detained for eleven days.  The appellant claims that he was  beaten
    and tortured using, for example, metal  bars  and  sticks.   There  are
    photographs in the file, showing scarring on the back of the  appellant
    which, it was not suggested before me, are other than  consistent  with
    that account.  Whilst in detention, the appellant  also  told  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities about his involvement with the LTTE.

33. The appellant claims that he was released after his father paid a bribe
    to army officers.  He  was  released,  the  appellant  claims,  with  a
    reporting obligation back to the police station on a monthly basis.  He
    claims that thereafter he went into  hiding  and  arranged  through  an
    agent for a passport and to leave Sri Lanka which he did on  8  January
    2011.  The respondent argues that it is, in  effect,  implausible  that
    the appellant would be released with a bribe or could obtain a passport
    or leave Sri  Lanka  without  difficulty  if  he  remained  of  adverse
    interest to the authorities.  I do not accept that argument.  All three
    parts of the appellant's account, are in my judgment,  consistent  with
    the background evidence concerning what can be done through bribery  in
    Sri Lanka.  Release from detention in Sri Lanka  by  bribery  is  well-
    documented (see GJ and others at [424]).  Likewise,  the  obtaining  of
    "genuine" passports in Sri Lanka through bribery is documented at  para
    27.02 of the COI Report.  Finally, at [394] of GJ and Others, the Upper
    Tribunal said this:

         "The principal challenge remaining is to the appellant's ability to
         travel through Colombo airport unhindered, if he were  of  interest
         to the Sri Lankan authorities as claimed.   Given  the  substantial
         sum paid to the agent and the evidence before us on  the  pervasive
         bribery and corruption in Sri Lanka, applying the  lower  standard,
         we accept this element of the appellant's account."

34. I accept, therefore, that the appellant  was  released  from  detention
    through the payment of a bribe and that his obtaining of a passport and
    leaving Sri Lanka unhindered is not inconsistent with  the  authorities
    having any adverse interest in him.

35. It remains, however, to determine what, if any, that  adverse  interest
    would be on return.

36. The appellant's claim is that he is subject to an arrest warrant and he
    relies upon the evidence of his mother in  a  letter  dated  7  January
    2015.  In that letter she explains that she  attended  a  demonstration
    when the British Prime Minister was at the Commonwealth  Conference  in
    Sri Lanka on 15 November 2013.   She  attended  because  her  son  (the
    appellant's brother) was missing.  She says that after  this  the  army
    and police came to their house and threatened her and her husband.  She
    said:

         "They also threatened my younger son, they said LTTE  are  starting
         again and asked if he was involved in LTTE.  They then asked  about
         [the appellant's] details and they wanted to know what he is  doing
         now.

         The army and police showed us a document  and  I  think  it  is  an
         arrest warrant.  They did not give me the document.  We got  scared
         and worried for our safety.  I said [the appellant] is gone  abroad
         and we have no contact with him.  We will inform them and will hand
         him over once he returned.  They said if he come back  he  will  be
         arrested as they have arrest warrant."

37. Mr Richards submitted that I should not accept this evidence as it  was
    wholly lacking in credibility.  Mr Paramjorthy submitted that I  should
    consider the reliability  of  this  evidence  in  the  context  of  the
    evidence in the round.

38. That latter approach is the correct approach following Tanveer Ahmed  v
    SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318.  I note that there  is  nothing  surprising  in
    there being an arrest warrant issued  in  relation  to  the  appellant.
    When he was released,  albeit  through  a  bribe,  he  was  subject  to
    reporting requirements which he was, as a result of going  into  hiding
    and leaving Sri Lanka, in  breach  of.   It  is  not  suggested  by  Mr
    Richards that the appellant (or his family) could in the  circumstances
    of this case have obtained a copy of the arrest warrant.  Although  the
    appellant's  mother  was  not  sure  whether  the  document  which  the
    authorities brought to her house was an  arrest  warrant,  she  clearly
    states that she was told that the appellant was subject  to  an  arrest
    warrant.  There is nothing obviously unreliable about the  letter  from
    the appellant's mother.  As I have already  said,  that  the  appellant
    remains of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities is  not  inconsistent
    with the means by which he left Sri  Lanka.   The  judge  accepted  the
    general credibility of the appellant and the truth of  his  account  of
    involvement with the LTTE and subsequent detention  and  ill-treatment.
    I see nothing in the  evidence  sufficient  to  lead  me  to  conclude,
    looking at it all in the round including  evidence  to  which  I  shall
    shortly refer, that the evidence of  the  appellant's  mother  in  this
    letter is unreliable.

39. On that basis, I accept that the appellant  is  subject  to  an  arrest
    warrant.

40. On that basis alone, the appellant falls within the risk  category  set
    out in the head note at para 7(d) of GJ and  Others  as  a  person  who
    would be on a "stop" list and would, as a result,  be  stopped  at  the
    airport on return  and  handed  over  to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan
    authorities where, as is accepted in GJ and Others, in detention  there
    is  a  real  risk  of  serious  ill-treatment  or  harm  amounting   to
    persecution or contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

41. I turn now to consider the risks to the appellant, if any,  based  upon
    principally his sur place activities.

42. I accept that the appellant is a member of the TGTE in the  UK.   There
    is supporting documentary evidence at pages 26 - 27  of  Bundle  A  and
    supporting photographic evidence of A's attendance  at  demonstrations.
    The TGTE is a proscribed organisation in Sri Lanka  and  would,  in  my
    view, create a real risk of the appellant being  perceived  as  someone
    who is involved in diaspora activities which threaten the unitary state
    of Sri Lanka.

43. Further, at page 7 of  Bundle  B  is  a  photograph  of  the  appellant
    standing on a street corner which, he told me, he was doing in order to
    collect signatures for a petition to indict the President of Sri  Lanka
    before the ICC.  He told me in his evidence that the result of  whether
    this was going to happen would be published in the middle of  September
    2015.  He told me that, as a result,  at  the  moment  the  Sri  Lankan
    government was under pressure because of these activities and that  was
    why he had been threatened.

44. The appellant relies upon a further letter from  his  mother  dated  25
    August 2015 at page 4 of Bundle B.  There she states:

         "I precisely have to inform  to  your  honour  about  the  incident
         happening 26.06.2015 Jaffna, Sri Lanka.  Sri Lankan CID people came
         to our house and threatened us  to  death  asking  the  information
         about my son [the appellant].  They were very angry on  me  and  my
         family as they believe that we are withholding all the  information
         about my son.

         They further shouted that my son  is  active  TGTE  member  in  the
         United Kingdom and do everything that criticises Sri  Lanka.   They
         shouted on us they almost  killed  everybody  who  criticising  the
         government and soon will be killing my son as well.

         They said my son's pictures were published on Tamil  news  websites
         revealing his activities in the United Kingdom.  I  could  see  how
         they were angry on the way of their talking, how hey treat even  me
         was like punishing me like an animal and I could realise  how  they
         will torture my son if they caught my son."

45. Mr Richards submitted that this evidence was  not  credible.   Further,
    given that the appellant was photographed with only  the  side  of  his
    face showing, he would not be identified by the Sri Lankan  authorities
    from the photograph that appeared on the website.

46. I  accept  the  appellant's  membership  of  the  TGTE.   Further,  the
    photographs show the appellant involved in demonstrations  against  the
    Sri Lankan government in the UK.  I further accept that the  photograph
    at page 7 of the bundle shows  the  appellant  involved  in  collecting
    signatures for a petition to indict the President of Sri  Lanka  before
    the ICC.  I also accept that the photograph appeared on a Tamil website
    as part of an article describing the campaign of the TGTE  against  the
    President of Sri Lanka.  Whilst  the  article  does  not  identify  the
    appellant by name, there is a photograph of  him  which,  at  least  in
    part, showed his  face.   It  is  a  very  real  possibility  that  the
    appellant could be identified from this photograph.  It is part of  the
    background evidence, which was not doubted before me  by  Mr  Richards,
    that the Sri Lankan authorities engage in sophisticated surveillance of
    the Tamil diaspora particularly in the UK (see, e.g. GJ and  others  at
    [430]).  Applying the lower standard, in my judgment, there is  a  real
    risk that the appellant was recognised in this photograph  (and  indeed
    at other demonstrations within the UK) through the surveillance of  the
    Sri Lankan authorities.  The evidence of the appellant's mother is,  of
    course, consistent with that.  Again, applying Tanveer  Ahmed,  I  must
    consider the reliability of that evidence in the round.  There is again
    nothing  in  that  evidence  which,  it  was  suggested,  was  patently
    inconsistent with its reliability.  As a result, I accept that evidence
    concerning the appellant's involvement with the TGTE in the UK which  I
    have no reason to consider, given his history, is  other  than  genuine
    and I also accept that he has come to the attention of the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities as a result.

47. As regards the issue to the appellant of a passport by the  Sri  Lankan
    High Commission in the UK, it is clear from the  e-mail  evidence  that
    the appellant applied for this in  order  to  obtain  a  new  Biometric
    Residence Permit.  Mr Richards submitted that the authorities would not
    have issued this passport if he were  of  any  interest  to  them.   Mr
    Richards did not draw my attention to any evidence that suggested  that
    the High Commission would be aware of the appellant's past  history  or
    would not, even on the face of that, issue him with a passport  in  the
    UK.  I accept Mr Paramjorthy's submission that it is  not  inconsistent
    with the appellant's account to  be  of  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities that he was issued with a passport in the UK.

48. Mr Richards also placed reliance upon s.8  of  the  2004  Act.   It  is
    undoubtedly the case that the appellant delayed claiming asylum, having
    entered the UK in January 2011, until June 2014 when  his  leave  as  a
    student was curtailed.  The appellant explained in  his  evidence  that
    the agent who had sent him to the UK had advised him not to seek asylum
    when he arrived.  He was told that he could continue to study in the UK
    anyway.  That was why he had not asked for asylum on arrival.  He  told
    me that when he received the Home Office letter saying  that  he  could
    not study, he realised he could  not  continue  to  study  and  he  was
    advised to approach a solicitor to seek asylum.  He  told  me  that  he
    feared going back to Sri Lanka and that was why he claimed asylum.

49. I accept that the appellant's delay in claiming asylum is, as a  result
    of s.8 of the 2004 Act, "damaging" of his credibility.  It is  relevant
    in assessing whether his claim  is  a  genuine  one.   However,  in  JT
    (Cameroon) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 878, the Court  of  Appeal  concluded
    that the behaviour was only "potentially" damaging of  an  individual's
    credibility and was a factor to be taken  into  account  in  making  an
    overall or global assessment of an individual's credibility.  Whilst I,
    therefore, take the appellant's delay into account, I bear in mind  his
    explanation and, in the light of all the evidence  and  the  reasons  I
    have given, I reject the submission that the appellant is not a genuine
    asylum seeker and someone whose evidence is not entitled to credit.

50. The relevant risk category in GJ and Others is set out at para 7(a)  of
    the head note as follows:

         "Individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and/or   a   renewal   of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka."

51. In applying that risk category,  I  bear  in  mind  what  was  said  by
    Underhill LJ in MP and Others at [50] that  the  category  is  properly
    understood as whether an individual would be perceived  as  a  "current
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state" which could  be
    established even in the absence of diaspora activism.

52. In this case, however, the  appellant  has  established  both  diaspora
    activity and also a past history of involvement with the LTTE.

53. His activities in the UK alone would, in my judgment, lead  him  to  be
    perceived as someone falling within the risk category in 7(a) of GJ and
    Others.  He is involved with a proscribed organisation, taking part  in
    demonstrations in favour  of  Tamil  separatism  and  is  assisting  in
    compiling a petition seeking to indict the President before the ICC.

54. I accept Mr Paramjorthy's submission that the appellant is at  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka at  the  airport  about  being  questioned  of  his
    political activities (see the evidence of Malcolm Lewis at  para  4  of
    Appendix C of GJ and Others).  The  appellant  cannot  be  expected  to
    dissemble as to his political views or activities  (see  RT  (Zimbabwe)
    and Others v SSHD [2012] UKSC 38.

55. In my judgment, on return  to  Sri  Lanka  the  appellant  will  be  of
    interest to the Sri Lankan authorities because of his activities in the
    UK which I accept they are aware of and which, in any event, he  cannot
    be expected to not disclose in answer to questions at the airport.   He
    will, as a result, be perceived as  an  individual  who  threatens  the
    unitary state falling within para 7(a) of GJ and  Others  and  will  be
    subject to detention and the real risk of persecution or  serious  ill-
    treatment contrary to Article 3 as a result.

56. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the  appellant  has  established
    that his return to Sri Lanka will breach  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

Decision

57. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.  That decision  was  set
    aside for the reasons set out in my decision of 15 June 2015.

58. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds
    and under Article 3 of the ECHR.

59. No reliance was placed on Article 8 before me.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
