
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07251/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st December 2016                          |On 9th December 2016          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR OMOY ETANDA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Not Represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with  permission,  by  the
         Secretary of State in relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lloyd-Smith) promulgated on 8th February
         2016. In her Decision and Reasons Judge Lloyd Smith  dismissed  the
         Appellant's appeal on asylum and  humanitarian  protection  grounds
         but allowed it on Article 8 grounds on the basis of the Appellant's
         relationship with his son.
      2. For the purposes of continuity and clarity I will continue to refer
         to Mr Etanda as the Appellant and to the Secretary of State as  the
         Respondent in this judgment. The Secretary of State's grounds, upon
         which which permission to appeal was granted, assert that the child
         in question is not a qualifying child and thus the Appellant  could
         not meet the requirements of section 117B(6) of the Immigration and
         Asylum Act 2002. The Secretary of State also asserts that the Judge
         failed to provide adequate reasons for finding that  the  Appellant
         and his son enjoy a parental relationship that  went  beyond  being
         biologically related


      3. The Secretary of State asserts that the direct contact between  the
         Appellant and his son is heavily supervised and limited  to  a  few
         days a month and the  predominant  method  of  contact  is  through
         modern methods  of  communication.  The  Secretary  of  State  also
         asserts that the Judge has not given consideration as  to  how  the
         Appellant acts as a person with parental responsibility as there is
         no evidence to suggest that he disciplines the child, has a role in
         choosing his education or agreeing to medical treatment.


      4. The Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  August  2003  and
         claimed asylum. His claim was refused and his appeal dismissed.  He
         became appeal  rights  exhausted  on  9th  August  2004.  Following
         further representations made to  the  Secretary  of  State  on  6th
         January 2009 he was granted discretionary  leave  from  April  2010
         until April 2013. During the currency of  that  leave  he  made  an
         application on  9th  April  2013.   It  was  the  refusal  of  that
         application which led to the appeal before Judge Lloyd-Smith.


      5. The Judge's findings commence at paragraph 12 of the  Decision  and
         Reasons and conclude at paragraph 23.


      6. The Judge found the Appellant's claims in relation to  his  partner
         lacked credibility and she did not allow the appeal  the  basis  of
         that relationship.


      7. At paragraph 14 the Judge noted that there  had  been  inconsistent
         evidence in relation to the frequency of  the  Appellant's  contact
         with his son, born  on  2nd  March  2007.  The  judge  recited  his
         explanation for this  being  due  to  the  difficulties  after  his
         relationship with the child's mother broke down and the  fact  that
         they do not live in the same town.


      8. The Judge then went on to consider the parent route under  Appendix
         FM of the Immigration Rules but dismissed the appeal on that  basis
         because at the relevant time the child was not a qualifying child.


      9. At  paragraph  17  the  Judge  reminded  herself  of  the  guidance
         contained in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 that she must consider the
         best interests of the child as a primary consideration. She  stated
         that in assessing the best interests of the child she could not  go
         behind the order of the Family Court that  had  formalised  contact
         between the Appellant and his son. The Supreme Court  has  endorsed
         this view in the case of Makhlouf [2016] UKSC  59  indicating  that
         the Tribunal can rely on a Family Court order to indicate where the
         best interests of the child lie. The Family Court has of course far
         more resources to obtain independent  evidence  before  determining
         where the best interests of a child lie. If that court has made  an
         order for direct contact then it can be taken that  it  is  in  the
         best interests of the child to have that direct  contact  with  the
         parent concerned.


     10. In this case it is true that direct contact is  limited  under  the
         terms of the order to 2 days per  month  with  additional  indirect
         contact. However, the Judge also referred  herself  to  the  social
         worker's notes describing the nature of  the  contact  between  the
         Appellant and his son which indicated  that  the  relationship  and
         contact was all positive and the child  clearly  enjoyed  his  time
         with his father indicating that he  would  like  to  see  him  more
         often.


     11. On the basis of that evidence the Judge found  that  the  Appellant
         had  a  genuine  interest  in  his  son  and  was  forming  a  good
         relationship with him.


     12. She then went on to consider section 117B of  the  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 and referred herself to the case  of  Treebhawon  &
         Ors (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674  (IAC)  which  makes  clear
         that where section 117B (6) applies that is a complete  answer  and
         there is no public interest in removing the Appellant. If there  is
         no public interest in  removing  the  Appellant  the  Secretary  of
         State's case fails.


     13. Of note is that at paragraph 21 the Judge finds the Appellant is  a
         qualifying child. He is over the age of seven and at  paragraph  22
         notes that the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  conceded  that  it
         would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK.  That
         is was clearly an appropriate concession given that the child lives
         with his mother, separately from the Appellant.


     14. It cannot be said that the requirements of section 117 B(6) are not
         met. The Secretary of State is wrong to suggest the child is not  a
         qualifying child. The Judge was entitled to rely on  the  order  of
         the Family Court and the assessment by the social worker as to  the
         progress of contact and its likely increase in future, to establish
         there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  between  the
         Appellant and his son. The Secretary of  State  is  also  wrong  to
         suggest that in order to have a genuine and subsisting relationship
         the Appellant  must  show  he  is  exercising  various  matters  in
         relation to parental responsibility such as discipline and choosing
         schools. This is clearly not going to be the  case  where  a  child
         lives with the other parent who makes those  day-to-day  decisions.
         Additionally, having found there to be  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship, the Secretary of State before the First-tier Tribunal
         conceded it would not be reasonable for the child to leave the UK.


     15. The Judge having found that's.117B(6) applied, was correct to allow
         the appeal. It is clear that she was troubled  by  the  Appellant's
         past behaviour and the lack of credibility to much of his  evidence
         and did take that into account. However, her reasons  for  allowing
         the appeal are sound, reasoned and in accordance with case law.


     16. Mr Harrison did not seek to argue otherwise.


    Decision


    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


    There having been no application for an anonymity order I do  not  make
    one.


Signed                              Date 9th December 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
