

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA /07425 /2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th October 2016                 |On 31st October 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                 MISS P [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     MR P NATHAN (Counsel instructed by FADIGA & Co
solicitors)
For the Respondent:    MR S STAUNTON (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This  is  an  error  of  law  hearing.   It   comes  before   me   for
    consideration as to whether or not there is a material error of law  in
    the decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge     LK  Gibbs)  ("FtT")
    promulgated on 9th November 2015 in which the appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds Article 8 ECHR was dismissed.


Background

2.  The appellant is a citizen of Russia.  She has  two  children  who  were
    born in 2010 and 2014 the UK and who are dependent on  her  claim,  and
    who are citizens of Russia.  Their father is a citizen of  Ukraine  and
    he  is  married  to  (and  a  family  member  under  Regulation  7  EEA
    Regulations) an EEA citizen from Latvia; both are living in the  UK  in
    accordance with Treaty Rights.  The appellant initially  made  a  claim
    for asylum but this was withdrawn at the hearing before the  FtT.   The
    respondent accepted that she was a victim of trafficking but it was not
    shown that she faced any risk on return to Russia.

FtT decision

3.  The appeal before the FtT was pursued on the basis of Article  8  family
    and private life outside of the Rules, and under  the  EEA  Regulations
    2006.  The FtT  dismissed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  and
    concluded that it had no jurisdiction to  consider  an  EEA  appeal  as
    there was no application nor decision made under those provisions  [10-
    11]. (The appellant now accepts that there was no appeal under the  EEA
    Regulations.) The FtT found that the  children  were  living  with  the
    appellant and were financially dependent on their father with whom they
    had regular contact. It found that there was shared responsibility  for
    the children. It accepted that the father of the children was himself a
    family member under Regulation 7 EEA Regs. dependent on  his  EEA  wife
    who was exercising Treaty rights, and that as  a  matter  of  fact  the
    children were financially dependent on him [9-10], but that he was  not
    their primary carer. In dismissing Article 8 the FtT found  that  there
    was an interference with family life but that it was proportionate. The
    FtT took into account the appellant's  poor  immigration  history,  the
    background of trafficking, the impact of  separation  of  the  children
    from their father, the principle of no blame on the  children  for  the
    conduct of the appellant, and the delay on the part of  the  respondent
    [19-20].  The FtT further considered that their father had a successful
    business in Russia where he had family and that he  could  continue  to
    support the appellant and the children. He would be able to visit  them
    in Russia and maintain regular contact by  skype  and  telephone  [20].
    The FtT took into account the young  ages  of  the  children  who  were
    Russian nationals, their minimal educational involvement in the UK  and
    that they had never lived with their father  and  that  they  presently
    lived a considerable distance from him.  He had purchased a  house  for
    the family in Essex when he himself lived in Coventry  [21].   The  FtT
    concluded that the best interests of the children lay in remaining with
    their mother [13 - 16] and had regard to principles  in  ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] EWCA Civ 348.

Grounds for application for permission to appeal

4.   The appellant argued that the FtT  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    father's statement that he refused to allow the children to  leave  the
    UK and that he would seek an injunction to stop this.  The FtT  further
    failed to consider what would amount to  realistic  family  contact  as
    between the father and the children, by indicating that  telephone  and
    "skype" would be available.

5.  The appellant argued that the FtT failed to take into account the  delay
    of four and a half years by the  respondent  in  reaching  a  decision,
    notwithstanding that the appellant's own conduct had been adverse.  The
    delay was a factor to be considered under Article 8.

Permission to appeal

6.  Permission to appeal was refused by FtT M. Davies and on renewal to  the
    Upper Tribunal (UTJ McGeachy)  ("UT").   An  application  for  Judicial
    review was granted and on 5th April 2016 the decision of the UT was set
    aside.  Permission to appeal was then granted by the Vice President  of
    the UT on 12th September 2106.


Submisssions

7.  At the hearing before me  Mr  Nathan  relied  on  and  expanded  on  the
    grounds for permission for judicial review.  He  argued  that  the  FtT
    failed to take into account the potential chaos that would occur in the
    event that the father refused to allow the children to  leave  the  UK.
    The father had parental rights and was named on the birth  certificate.
    Any removal by the respondent would be unlawful as they were  dependent
    on an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the UK. The  father  and
    his wife would be  entitled to apply for permanent  residence,  and  it
    was not a question of choice of residence.  There was an absence of any
    clear findings as to the nature and extent  of  family  life  with  the
    father.  He also relied on the delay issue.

8.   Mr Staunton relied on the Rule  24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    father had issued no court proceedings in the family courts and it  was
    speculative at this stage.   The reasoning given by the FtT at  [19-20]
    was sufficient and the appellant simply  disagreed  with  the  decision
    made.  The father had made no attempt to commence  proceedings  in  the
    family court and the FtT had considered delay.


Discussion and conclusion

9.   I heard the submissions made by both representatives.  I also  rose  in
    order to consider further the evidence that was before the  FtT  as  to
    the nature and extent of family life as between the children and  their
    father.  I was fully satisfied that the FtT had considered all  of  the
    evidence in this regard and made findings that were open to it  on  the
    evidence.

10.  I failed to agree with the submissions made by Mr Nathan in respect  of
    both grounds of appeal.  The FtT clearly considered the  delay  on  the
    part of the Respondent  and  properly  found  that  the  appellant  was
    equally responsible in that regard [19].

11.  In considering the submission  as  to  the  father's  refusal  to  give
    permission for the children to leave the UK, whilst I accept that  this
    evidence was not recorded in the decision and there is no dispute  that
    this was indeed his evidence, I am not satisfied that this  is  capable
    of amounting to a material error of law by the FtT.   The  position  of
    the father was fully considered by  the  FtT.   There  were  no  family
    proceedings  in  existence  and  no  application  made  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.  The statement by the father was just that,  an  assertion
    of an intention, which of course he is entitled to make, but as such it
    has no bearing on the issues considered  under  the  appeal.   The  FtT
    considered the alternative position that the father, who himself had  a
    business and family in Russia, could continue to visit and support  the
    children.  The FtT concluded that the best interests  of  the  children
    lay in remaining with their mother and they would return to Russia as a
    family unit.  Furthermore, the FtT found that the  public  interest  in
    immigration  control  outweighed  other  considerations  and   properly
    applied factors under section 117 of the 2002 Act.


Decision

12.  There is no material error of  law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand.


                               Signed                 Date 28.10.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






                               NO ANONYMITY ORDER
                               NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                 Date 28.10.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


