
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/07784/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On February 19, 2016                 |On February 26, 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   MR E D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Hodson (in-house advocate instructed by Elder Rahimi
                    Solicitors)
Respondent  Mr Staunton (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of  Albania  and  he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as an unaccompanied minor in November 2013 when he was  sixteen
    years of age He applied  for  asylum  on  the  basis  he  had  suffered
    domestic violence at the hands of his parents. The  respondent  refused
    his application on September 26, 2014  but  granted  him  discretionary
    leave to remain on the basis he satisfied the requirements of Paragraph
    252ZC of the Immigration Rules in accordance with the published  asylum
    instruction  on  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  children  because  the
    respondent was not satisfied that adequate reception arrangements  were
    available for him in his own country.

 2. The appellant appealed against that decision under section 82(1) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on October 6, 2014.

 3. The matter was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dean  on  July
    14, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on August 3, 2015  the  Tribunal
    refused his application for asylum and ancillary applications.

 4. The appellant applied for permission  to  appeal  on  August  17,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred in its approach to the evidence.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Reid on September 22, 2015 on the basis the grounds were  arguable  the
    Tribunal had erred in its approach to the assessment of  the  level  of
    domestic violence and thereafter did not adequately analyse sufficiency
    of protection or internal relocation.  The matter  came  before  me  on
    October 27, 2015 and on that date I concluded there was no error in law
    in relation to either the appellant's asylum or humanitarian protection
    claim but there was an error in the way the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Reid had dealt with the human rights claim.

 6. I adjourned the case to today's date giving directions on the format of
    the resumed hearing. I gave both parties permission to file  additional
    evidence in relation to:

      a. Sufficiency of protection.

      b. Internal relocation.

      c. Medical evidence.

 7. Taking into account  his  age  and  his  ongoing  medical  condition  I
    indicated the  Tribunal  would  have  to  consider  whether  there  was
    sufficiency of protection for him in his home area or  whether  it  was
    reasonable for him to relocate.

 8. I made it clear that submissions only would be required.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  direction  and  pursuant  to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I  extend
    that order.

    SUBMISSIONS

10. Mr Staunton relied on the refusal letter and in submissions referred me
    to the appellant's hospital discharge form, a report on Albanian health
    care and the  country  information  for  Albania.  In  so  far  as  the
    appellant's own mental health was concerned  he  submitted  the  latest
    report painted an optimistic picture for the  appellant.  If  he  still
    required assistance, he submitted that page 119 and 121 of the National
    Heath Report confirmed there were facilities in  Albania  to  which  he
    could turn to. As to whether there was  sufficiency  of  protection  he
    submitted  the  appellant  did  not  seek  any  protection   from   the
    authorities whilst he was in Albania but in any event  he  was  now  an
    adult and could seek protection from them in his own area. The  country
    information report provided positive information about the state of the
    country and even if he was unable to return to his village it would not
    be unreasonable or unduly harsh for him to  return  to  relocate  to  a
    capital city where he could utilise the education he has received here.
    There was no evidence his father would be  able  to  find  him  and  he
    submitted returning him would not breach his human rights.

11. Mr Hodson adopted the skeleton  argument  in  so  far  as  it  remained
    relevant. The respondent  conceded  that  the  appellant  had  suffered
    physical abuse and the remaining issues to be decided were  whether  if
    was safe for him to return to his home area (sufficiency of protection)
    or would it be unduly harsh for him to relocate  to  another  area.  He
    submitted the refusal letter accepted the history of abuse and it would
    not be feasible or safe for him to return to his own  village  to  live
    either on his own or with other family members. His aunt had  explained
    why she could not provide accommodation and the same applied  to  other
    family members. The expert evidence and reports made it clear that  the
    police were unable to provide the appellant with the protection  needed
    as children did not seek protection from the police. Although he was no
    longer a minor nevertheless he was a young adult. Here he was  assisted
    by social services and would continue to be so until he  was  21  years
    old. The expert report of Professor Haxhiymeri identified the risks  he
    would face as a young adult and the fact he would not  have  access  to
    the shelters or family accommodation referred to by the  respondent  in
    her refusal letter.

12. Mr Hodson further  submitted  that  the  appellant's  mental  condition
    placed him at further  risk  because  he  would  be  returned  as  a  n
    vulnerable young adult with no family to turn to.  The  medical  report
    and discharge form both confirm the precarious  nature  of  his  mental
    state and the fact he had a breakdown when he was refused by the First-
    tier Tribunal highlighted the difficulties he faced. Whilst there  were
    hospitals and doctors there was limited access.  The  respondent's  own
    report suggests there were 2 psychiatrists for 100,000 people. This did
    not inspire confidence in the system  and  the  same  report  confirmed
    there were limited funds available for healthcare. Internal  relocation
    was not an option in this case. He  referred  to  the  appellant's  own
    bundle and the respondent's own country  report.  The  appellant  would
    also face practical difficulties in returning and being returned  alone
    would place at him risk. Mr Hodson invited me to allow  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection and article 3 grounds. He  did  not  pursue  an
    article 8 appeal on the appellant's behalf.

13. I reserved my decision.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

14. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on November 25, 2013 as  an
    unaccompanied minor by clandestine means and made himself known to  the
    police on  arrival.  He  claimed  asylum  on  January  15,  2014.  That
    application was rejected but he was granted limited leave to remain  as
    an unaccompanied minor pursuant under paragraphs 352ZC to 352ZF  of  HC
    395. On October 27, 2015 I upheld the First-tier  decision  to  dismiss
    his appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds but I found an
    error in law in the approach to human rights.

15. I am concerned now with whether his removal would place him at risk  of
    serious harm thereby breaching his rights under article 3 ECHR. This is
    the only human rights argument I need to  consider  because  Mr  Hodson
    indicated that he did not pursue an appeal under either the Immigration
    Rules or article 8 ECHR.

16. In addition to the papers that had previously been served  I  have  now
    been provided with the Hospital discharge form dated October 29,  2015,
    a 2014 Albanian Health report from Institute of Public Health  and  the
    August 2015 Country, Information and Guidance.

17. I accept the appellant was physically abused by his father and  I  have
    concluded that such abuse amounted to domestic abuse in  light  of  the
    fact it occurred within a domestic environment.

18. Mr Hodson confirmed  that  no  additional  medical  evidence  would  be
    adduced and in the absence of any further witness  statement  from  the
    appellant himself the most current assessment of his medical  condition
    was the discharge form referred to above.

19. Having been assessed and medicated by the hospital for 35 days  he  was
    discharged. The discharge form recorded the following:

         "E's mood had been described as euthymic. His sleep,  appetite  and
         self-care continue to remain good.  He  was  not  suicidal  and  no
         threats to others reported. No  psychotic  symptoms  observed.  His
         motivation was good, he had been attending groups and he  continued
         to comply with medication with no side  effects  reported.  He  had
         good insight and no significant incidents since his last review....
         His speech was normal in all modalities. He described his  mood  as
         general good and objectively he appeared euthymic in  mood  with  a
         reactive affect. E described good sleep, appetite and self-care. He
         did not feel hopeless, helpless or worthless, no guilt feelings and
         did not express any suicidal thoughts or thoughts to self  harm  or
         cause harm to others.  No  evidence  of  any  active  psychotic  or
         affective symptoms, continued  to  comply  with  medication  though
         complained of eyes rolling up which is though to be  a  sign  extra
         pyramidal side effects. He had good insight as he was aware he  had
         been unwell and required treatment. E was able to revisit the issue
         that happened prior to his admission which he regretted and willing
         to apologise to the lady he harassed".

20. Mr Hodson referred me in closing  submissions  to  the  earlier  report
    provided by Dr Laura Salvo dated April 10,  2015  although  her  report
    must be considered against the October 29, 2015 assessment.

21. Dr Salvo's report was prepared when E was 17 � years  of  age  and  was
    supplemented by a short letter dated May  13,  2015.  E  complained  of
    weekly headaches which first began  after  he  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom, nightmares, difficulties with concentration  and  stress.  The
    headaches had reduced in frequency after he had been prescribed glasses
    in January 2015 and were now weekly as against  daily.  The  nightmares
    appeared linked to his pending  immigration  hearing  and  the  general
    conclusion was that his current difficulties may be symptoms of trauma.



22. Mr Hodson  also  referred  me  to  the  report  prepared  by  Professor
    Haxhiymeri dated June 25, 2015. This report has to  be  read  alongside
    the respondent's concession that the appellant had  suffered  abuse  at
    home. Mr Hodson invited me to find that he would face further abuse  if
    he were now returned.

23. Professor Haxhiymeri's report is a study of abuse faced by children but
    I am conscious of the fact the appellant is now an adult albeit a young
    adult. The report concentrates on the abuse that children under the age
    of fourteen suffer but  Mr  Hodson  referred  me  to  an  extract  that
    confirmed children over the age of fourteen continued to be  abused  by
    their fathers, sometimes with fatal results, especially  if  the  child
    lives in a rural area.  Professor  Haxhiymeri's  report  suggests  that
    children are reluctant to report matters to the police  and  those  who
    did seek  help  could  be  left  without  family  support.  The  report
    considers what facilities are available for accommodating  and  looking
    after children/young persons who have been victims of violence although
    the report bases its conclusions on data that is almost nine years old.
    Professor Haxhiymeri specifically considers  the  problems  facing  the
    appellant in his home area and concludes he would be tracked down quite
    easily in that area. At page 19  of  his  report  Professor  Haxhiymeri
    gives reasons as to  why  internal  relocation  would  not  be  in  his
    interests and lists these as:

      a. No housing program to support him.

      b. Rent is high.

      c. People have to work two jobs to cover their costs.

      d. Unemployment is high.

      e. No support system due to family problems.

      f. Risk of trafficking.

24. Mr Hodson's argument is that internal relocation would be unduly  harsh
    especially when regard is had for his general health.

25. I was referred to the 2015 Country report. Paragraph 5.1.2 referred  to
    the fact that economic growth slowed further and the  level  of  public
    debt continued to increase although arguably Albania was performing  no
    worse than many other European Countries. The World Bank stated-

         "Albania is a middle-income country that has made enormous  strides
         in  establishing  a  credible,  multi-party  democracy  and  market
         economy over the last two  decades...  Albania  has  been  able  to
         maintain positive growth rates and financial stability despite  the
         ongoing crisis".

26. At paragraph 8.2.2 of the same  report  it  was  reported  that  police
    corruption remained a problem albeit the ombudsmen processed complaints
    against the police  mainly  linked  to  arrest  and  detention  and  at
    paragraph 8.2.13 it was reported the police  often  did  not  have  the
    training or capacity to deal effectively with domestic violence  cases.
    The report also referred  to  corruption  generally  and  concluded  it
    remained a major obstacle to democratisation and EU integration.

27. The 2014 Health report was referred to by both representatives on basis
    the appellant was seeking medical treatment in the United Kingdom.  The
    latest report portrays a positive outlook for him and the  2014  Health
    report has to be considered  against  that  background  rather  than  a
    background of a person who is having  regular  medical  treatment.  The
    ratio  of  general  practitioners  and  psychiatrists  to  the  general
    population is low as  is  the  availability  of  primary  health  care.
    However, it is important to recognise that I am not comparing  what  is
    available in the United Kingdom with  what  is  available  in  Albania.
    Whilst Albania may lack the numbers and facilities seen in  the  United
    Kingdom it cannot be argued that  health  care,  albeit  underfinanced,
    does not exist in Albania.

28. The appellant did not attend and give oral evidence but I am  satisfied
    that does not hamper my assessment of his claim.

29. At the "error of law hearing" I found removing the appellant would  not
    lead to him having a humanitarian protection claim.

30. Paragraph 339C of the  Immigration  Rules  requires  the  appellant  to
    demonstrate that there are substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
    believing that the person concerned, if  returned  to  the  country  of
    return, would face a real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable,
    or, owing to such risk, unwilling to avail himself of the protection of
    that country. Serious harm consists of:

    (i)    The death penalty or execution;

    (ii)   Unlawful killing;

    (iii)  Torture or inhuman or degrading treatment  or  punishment  of  a
    person in the country of return; or

    (iv)   Serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person  by
    reason of indiscriminate violence in  situations  of  international  or
    internal armed conflict."

31. The factors advanced and the evidence relied on by  Mr  Hodson  do  not
    bring the appellant's claim within the "humanitarian protection" realm.
    There is nothing  in  either  Mr  Hodson's  skeleton  argument  or  his
    detailed submissions that persuades me to re-visit  this  issue  and  I
    affirm my earlier decision to find no error of law in  respect  of  the
    appellant's humanitarian protection claim.

32. The appellant's outstanding claim would therefore be  under  article  3
    ECHR. Mr Hodson has raised financial, medical and  other  circumstances
    as reasons for engaging article 3.

33. In Bosnja (2002) UKIAT 07605 the  Tribunal  said  that  the  conditions
    which an appellant faced on return to his home country, such as a  lack
    or inadequacy  of  medical  facilities,  could  constitute  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment. However, in practice, it will be very rare for  an
    appellant to be able to show that the conditions he  faces  on  arrival
    home will breach Article 3, at least so  far  as  they  relate  to  the
    general country conditions.

34. In MB, YT, GA and TK v SSHD [2013] EWHC 123 the Court  of  Appeal  held
    that case law establish that Article 3 imposes no general obligation on
    a contracting state to refrain from removing a person to another  state
    or territory in which he would be destitute. It was not the function of
    Article 3 to impose a minimum standard of social support for  those  in
    need. A breach of Article 3 only occurred when deliberate state  action
    was taken to prohibit a person from sustaining himself by work and when
    accommodation and the barest of necessities were removed.

35. The appellant fears a return to his home area and Mr Hodson argues that
    there would not be "sufficiency of protection". In light  of  the  fact
    the respondent accepted he suffered violence at his father's hands  and
    taking into account the findings in  Professor  Haxhiymeri's  report  I
    find it that if he were forced to return to to  Albania  he  would  not
    have sufficiency of protection in his home area.

36. Internal relocation for the purposes of article  3  was  raised  by  Mr
    Staunton and  argued  respectively  by  both  representatives.  I  have
    considered particularly the medical and expert evidence as well as  the
    two recent reports submitted by Mr Staunton.

37. The latest medical assessment painted  a  positive  picture  about  the
    appellant's mental health. Whilst medical facilities  in  Albania  were
    considerably more restrictive than in the United  Kingdom  nevertheless
    facilities existed.

38. The appellant had been educated and accommodated in the United  Kingdom
    and was fit and in reasonable health.  There  does  not  appear  to  be
    anything that would prevent him from returning to Albania  and  seeking
    work. The fact jobs and accommodation may not be as accessible does not
    automatically mean his return would breach article 3.

39. I accept life would not be easy for the appellant but I  remind  myself
    that I am dealing with his article 3 claim as distinct to his article 8
    claim. The requirements are different and whilst the  test  is  to  the
    lower standard of proof the appellant must still demonstrate  that  the
    conditions he will face are such that returning  him  would  amount  to
    inhuman or degrading treatment.

40. If the only option was to return the appellant to his own village  then
    in light of the problems he experienced and having regard  to  his  age
    and recent medical problems, it may be arguable that the threshold  had
    been  crossed.  However,   both   representatives   accepted   internal
    relocation was an arguable issue that I  had  be  consider  and  having
    considered all of the written evidence as well as the  representatives'
    submissions I find I am not satisfied  that  returning  this  appellant
    would breach his rights under article 3 ECHR.

41. Mr Hodson specifically did not seek to  raise  article  8  ECHR  and  I
    accordingly I make no finding on that article.

    DECISION

42. There was an error in law in respect of article 3 ECHR and I previously
    set aside the First-tier decision.

43. I have remade that decision and dismiss it.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

