
[pic]
IAC-UT

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07156/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 February 2016                   |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)


                                   Between

                                     VA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, instructed by Duncan Lewis & co,
solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Monson)  dismissing  her  appeal  against   the
    respondent's decision made on 3 March 2015 refusing to vary  her  leave
    to remain and to make removal directions following a finding  that  she
    was not entitled to asylum or relief on human right grounds.



Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 5  November  1979.  She
    arrived in the UK on 2 July 2011 to  join  her  husband  as  a  student
    dependant. Her leave was subsequently extended  and  her  husband's  in
    line with hers expiring on the 30 August 2014.  The  appellant  claimed
    asylum on 3 September 2014. Her application was refused for the reasons
    set out in the respondent's  decision  letter  annexed  to  the  asylum
    decision of 27 February 2015.

3.   Her reason for claiming asylum was that she could  not  now  return  to
    Sri Lanka because the authorities there were accusing her of  being  an
    LTTE intelligence worker and of promoting the LTTE  organisation.  This
    was a problem which had arisen after she had left Sri Lanka  [14].  The
    trigger for her asylum claim had been that when her husband went to Sri
    Lanka in June 2014 he had taken on her behalf money  for  a  friend  of
    hers in Vanni who wanted to start a small business. After he had  given
    her the money, unknown people had gone to the friend's house to  arrest
    her husband but by that time  he  had  already  left  the  country,  so
    instead on 14 July 2014 they arrested her brother. He was detained  for
    20 to  25  days  and  released  on  condition  that  he  should  report
    fortnightly. She could not now return to Sri  Lanka  as  she  would  be
    arrested by the Sri Lankan army. When her brother had been arrested  he
    had been asked about her whereabouts [16].

4.    The  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  had  a   minimal
    involvement with the LTTE. She had  completed  a  month's  training  in
    June/July 2004 and in  2011  had  helped  three  ex-LTTE  members  find
    accommodation in Colombo. However, the respondent did not  accept  that
    the account of events in June/July 2014 was credible and found that the
    appellant would be of no adverse interest to  the  authorities  in  Sri
    Lanka.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge

5.   At the hearing before the  immigration  judge  the  appellant  and  her
    husband gave oral evidence and evidence was  produced  to  confirm  the
    appellant's account. In [62] the judge identified this as falling  into
    three main categories: (a) medical evidence relating to the  appellant,
    her husband and her brother; (b) oral and documentary evidence from the
    appellant's close family members, namely her husband,  brother,  mother
    and uncle; and (c) what purported to be independent evidence  from  Sri
    Lanka, most notably the letter from Mr Punethnanayagam, an attorney  at
    law. The judge summarised the oral evidence at [40]-[58]. He set out at
    [61] a summary of the most recent country guidance  in  GJ  and  others
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319. His  analysis
    of the evidence is at [63]-[102] and his conclusions at [103]-[105]. In
    summary, the judge did not  find  that  the  core  of  the  appellant's
    account was true, commenting that there were no substantial grounds for
    believing that her husband had travelled to Vanni in order to hand over
    a small sum of money to a friend of the appellants at the same time  as
    visiting his mother-in-law in July 2014. Alternatively, if  he  did  so
    there were no substantial grounds for believing that his visit  aroused
    suspicion in the local militia, that the appellant  became  of  adverse
    interest to the authorities at that stage or later, or that her brother
    had been arrested and detained in July 2014.  Accordingly,  the  appeal
    was dismissed.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

6.   The grounds of appeal raise four issues. Firstly,  it  is  argued  that
    the judge was wrong to attach little  weight  to  statements  from  the
    appellant's family members "solely" because  "they  have  a  motive  to
    misrepresent the truth" [77]. It is argued that such  a  conclusion  is
    patently unsustainable  because  it  operates  on  a  false  or  unfair
    assumption, that there is a need to misrepresent the  truth.  Secondly,
    the basis of the judge's rejection of the evidence from the Sri  Lankan
    attorney is criticised  as  being  a  finding  based  on  no  evidence.
    Thirdly, the judge was irrational to find  that  the  decision  by  the
    appellant's husband to secure protection as  a  dependant  rather  than
    claiming asylum in his own right was consistent with  him  being  aware
    that the letter from  the  lawyer  was  false.  Fourthly,  the  judge's
    comment at [96] that the Sri Lankan authorities  would  not  act  in  a
    "preposterous" manner or "on a  flight  of  fancy"  was  based  on  the
    misconception that torturers  acted  and  thought  rationally  and  was
    neither a reasonable nor a rational finding.

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on  grounds
    1, 3 and 4 but not on ground 2 as that was a challenge  to  the  weight
    the judge attached to the evidence.

8.   Mr Bandegani adopted these grounds in  his  submissions,  arguing  that
    the judge's approach to the evidence of the witnesses was flawed by his
    comment that they had a motive to misrepresent the truth.  He  accepted
    that the judge had provided some further reasons at  [78]-[80]  why  he
    did not accept their evidence but this was not sufficient to compensate
    for the fact that he had approached the evidence  on  an  impermissible
    basis. He had failed to confront directly the evidence that  government
    officials had come to  the  family  home  in  Sri  Lanka.  The  judge's
    approach, so he submitted, about why the appellant's  husband  had  not
    claimed asylum and about how the authorities were likely to behave  was
    irrational. The background evidence showed that torture  was  routinely
    practised to extract  information  and  the  behaviour  of  Sri  Lankan
    officials could not be described  as  sophisticated.   It  showed  that
    there was an extensive use of informers and an interest  in  those  who
    had attended heroes day ceremonies as had the appellant [37].

9.   Ms Isherwood pointed out that attendance at heroes day  ceremonies  had
    never been part of the appellant's claim.  The  core  of  a  claim  had
    always been in relation to events in Sri Lanka in June/July  2014.  The
    judge's comment at [77] had to  be  read  in  context.  The  judge  had
    discussed the evidence at length and so far as the statements from  the
    family members were concerned, the judge had  found  that  the  medical
    report relating to the appellant's brother was wholly inconsistent with
    the claim that he had been released from detention having been brutally
    tortured [65]. Further, the judge's comment at [77]  was  supported  by
    his previous findings. She submitted that the judge had given clear and
    sufficient reasons for his credibility  findings.  He  had  taken  into
    account the country guidance in GJ and had reached conclusions properly
    open to him.

Assessment of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

10.  The first ground argues that the judge took the wrong approach  to  the
    evidence in the written statements from the  appellant's  relatives  in
    Sri Lanka. This was the second category of evidence he  had  identified
    at [62] as corroborative evidence. At [77] the judge said:

         "As they are all close  family  members,  they  have  a  motive  to
         misrepresent the truth in order to assist  the  appellant.  So  for
         that reason alone I attach little weight to the evidence."

    In the grounds reliance is placed on R (SA Iran) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Department [2012] EWHC 2575 (Admin) where it hads  been  argued
    that because the  claimant  had  given  evidence  about  her  husband's
    conduct, the evidence of her son added nothing and  could  not  make  a
    difference. That approach was rejected as unarguable if advanced  as  a
    rule of general application. In cases where credibility was  in  issue,
    the fact that the witness' account was corroborated by another  witness
    could add to its credibility.  The  judge  expressed  concern  that  so
    straightforward and long-standing  a  concept  as  one  witness  giving
    support to another's credibility should have  been  overlooked  by  the
    Home Secretary.

11.  However, this is not the approach the judge was taking in this  appeal.
    He was not discounting the evidence simply because it was evidence  put
    forward to confirm the appellant's own evidence. The judge was entitled
    to approach the evidence with caution and to consider the extent of the
    witnesses' personal interest in the outcome of the appeal. In HJ (Iran)
    [2010] UKSC 31, Lord Walker at  [88]  commented  that  the  appellant's
    evidence "may have to be treated with caution  because  of  his  strong
    personal interest in the outcome". It may be that the  judge  expressed
    himself strongly on this issue commenting that for this reason alone he
    attached little weight to their evidence but the comment must  be  read
    in the context of the whole determination. The judge had considered the
    medical evidence in respect of both the appellant and her  brother  and
    for clear and compelling reasons (see in particular [65] and [70]-[71])
    explained why he considered that it  did  not  materially  support  the
    appellant's case and in some respects undermined the core claim [63].

12.  The judge went on to consider the evidence from the relatives.  He  set
    out  in  [78]-[80]  three  specific  reasons  which  he   regarded   as
    undermining that evidence, the first that the brother's medical  report
    referred to injuries from an accidental fall rather  than  torture  and
    the second and third to implausibilities in the account.  He went on to
    explain why he found the evidence from the Sri Lankan  attorney  to  be
    unsatisfactory and  permission  to  appeal  against  that  finding  was
    refused. When considering the oral evidence of the  appellant  and  her
    husband about the hand-over of money the judge was entitled to  comment
    that this account had become progressively more detailed and  elaborate
    over time [99]. The judge's comments  at  [100]-[101]  are  compelling.
    This was not a case of the judge simply rejecting the evidence  in  the
    statements without considering it in the context of the evidence  as  a
    whole. If the judge's comment in [77] stood alone, it might  well  give
    concern as to whether he had approached the  evidence  in  the  written
    statements correctly. But when the decision is read as a  whole,  there
    is no basis for an argument that  his  comment  indicated  an  unlawful
    approach to the evidence.  The witnesses' interest in  the  outcome  of
    the appeal was one of a number of factors properly taken into account.

13.  It is argued that the judge was  irrational  when  commenting  at  [95]
    that the fact that the appellant's husband was content simply to  be  a
    dependant on her claim was not consistent with him  having  a  genuine,
    still less a well-founded, fear  of  persecution  on  return  but  more
    consistent with him being aware that the letter  from  the  lawyer  was
    false. Again, read by itself, this  comment  might  be  susceptible  to
    criticism but it was one of five reasons (at [90]-[98])  given  by  the
    judge which led him to give little weight to the letter from the lawyer
    and the fact that the appellant's husband had not himself made a  claim
    was a matter the judge was entitled to take into account.

14.  The comments in [96] that the claims attributed to the officer  at  the
    police station were "preposterous" have regard to the country  guidance
    of GJ and that the approach of the Sri Lankan authorities was based "on
    sophisticated intelligence, not complete flights of fancy" must also be
    read in the light of the findings as a whole (and in  particular  [98])
    and  also  the  context  of  the  use  of  the  phrase   "sophisticated
    intelligence" in paragraph 8 of the head-note in GJ. The fact that  the
    Sri Lankan authorities regularly resort to torture does  not  have  any
    bearing on the point the judge was making in the light of  the  country
    guidance. He was seeking to assess whether the appellant could, on  the
    basis the evidence he  had  heard,  fall  within  the  risk  categories
    identified in GJ. He found that she could not for the reasons he  gave.
    The  issue  of  attendance  at  heroes  day  celebrations   raised   in
    submissions was not raised in the grounds and in any event in the light
    of the judge's findings of fact has no material bearing on the  outcome
    of the appeal.

15.  In summary, the grounds do not satisfy me that the judge erred  in  law
    in his approach to the evidence or in his  assessment  of  whether  the
    appellant would be at real risk on return to Sri  Lanka.  The  decision
    sets out a careful analysis of the evidence and I am satisfied that the
    judge reached findings and conclusions properly open  to  him  for  the
    reasons he gave.

Decision

16.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law. It follows that the  appeal
    is dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands
    including the anonymity order, no application having been made to  this
    tribunal to vary or discharge it.


Signed   H J E Latter

H J E Latter  Date: 15 February 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
