
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07569/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 3 September 2015             |On 22 September 2015            |
|Prepared on 4 September 2015    |................................|
|                                |.......                         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. P.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Selway, Brar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom by air on 11 January  2014
         but did not deliver  up  the  passport  used  to  do  so.  She  had
         travelled in the company of a man, T, and her son, A. She  and  her
         son claimed asylum as  T's  dependents.  On  1  February  2014  she
         withdrew the claims made by herself and her son as T's  dependents,
         and instead claimed asylum in her own right, with her  son  as  her
         own dependent.
      2.  That  application  was  refused  on  15  September  2014,  and  in
         consequence a removal decision was made in relation to her and  her
         son as individuals who had entered the UK illegally.
      3. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal against the removal decision
         and her appeal was heard on 17  December  2014,  and  dismissed  by
         decision of Judge Scobbie, promulgated on 30 December 2014.  Whilst
         the Respondent had accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  an  Iranian
         citizen, he was not satisfied the  Appellant  had  told  the  truth
         about how she had left Iran and travelled to the UK, or,  what  had
         occurred prior to her departure from Iran, or, that she would  come
         to the adverse attention of the Iranian authorities.
      4.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal, was refused by Judge  Andrew  on  29  January
         2015 on the basis it was no more than  a  disagreement  with  Judge
         Scobbie's decision, because he had contrary to the complaint raised
         in the grounds taken full  account  of  the  expert  report  of  Ms
         Kashefi that had been relied upon. Undaunted  the  application  was
         renewed to the  Upper  Tribunal,  when  it  was  granted  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Lindlsey on 20 April 2015.
      5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice of 13 May 2015 in  which  she
         reminded the Upper Tribunal that the Judge had taken  into  account
         the evidence of Ms  Kashefi,  had  rejected  the  evidence  of  the
         Appellant as inconsistent and not credible,  and  had  specifically
         followed the applicable country guidance decisions.
      6. Thus the matter comes before me.


    The complaints advanced
      7. As drafted (although there are two complaints  numbered  the  same)
         there are four complaints raised in the grounds. Mr Selway accepted
         at the outset that there was no merit in the second complaint which
         had asserted that there was no evidence  that  Mr  I  was  a  "high
         ranking official",  because  this  had  been  the  Appellant's  own
         evidence about him.
      8. In consequence three complaints were  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
         Appellant by Mr Selway, although to be fair to him he was not their
         author;
          i) that although the Judge had made a number of references to the
             expert  report  of  Ms  Kashefi  he  had  failed  to  give  it
             significant weight and adopt its conclusions
         ii) that although the Judge made reference to the document  relied
             upon by the Appellant as a Court Summons demonstrating she was
             at risk of losing custody of her son to her husband  in  Iran,
             he had not given adequate reasons for  his  finding  that  her
             husband in Iran had  no  interest  in  pursuing  legal  action
             against her
        iii)  that although the Judge made reference to the current country
             guidance in relation to the risk of harm upon return  to  Iran
             faced by those perceived to have left Iran  illegally  he  had
             not properly considered the argument that the Appellant  faced
             such a risk.


    Error of Law?
      9. It is not in dispute that the Appellant gave through her  different
         interviews,  her  witness  statement,  and   her   oral   evidence,
         inconsistent accounts of her past actions.
     10. The first complaint recognises that the Judge did take  the  report
         of Ms Kashefi into account, and that he referred to it in a  number
         of passages in his decision. As Mr  Selway  accepted  there  is  no
         proper basis for an argument that it was for the expert  to  decide
         whether the Appellant's account of her conduct and  her  allegation
         of rape was credible. That was a matter for the Judge after  proper
         consideration  of  all  of  the  evidence.  What  the  expert   was
         commenting upon was not whether the rape did occur,  but  what  the
         consequences were for the Appellant  if  it  had.  The  Judge  gave
         adequate reasons for his decision that the Appellant had  presented
         a fictitious account of her conduct and experiences, and  that  was
         plainly a decision he was entitled to reach on the evidence.
     11. The second complaint recognises that the Judge did not overlook the
         document relied upon as a copy Court Summons, said  to  corroborate
         the Appellant's claim that her former husband now sought custody of
         her son. Although the Judge's language is criticised it is plain on
         a fair reading of the decision as a whole  that  he  rejected  this
         claim, and that he gave adequate reasons for doing so  [77-8].  The
         Judge noted that on the Appellant's own evidence her former husband
         had consented to their son living with her after the  breakdown  of
         their marriage, and that he had displayed no interest in their  son
         since. In those circumstances he was perfectly entitled  to  reject
         the claim that the Appellant faced the loss of custody of  her  son
         in the event of return to Iran, notwithstanding the  existence  and
         content of the document relied upon.
     12. As to the third complaint. I note that the Appellant  had  accepted
         that she had been issued with a valid Iranian  passport,  and  that
         she had in the past used this to travel to Malaysia, and Qatar with
         her husband and son, and then to return to Iran. It is obvious from
         her own account that her son also had his own passport in order  to
         be able to travel on his own from Qatar to Iran, when  he  returned
         to Iran to live with her following the breakdown of  her  marriage.
         At her screening interview she  said  that  she  and  her  son  had
         travelled by coach to Turkey when she and Mr T had decided to leave
         Iran for the UK, although she denied that they had  needed  to  use
         passports to do so and said that her passport  was  left  with  her
         parents.
     13. Despite this unpromising evidential foundation it was  argued  that
         whatever other adverse findings were made by the Judge in  relation
         to her account, an Amnesty International report  of  May  2011  (as
         quoted in the COI report at  #32.25-)  showed  that  an  individual
         would be  at  real  risk  of  harm  if  perceived  by  the  Iranian
         authorities to be a failed asylum seeker. Since this AI report post-
         dated the country guidance decision of SB (risk on return - illegal
         exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 53 it was argued that the Judge ought to
         have concluded that the situation was no  longer  as  it  had  been
         found to be in SB, and that he had failed to do so.
     14. As Mr Selway accepted this argument was based upon  the  assumption
         that the Appellant would be forcibly returned  using  an  emergency
         travel document issued  by  the  Iranian  authorities  following  a
         request by the Respondent, rather than on her own passport  [Expert
         report #24-]. There was however no proper evidential basis for that
         assumption, since the Appellant had on her own account ready access
         to her own passport. Even if it  had  by  now  expired,  she  could
         obtain its renewal.
     15. The argument also assumed that the Appellant left  Iran  illegally,
         which was clearly a matter that was in dispute. The Judge  made  no
         finding to that effect in her favour. Indeed it is difficult to see
         any basis upon  which  he  could  sensibly  have  done  so,  having
         rejected as untrue the whole of her  account  as  to  why  she  had
         chosen to  leave  Iran.  On  her  own  account  the  Appellant  had
         travelled from Iran to Turkey on a coach, no doubt taking advantage
         of the bilateral agreement between those countries  that  does  not
         require Iranian nationals to obtain a visa for entry to Turkey, and
         I am satisfied that when the decision is read  as  a  whole  it  is
         clear that she had failed to persuade the Judge that she left  Iran
         illegally.
     16. In those circumstances the third complaint simply falls  away.  The
         expert does not suggest  that  the  Iranian  authorities  have  any
         adverse interest in anyone who is returning to Iran  on  their  own
         validly issued Iranian passport, even if it  has  required  renewal
         whilst they were outside Iran - she has  focused  entirely  on  the
         results of the  emergency  travel  documentation  process.  The  AI
         report relied upon of 6 May 2011 is  based  upon  claims  that  two
         individuals forcibly returned to Iran in February  2011  by  France
         and Norway were then  detained  by  the  Iranian  authorities  [COI
         #32.25-26]. The further AI report of February 2012 is based upon  a
         report of comments made by an unnamed Iranian judge in relation  to
         the detention and questioning of those forcibly  returned  to  Iran
         [COI #32.27]. Neither of these reports appears to  have  found  any
         favour with either the Upper Tribunal, or the Court of  Appeal,  in
         any decision since their publication.
     17. Accordingly as Mr Selway accepted,  at  its  highest  the  evidence
         relied upon only suggested a risk of harm existed to those forcibly
         returned. There was no  need  for  the  Appellant  to  be  forcibly
         returned, or to require an ETD, since she could return  voluntarily
         to Iran using her own passport to do so.

    Conclusion
     18. I am satisfied that the criticisms that have been advanced  of  the
         decision are, at best, no more than a disagreement with the Judge's
         conclusions. The approach taken by the Judge to the evidence in his
         decision does not disclose any error  of  law  that  requires  that
         decision to be set aside and remade.



    DECISION


    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    30 December 2014 contains no error of law in the  decision  to  dismiss
    the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be set aside and
    remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.


Signed




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 4 September 2015



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.


Signed




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 4 September 2015
