
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07310/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 February 2016                   |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                    [Y R]
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr G Denholm, counsel (instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born  on  20  June  1988.  He
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge who in a decision promulgated on 2 October  2015,  dismissed  his
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights appeal.

 2. The lengthy rounds of appeal set  out  in  the  permission  application
    contend that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  holding
    against the appellant the absence of any explanation for his failure to
    claim asylum in France when such  an  explanation  had  been  provided;
    that the Judge  erred  by  not  assessing  the  corroborative  evidence
    provided by the appellant's father and uncle and by failing  to  assess
    the full circumstances surrounding the appellant's departure  from  Sri
    Lanka in 2006, accompanied, as he claims to have been, by  a  monk  who
    handled the immigration authority.

 3. It is also contended that the Judge erred  in  requiring  corroborative
    evidence of the appellant's involvement  in  support  of  the  LTTE  in
    Malaysia in circumstances where those able to provide such evidence had
    allegedly been returned to Sri Lanka and in  his  conclusion  that  the
    letters from two individuals who worked for the TGTE were inconsistent.



 4. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Blum found  that
    all the grounds relied on by the appellant were "properly arguable."

 5. I have had regard to the respondent's Rule 24 response, the  contention
    being that the  grounds  amounted  to  a  mere  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. At the hearing of the appeal the representatives identified  two  "main
    issues."

 7. Mr Denholm, who did not prepare the grounds and who did  not  represent
    the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, submitted that the  Judge
    made no evaluation of the 'witness evidence' of the appellant's  father
    and uncle. His father corroborated the attack on  the  appellant  which
    occurred in Malaysia on 26 July 2012. In the course of the  attack,  he
    was accused of being an  LTTE  supporter  and  was  asked  why  he  was
    attending demonstrations against the  Sri  Lankan  government.  He  was
    beaten  and  eventually  lost  consciousness,  waking  up  in   Chowkit
    Hospital. His hand was broken, requiring an operation.

 8. His father had stated that he went to visit the appellant in  hospital.
    His uncle also corroborated the  appellant's  account  of  having  been
    detained and that he had been released on a bribe.

 9. Mr Denholm submitted that the bundles before the Tribunal contained the
    witness statements in support. Indeed the Judge noted at [8(b)] that he
    had  the  appellant's  witness  statement  together   with   affidavits
    submitted by his father and uncle.

10. He had however failed to consider or assess their evidence when  making
    his findings.

11. Mr Denholm  also  submitted  that  it  was  irrational  to  reject  the
    appellant's account of torture in detention on the basis of a statement
    that the appellant's uncle (in relation to whom there is no evidence of
    connections to the LTTE) was not tortured.

12. In that respect, the Judge stated at [30]  that  he  accepted  that  in
    2006, probably due to the association with his father  and  uncle,  the
    appellant felt it was necessary to flee to Malaysia. He also considered
    it likely that he was involved at a low level of LTTE  support  in  Sri
    Lanka at the time. He also accepted it was possible that the  appellant
    was arrested and detained for his activities.

13. The Judge went on to note however that his uncle  still  lives  in  Sri
    Lanka despite his more serious support of the  LTTE  and  there  is  no
    evidence of his having been tortured, despite the police being aware of
    his relationship with the appellant. The Judge then said  in  the  same
    paragraph "consequently I do not accept the appellant's version of  the
    torture that he describes." That Mr Denholm submitted constituted a non
    sequitur.

14. He submitted that the Judge "mixed up" what the appellant said  in  his
    interview about an uncle who had disappeared from Sri Lanka and who has
    not been seen or heard of since. At questions 79-88 of  the  interview,
    the appellant was questioned initially on when his  father  helped  the
    LTTE. He stated that his father was an agent. He became an agent as his
    father's elder  brother  was  in  the  LTTE.  His  name  was  given  as
    "Sellathurai." He had been a member of the LTTE and he  introduced  his
    father to the LTTE in 1988. His uncle joined the LTTE in 1983.

15. He was then asked (question 81) whether  his  uncle  is  still  in  Sri
    Lanka. He stated that after the war, "we do not know where he is at the
    moment." They tried to locate him but  have  been  unable  to  get  any
    information.

16. However, there was a "second uncle" who in an affidavit stated that  he
    had had no involvement with the LTTE. The  second  uncle  had  in  fact
    produced a statement corroborating the appellant's  account  of  having
    been detained and then released upon a bribe.

17. Accordingly the confusion between the two uncles resulted in a material
    error as the Judge wrongly assumed that the uncle still  lived  in  Sri
    Lanka despite his more serious support of the LTTE. The uncle  who  had
    supported the LTTE  had,  as  asserted  by  the  appellant  during  his
    interview, disappeared from Sri Lanka and had not been heard of or seen
    since.

18. There are further grounds of appeal relied on including the failure  by
    the Judge to appreciate the  significance  of  the  appellant's  having
    worked in the UK for an organisation which had in fact been  proscribed
    by the Sri Lankan state. That constituted a relevant  consideration  to
    be taken into account and assessed in line with  the  country  guidance
    decision of GJ and Others (Post Civil  War:  Returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319. He would be placed into a risk category as a  person
    who is perceived as a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single
    state.

19. Although the respondent's position as set out in the Rule  24  response
    contended that there had been no material  errors  of  law,  Mr  Walker
    conceded that there had in the circumstances been a material  error  on
    the basis of the two "main grounds" relied on by Mr Denholm.

20. In the circumstances the parties agreed that the decision should be set
    aside and remitted to the first-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision  to
    be made.  It was accepted that "wholesale findings" would  have  to  be
    made after hearing the evidence.

21. I have had regard to the "main submissions" on behalf of the appellant.
    I find in the circumstances that the Judge failed to consider or assess
    the  corroborating  evidence  of  the  appellant's  father  and  uncle.
    Moreover, it is evident that the Judge  wrongly  stated  at  [30]  that
    there had been no evidence of the appellant's uncle, who still lives in
    Sri Lanka, having been tortured. The evidence before the Tribunal given
    by the appellant during his interview was that there had  been  another
    uncle who had been involved with the LTTE and who had  left  Sri  Lanka
    and had not been seen since. However, the uncle, who provided a witness
    statement and who still lives in Sri Lanka had not supported the LTTE.

22. The Judge allowed his assessment of that evidence at [30]  to  lead  to
    the  conclusion  -  "consequently"  -  that  he  did  not  accept   the
    appellant's version of the torture that he describes.

23. In the circumstances, I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. It is appropriate in these circumstances for the matter to be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  full  determination  of  the
    appellant's appeal.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and the decision is set aside. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal,  Birmingham,  for  hearing  before  a  differently
    constituted Judge.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 19 February 2016
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


