
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07498/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Eagle Building, Glasgow         |      Decision and Reasons        |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 02 September 2015                     |      On 6 October 2015           |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                MR HUA DI LIN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Ms Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr Winter,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Katani  and  Company
             Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For convenience we annex to this  decision  a  copy  of  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal dated 04 December 2014.  We refer particularly  to
    [3] thereof.


 2.  Upon  the  hearing  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal,  it   was
    acknowledged by  Mr  Winter,  Counsel  for  the  Respondent,  that  the
    criticism enshrined in [3] of the grant of permission to appeal is,  in
    substance,  well  made,  not  least  because  at  the   time   of   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") there was in  fact
    no outstanding determination of any application or  representations  to
    the Secretary of State differing from or other than the appeal  to  the
    FtT itself.  As a result, the premise upon which the FtT  purported  to
    allow the appeal, in [20], was non-existent.  Given this concession, we
    ordered that the decision of the FtT be set aside.

 3. We proceeded  to  remake  the  decision.   In  submissions,  Mr  Winter
    reiterated the concession mentioned above and  did  not  formulate  any
    further argument.

 4. In pronouncing our decision, we held that since it is common case  that
    there  will  be  no  separation  of  decision  making  and   associated
    fragmentation, however temporary, of the three members  of  the  family
    unit, the correct analysis must be that the impugned  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State, contained in the letter dated  15  September  2014,
    does not interfere with the right to respect for family life enjoyed by
    any of those concerned as the family unit will remain  intact..   Since
    there will be  no  interference,  no  further  Article  8  analysis  is
    required.  We would add that in any event the legitimate aims  in  play
    are not contentious and, even on the incorrect  hypothesis  upon  which
    the FtT proceeded, the proportionality  of  the  impugned  decision  is
    beyond plausible dispute.

DECISION

 5. Thus we decide as follows:

    (a)  The decision of the FtT is set aside.

         (b)  We remake such decision by dismissing the Appellant's  appeal.





                                    [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date: 03 September 2015
                                  A N N E X


[pic]
