

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07309/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 17 September 2013                          |On 11 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                  Taus Safi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E King, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, Home Office Presenting officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The  appellant  claims  that  he  was  born  on  5th  July  1994.   The
    respondent accepts an assessment that he was born on 1st January  1991.
    He is a national of Afghanistan.  He entered the United Kingdom on  2nd
    October 2008 and claimed asylum on the following day.  That  claim  was
    refused by the respondent on 9th June 2011 and a decision was  made  to
    remove him from the jurisdiction.

2.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before Immigration Judge White on 31st  August  2011.   The  Judge
    concluded that the appellant  lacked  credibility  and  the  claim  was
    dismissed in all respects.

3.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that decision.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted.  That came before the Upper  Tribunal
    on 7th February 2012.  There was a finding that there had been an error
    of law in certain respects.   It  was  not  found,  however,  that  the
    Judge's assessment of age was in error.   Thus  the  decision  was  set
    aside to be reheard, save as to the issue of age.

5.   Thus  the  matter  comes  before  me  to  be  reheard.   Ms  King,  who
    represents the appellant,  invited  my  attention  to  new  bundles  of
    material that  had  been  presented  in  connection  with  the  appeal,
    together with her skeleton argument.  Mr  Melvin,  who  represents  the
    respondent, also presented a skeleton argument together with  a  number
    of authorities and reports.

6.   At the outset I clarified with the parties the  issues  which  were  at
    large.  Those issues were the credibility of the claim, the  safety  of
    return and Article 8 of the ECHR.  It was  accepted  that  the  Judge's
    findings as to age were to stand for the purposes of this hearing.

7.   The appellant gave evidence  adopting  as  he  did  his  three  witness
    statements made on 21 October 2008, 6th July 2011 and at a date in 2011
    before the occasion of the previous hearing.

8.   In summary he is a  Pashtun  from  a  village  in  Kapisa  Province  in
    Afghanistan.  He attended an informal school in a garden for some time.
     Later he attended a more formal school,  his  father  being  the  head
    teacher of that school.  The father had worked after the  fall  of  the
    Taliban with an NGO to rebuild the school.

9.   The appellant had no problems in Afghanistan until about a year  before
    his flight.  These problems  intensified  about  four  to  five  months
    before he left.  Four of his cousins were members of  the  Taliban  who
    wanted himself and his father to join  them.  There were also arguments
    with his father concerning the  running  of  the  school.   Before  the
    appellant fled these cousins shot his father and  younger  brother  and
    came looking for him.  He was  warned  at  the  market  by  his  cousin
    Azizullah and taken to the home of his  uncle.   Thereafter  the  uncle
    made arrangements for an  agent  to  take  the  appellant  out  of  the
    country.

10.  In the interview conducted at the Home Office, the appellant  indicated
    that he  had  left  Afghanistan  two  months  previously,  but  in  his
    statements he indicates that he had spent nearly a year in  travelling,
    seemingly fingerprinted in Greece in January 2008.

11.  In the statement of  21  October  2008  the  appellant  indicated  that
    during the time that his father was head teacher of the school, he  and
    his brother attended the school and were living relatively  comfortable
    lives with his father who also received income from his farm.  In  that
    statement the appellant said that he had  no  problems  in  Afghanistan
    until approximately one week before he fled.   It  was  then  that  his
    father and brother were shot by  the  cousins  on  the  way  home  from
    school.  It was because they were unhappy  that  he  had  opened  up  a
    school in the village.  In that statement, in dealing with the  journey
    to the United Kingdom, the appellant had indicated  that  he  had  left
    Afghanistan two months before he arrived in the United Kingdom.

12.  The more detailed statement  was  that  of  6th  July  2011.   In  that
    statement he indicated that his problems began one year before he  fled
    Afghanistan and produces his taskera, an ID card, which was obtained by
    his uncle.  In his statement he  said  that  his  journey  took  almost
    eleven months and not two months.  He said that he was told by an agent
    to say two months due to his fingerprints in  Greece.   He  was  scared
    that if he told the truth about his journey he  would  be  returned  to
    Greece.  It was said that his  father  and  brother's  death  were  not
    reported to the police as this would have caused more problems for  his
    uncle and mother.

13.  The appellant said in oral evidence that he had attended a school,  and
    indeed produced school reports for the years 2001 to 2014.  He said  he
    only stopped going to school shortly before his departure.  The reports
    had been obtained by his uncle from home.  He said  that  he  had  been
    last in contact with his uncle in 2010.   He  said  that  his  paternal
    cousins had tried for some time to stop the school but had not at  that
    stage enough power.  There came a time when two of the  cousins  became
    commanders in the area.  Although the school had been  built  with  the
    assistance of the NGO, he did not know what NGO that was.

14.  He was questioned about the fingerprinting of himself  in  Greece.   He
    said he travelled through  a  number  of  countries  that  he  did  not
    remember, and he did not know where he had been fingerprinted.  He said
    of the NGO that it belonged inside the country.  His  father  was  also
    discussing the building of a supermarket with  the  assistance  of  the
    United Nations.

15.  He said of his cousin Azizullah that he was the son of  the  uncle  who
    was a farmer.  In 2010 he had spoken with his mother and uncle who were
    all together.  He was aware that his cousin was also in  the  house  at
    that time.

16.  He indicated so far as his private life was concerned that he does  not
    do anything day to day because  he  has  no  job  because  he  was  not
    permitted to work.  Though he was at school for a time he no longer  is
    at school because  he  cannot  afford  to  pay  the  fees.   He  shares
    accommodation with another boy.  He was  at  the  John  Ruskin  College
    learning how to speak and write for two years, but left  in  2011.   He
    has no emotional relationship with anybody and has no children.

17.  Mr Melvin made his submissions, relying particularly upon his  skeleton
    argument.  He asked me to find that the appellant was not credible.  He
    had told lies about when it was that he had left Afghanistan and sought
    to conceal the fact that he had been fingerprinted in Greece in January
    2008.  His evidence was vague, particularly being unable  to  name  the
    NGO that had assisted his father in building the school, and had  given
    very vague details concerning the superstore or market, also  that  his
    father was involved  in  building.   I  was  asked  to  find  that  his
    willingness to be untruthful  to  the  United  Kingdom  authorities  in
    pursuit  of  his   claim   fundamentally   undermined   his   generally
    credibility.

18.  I was asked to  find  on  the  authorities  that  the  appellant  could
    return, certainly to Kabul.  My attention was  drawn  to  a  number  of
    authorities and reports in support of that submission.

19.  Ms King relied upon her skeleton argument and invited me to  find  that
    it was unrealistic to expect the appellant, who on any account had left
    Afghanistan as a minor, to be fully aware of what was happening so  far
    as his father and the NGO and UN were  concerned.   The  appellant  had
    given an explanation as to why he had been  untruthful  concerning  his
    travel, but had  been  largely  consistent  with  his  account  of  his
    experiences in Afghanistan.  I was invited therefore to  find  that  he
    was generally credible as to his claim and that being so that he  could
    not return to his home area.  I was invited to find that  it  would  be
    wholly unreasonable to expect him to relocate to Kabul, particularly he
    having spent some five years in the United Kingdom.  I was addressed on
    the issue of delay and the consequences that  should  follow  from  the
    respondent's failure to undertake tracing in his case.

20.  I remind myself of the definition of refugee as set out  in  Regulation
    2 of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
    (Qualification)  Regulations  2006,  and  also  as  to  the  issue   of
    humanitarian protection as set out in paragraph 339C of the Immigration
    Rules.

21.  The burden and standard of  proof  to  be  applied  is  to  that  lower
    standard, namely "a reasonable likelihood" or "a serious  possibility".
    I bear in mind that a similar low standard should  be  applied  in  the
    cases of the appellant's human rights, namely whether there was a  real
    risk of a breach to the appellant's fundamental human rights.

22.  In assessing credibility, I remind myself that the claim should be  put
    within its proper context, so that a proper evaluation can be  made  of
    the individual features thereof.

23.  It is common ground that the appellant left  Afghanistan  as  a  minor.
    Accordingly, it is right  that  I  should  approach  any  vagueness  or
    discrepancy with caution as the awareness or understanding of the young
    person may be less developed than in an adult.

24.  A proper starting  point  for  the  consideration  of  the  appellant's
    evidence clearly is to understand his age.  The  first  assessment  was
    carried out by two Croydon social workers  on  16  October  2008.   The
    second assessment was carried out on 19 November 2008 at Kings  College
    Hospital.  The third assessment was  carried  out  by  Dr  Birch  on  5
    December 2008 and a fourth assessment on 9th July 2009.

25.  Judge White conducted a very detailed  examination  of  those  reports,
    noting the criticisms that were made about them.   The  assessment  was
    conducted from paragraph 23 of that determination until  paragraph  51.
    Consideration was also given to two letters from Ms O'Higgins, a  young
    refugee  rights  petitioner  with  the  Children's  Society,  to  a  Mr
    Harrison, and also to the taskera and identity card.

26.  It is unnecessary to set out in detail that which is already  expressed
    in considerable detail in that determination.  So far as the  reasoning
    that is employed, I apply the principles set out in Devaseelan to those
    findings.

27.  It was the finding of the Judge that the appellant was born during  the
    first half of 1991 and would have turned 18 by July 2009.  Thus when he
    left Afghanistan in late 2007, if that indeed be  the  case,  he  would
    have been 16, arriving in the United Kingdom aged 17.  At the  time  of
    his asylum interview and his evidence at the first hearing  he  was  an
    adult and will be returned as an adult to Afghanistan  should  that  be
    decided upon.

28.  There  was  some  suggestion  made  that  the  appellant  had  learning
    difficulties by Ms O'Higgins.  The  Judge  did  not  find  that  to  be
    substantiated, not least that no reference was made to it by Dr  Birch.



29.  The school report  scores  the  appellants  with  9s  or  10s  in  most
    subjects including the Qur'an,  behaviour,  Dari,  maths,  science  and
    health, drawing, writing, physical training.

30.  There is no key to the value of such points but it  is  noted  that  in
    the last school report very much higher marks  are  given  for  Qur'an,
    behaviour, Dari, Pashtu, history, geography, maths, science and health,
    drawing, writing, physical training, social civilisation.

31.  Although demeanour must be approached with caution there is  little  in
    the way in which the appellant gave evidence to indicate  any  lack  of
    understanding of the question or of any  inability  to  make  a  proper
    response.  That was also the  assessment  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

32.  The respondent relies heavily upon the appellant's lies as to  when  he
    left Afghanistan and whether or not he  was  fingerprinted  in  Greece.
    Such lies are of significance in that the appellant has  shown  himself
    capable of producing a false account should  that  suit  him.   Clearly
    care must be employed in not putting  too  much  of  an  emphasis  upon
    issues  involving  travel.   The  fundamental  issue  is  that  of  the
    credibility of the matter generally.

33.  Mr Melvin suggests that the appellant, in giving  his  evidence  before
    me  that  two  of  his  cousins  were  commanders  is  an  example   of
    exaggeration.  The applicant contends that no one had asked  him  about
    that directly before.  A question arises in  the  connection  with  the
    claimed actions of the cousins in killing his father and his cousin  as
    to why it was necessary to kill his  cousin.   It  is  curious  if  the
    commanders were seeking to recruit support for the  Taliban  that  they
    would kill his brother.   Indeed,  if  these  commanders  had  been  so
    powerful the question arises why it was that they did not exact revenge
    upon the maternal uncle for helping the applicant to escape  or  indeed
    seek to recruit the uncle's son Azizullah.  Seemingly, all were present
    at the home in 2010.

34.  It is to be noted that although the applicant claims that that was  the
    last time that he had spoken to his uncle, it is noted in paragraph  17
    of the previous determination that the applicant indicated  as  at  the
    hearing on 31st August 2011 that" he remains in touch by telephone with
    his maternal uncle.  His mother is still living with his  uncle.   They
    are at home in Afghanistan".

35.  In assessing the truthfulness of the claim it  is  perhaps  instructive
    to  note  how  the  appellant  expressed  the  matter  to  the  persons
    conducting the age assessment.  Clearly the quality of what is said  is
    not such as a formal interview, and care must be  taken  not  to  place
    undue weight upon what was said.  However, in this particular  case  it
    perhaps helps to throw some light on the issue of credibility.  In  the
    assessment conducted on 16 October 2008 where social history and family
    composition is recorded, it is said that his  father  died  two  months
    prior to him leaving and sibling Azir  aged  9  also  died  two  months
    previously.  Members of the Taliban asked for him  and  his  father  to
    join them.  One day the appellant found letters stating that they would
    not leave him alive, and one day they would be shot dead in  their  own
    country.  His mother then took him to  his  uncle's  home.   It  was  a
    journey that  took  approximately  two  months  but  he  was  not  very
    specific.  In the assessment of 9th July 2009 he said that  encountered
    after obtaining funds from the Americans to  set  up  the  school  ,his
    father continued to work with the Americans. The  cousins  visited  the
    family home and told the father to stop  working  with  the  Americans.
    When he refused to join the Taliban the cousins killed him.   There  is
    no mention of the killing of the brother at that stage.

36.  In dealing with the social history  and   family  composition  he  said
    that he had one brother Nazir aged 8.  Once again mention is made  only
    of the cousins killing his father and coming looking for him .

37.  Thus there would seem to be some confusion about who had  provided  the
    funds for the school, whether it was the Americans or an  NGO  who  was
    based in the country.  The  relationship  with  the  Americans  was  of
    fairly long standing.

38.   One  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  had  been  directed   against
    Immigration Judge  White  was  the  lack  of  reference  to  background
    material.  In those circumstances,  having  regard  to  the  bundle  of
    background material of some 563 folios I invited Ms King to indicate to
    me those passages which related to  the  appellant's  home  area.   She
    indicated that she could not, but was relying upon  those  reports  for
    their general effect.  In those circumstances it is somewhat  difficult
    to assess by way of background material what was the situation  so  far
    as the Americans and the Taliban in the area of the  appellant  without
    embarking upon my own researches on the matter.  Clearly if the Taliban
    had been prominent in that area the desire to recruit support would  be
    understandable.  It is also to be  noted  in  general  terms  that  the
    Taliban  would  clearly  be  unhappy  with  anybody  working  with  the
    Americans and that education was also a matter upon which  the  Taliban
    have strong views.

39.  The appellant claims to have been at school up until the  time  of  his
    leaving Afghanistan.  Only those reports up to 2004  are  produced.   I
    note that in his evidence before Judge White at paragraph  15  of  that
    determination, the appellant had indicated that he did  not  have  more
    certificates  because  he  had  repeated  one  year  and  left   before
    completing the final year. This is said in the context of being the son
    of the headmaster at that school.  It is perhaps  surprising  in  those
    circumstances that there is a lack of details concerning his  last  few
    years in Afghanistan.  It is perhaps  reasonable  to  assume  that  his
    father as the headmaster would be particularly motivated to ensure  the
    good education of his sons.

40.  It is said by Mr Melvin that the appellant was unduly vague  about  the
    situation and circumstances of his  father,  the  supermarket  and  the
    NGOs.  As the appellant would have been 16 in 2007,  it  is  perhaps  a
    point to be made with some merit that it is reasonable to  expect  that
    at that age he has a little more understanding of what is going  on  in
    his family and in his village.  Excepting  that  he  was  a  relatively
    young man when he left, whether that be 2007 or 2008,  nevertheless  it
    is reasonable to expect that he would have had some  awareness  of  the
    dramatic events which he describes.

41.  It seems to me that it is a matter of very much  relevance  that  there
    is a variation in his account as between his first  statement  and  his
    second,  these  being  possibly  prepared  more  carefully   than   the
    interview.  I find that his  ability  to  maintain  a  lie  as  to  his
    movements to  the  United  Kingdom  are  relevant  in  undermining  his
    credibility.  I do not find it would be credible that the cousins, even
    were they to be Taliban, would be interested in killing a  9  year  old
    boy.  If they were as violent as claimed to gun down a member of  their
    own family they would have shown little mercy to the uncle who  enabled
    the appellant to escape their clutches, or indeed to his cousin.  I  do
    not find it credible that the appellant has  ceased  contact  with  his
    family in Afghanistan.  There have been no police reports.  That  again
    is a  matter  of  some  concern,  particularly  given  the  significant
    community profile that the appellant's  father  would  have  had  as  a
    school master and seemingly as a local entrepreneur  working  with  the
    United Nations to create a supermarket.

42.  Overall I do not find therefore that  the  appellant's  credibility  is
    such that his claim can be relied upon.

43.  Equally, it is difficult without clear evidence to detect what  is  the
    current situation in  his  area.   Clearly  he  would  be  at  risk  of
    recruitment to the Taliban should they be in the ascendant.  The  fact,
    however, that  his  cousin  was  still  at  home  in  2010  is  perhaps
    indicative that the power of the Taliban in that area is not  as  great
    as the appellant would now claim.

44.  In the  circumstances,  without  further  detail  it  is  difficult  to
    conclude that the appellant's return to his home area would be  unsafe.
    His cousin, mother and uncle reside there and would be  able  to  offer
    him a home.  I do not find it credible that he is wanted by the cousins
    as claimed.

45.  In any event I find that relocation to Kabul in  the  circumstances  of
    this case is entirely proper and open to be made.  I have regard to  AK
    (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC).

46.  It is noted  in  paragraph  212  of  that  decision  that  there  is  a
    significant level of support provided by the Afghan population  by  aid
    and humanitarian agencies, domestic and international.  There is a high
    level of international support in money and in kind.  There are  return
    and reintegration packages  available  in  Kabul  designed  to  cushion
    against immediate difficulties on return.  They can assist with  skills
    training and assist returnees generally.

47.  The conclusion of the Tribunal in that decision at  paragraph  243  was
    that it was not unsafe or unreasonable to relocate to Kabul,  nor  that
    Article 15(c) was thereby engaged.

48.  It is suggested that the appellant's father had  connections  with  the
    US forces and that accordingly the appellant would  be  targeted  as  a
    consequence.  Bearing in mind the age of  the  appellant  and  that  he
    would have had no realistic contact with UN or US forces I find that it
    is not reasonably likely that he would perceived to have  had  so.   In
    that connection the case of H and B v the  United  Kingdom  -  70073/10
    44539/11 was produced for my attention, particularly paragraphs 97  and
    100 thereof, which indicate that there  was  insufficient  evidence  to
    suggest that the Taliban had the motivation or ability to  pursue  low-
    level collaborators in Kabul or other areas outside their control.

49.  In that connection I do not find it credible that the cousins  had  the
    significance which are claimed, or that they would have any interest in
    pursuing the appellant who was, after all, a very  young  man  when  he
    left the country.  There was no indication for example that  they  have
    pursued any enquiries of the appellant through the uncle or through his
    mother.  No doubt if that had been happening  that  would  be  evidence
    reasonably likely to have been given by the appellant in the course  of
    his various appeals.  As I have indicated I find the  presence  of  the
    appellant's mother, cousin  and  uncle  still  in  their  family  home,
    certainly in 2010 if not to the current time, to be indicative  of  the
    fact that the family is not the subject of targeting by the Taliban.

50.  My attention was also drawn by Mr Melvin to  the  Operational  Guidance
    Note on  Afghanistan  OGN  v11  issued  in  June  2013,  which  further
    amplifies the current situation in Kabul.

51.  The appellant is a person of some education and if it be right that  he
    had spent nearly a year getting to the United Kingdom it shows a degree
    of resilience and initiative which will hold him in good stead were  he
    to be returned to Kabul.

52.  Looking at the  matter  overall  therefore  I  do  not  find  that  the
    appellant is at risk were he to return, particularly were he to  return
    to Kabul.  I do not find that it would be unreasonable or unduly  harsh
    to expect him to return to Kabul in all the circumstances.

53.  Ms King seeks to argue also  that  the  appellant's  fundamental  human
    rights would be breached were he to be removed.  She accepts  that  the
    appellant has done very little during the five years that he  has  been
    in the United Kingdom other  than  attend  college  and  had  developed
    friendships and become more acquainted with life in the United Kingdom.

54.  She prays in aid strongly, however,  the  delay  on  the  part  of  the
    respondent  in  making  a  decision  and  the  failure  to  trace   the
    appellant's relatives in Afghanistan.  She relies upon EB  (Kosovo)  to
    the extent that although the appellant has  not  been  working  in  the
    United Kingdom, that was because he had not been granted status  to  do
    so and if that status had been granted at an earlier stage his  private
    life would now be very much more advanced.

55.  She stresses that the appellant in fact arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    on any view  of  his  age  as  a  minor,  and  in  those  circumstances
    Regulation 6(1) of the 2005 Regulations imposed a  plain  duty  on  the
    Secretary of State to endeavour to trace the  members  of  the  minor's
    family as soon as possible after the minor makes his claim for  asylum.
    In that connection she relies upon DS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 305 and in particular paragraph 44 of the judgment therein.

56.  In her skeleton argument she also  relies  upon  the  moments  made  by
    Elias J in HK and Others v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 315, particularly those
    found at paragraph 39 thereof.

57.  She also relies on KA (Afghanistan and Others) v SSHD [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    101.  She relies upon those matters in support of a contention that the
    appellant falls to be granted asylum, but in the alternative that it is
    a matter properly taken into account in assessing  the  proportionality
    of return.

58.  For my part I find it difficult to  understand  the  relevance  of  the
    tracing requirement in the particular circumstances of the  appellant's
    case.  It is not his case that he had lost contact with the members  of
    his family, but was indeed in  contact  with  his  mother,  cousin  and
    uncle.  Little would have been served in trying to trace those  members
    of the family when it was not suggested that the appellant was  without
    family members.

59.  Ms King relies upon the case of Jabarkhail v  Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2013] EWHC 1798.  The  court  held  that  for  the
    appellant to be entitled to any sort  of  leave  as  a  result  of  the
    respondent failing to carry out her  tracing  obligations,  he  had  to
    demonstrate a real rather than hypothetical disadvantage.

60.  As I have indicated it was never in  dispute  that  the  appellant  had
    family members in his village, rather that he was unable to  return  to
    them.  He would not be returning to Kabul as a long  vulnerable  child.
    The uncle was able  to  provide  assistance  and  presumably  financial
    support to acquire an agent in the past.  There  was  every  reason  to
    believe that at least financial support if not physical  support  could
    continue to be provided.

61.  It is difficult to understand what detriment the appellant  would  face
    if returned to Kabul.  He has not in fact built up any work pattern  or
    work  relationship  or  any  other  personal  relationship  other  than
    friendship in the United Kingdom.  He has not been studying and nor has
    he been working, but does very little.  It is  therefore  difficult  to
    understand that his lifestyle  would  be  unduly  changed  were  he  to
    return.

62.   Both  parties  seemingly  seek  to  rely  upon  the  decision  in   EU
    (Afghanistan) and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 32.

63.  Sir Stanley Burnton in the course  of  his  judgment  referred  to  the
    decision in KA and commented as follows:-

         "To grant leave to remain to someone who has  no  risk  on  return,
         whose Convention rights will not be infringed by  his  return,  and
         who has no other independent claim to remain here (such as a  claim
         to be a skilled migrant) is to use the  power  to  grant  leave  to
         remain for a purpose other than that for which it is conferred."

64.  The Judge went on further in the passage to say:

         "I do not think that the court  should  require  or  encourage  the
         Secretary of State to grant leave in such circumstances  either  in
         order to mark the court's displeasure  at  her  conduct,  or  as  a
         sanction for her misconduct."

65.  The court recognised, however, at paragraph 7 that the  state's  breach
    of duty may be relevant to a Tribunal  decision,  particularly  in  the
    assessment of risk on return  and  the  availability  or  otherwise  of
    familial support.

66.  It may be that the appellant should have been granted leave  to  remain
    under the then-minors policy.  If he had been then he would  have  been
    able to work lawfully.  Similarly the failure to endeavour to trace may
    result in a failed asylum seeker, who may in consequence  lose  contact
    with his family putting down roots and establishing a valid  Article  8
    claim.

67.  Mr Melvin submits that this was not a case of an untoward  delay.   The
    decision to refuse asylum was made on 9th June 2011 and it has been the
    court processes since that time that have resulted in yet further delay
    in the disposal of the appeal.  It is to be noted that during that time
    the appellant was in fact attending  college,  seeking  to  better  his
    language and learning qualifications.

68.  Ms King submits that if the appellant had been  found  credible  as  to
    the circumstances of his claim when that claim was made, he would  have
    been granted some form of protection  and  would  have  been  therefore
    better placed to have developed his private life further.

69.  Whilst recognising the force of that submission it is to be noted  that
    the Secretary of State did not find the appellant to be credible as  to
    the claim advanced, nor did the Immigration Judge,  nor  indeed  do  I.
    This would be to attempt to deal with  the  matter  on  a  hypothetical
    basis rather than considering the reality of the situation. Clearly the
    appellant should not be disadvantaged in presenting his  private  life,
    having been deprived of the  opportunity  of  further  developing  that
    private life by working.  Clearly the  greater  the  prejudice  to  the
    appellant by reason of a delay in the decision, the more  important  it
    is to reflect that  in  the  consideration  of  his  fundamental  human
    rights.

70.  Ms King also makes  the  point  that  although  the  appellant  is  now
    technically an adult he remains vulnerable.  She  submits  that  it  is
    artificial to impose an arbitrary cut off point.  He has  never  worked
    or lived wholly self-sufficiently.  I have  been  asked  to  bear  that
    matter in mind.

71.  She asked me also to bear in mind the relative tranquillity  and  order
    in the United Kingdom and the difficult circumstances in Afghanistan.

72.  I bear all such matters in mind.  I remind  myself  of  the  principles
    set out in Razgar.  It is not suggested in  this  case  that  there  is
    family life but rather that there is private life and the potential  to
    develop it further.  The appellant has, however, had the opportunity of
    education in the United Kingdom and has matured  further.   As  I  have
    indicated before, he managed some 11 months in  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom and is therefore someone of some resilience.  I  remind  myself
    of the many agencies that are available in Kabul to assist him  as  was
    noted by the Tribunal in the decision of AK.  He will  not  be  someone
    returning without support.  There is no  reason  to  suppose  that  his
    uncle who supported him financially at the very  least  at  an  earlier
    stage might not do so again.

73.  I do not find therefore that the appellant's fundamental  human  rights
    would be breached by any return to Afghanistan, nor do I find  that  it
    would be disproportionate to expect him so to return.

74.  In all the circumstances therefore, the appellant's appeal  for  asylum
    is  dismissed.   That  in  relation  to  humanitarian   protection   is
    dismissed.  That in relation to human rights is also dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
