
IAC-BFD- MD
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07383/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22nd June 2015                        |On 6th July 2015                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mr haider dheyaa subhi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Khan, of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent Haider Dheyaa Subhi  is  a  citizen  of  Iraq.  I  shall
    hereafter refer to  the  Respondent  as  "the  Appellant"  and  to  the
    Appellant as "the Respondent" (as they  were  respectively  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The Appellant entered the UK initially on 15th February 2013 and stayed
    only a few days. He then paid an agent to take him to the  Republic  of
    Ireland arriving there on 20th February 2013. He claimed asylum in  the
    Republic of Ireland. He was returned to the UK following a request from
    the Irish authorities and arrived here once more on 2nd August 2013.

 3. His application for asylum  was  refused  by  the  Respondent  on  15th
    September 2014 and a decision was made to refuse  him  leave  to  enter
    with removal directions set for Iraq.

 4. The Appellant appealed against that refusal to the FtT  (Judge  Saffer)
    which in a decision dated 15th  January  2015  allowed  his  appeal  on
    asylum/human rights grounds. The Respondent now appeals with permission
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. The  Respondent  submits  that  the  FtT  erred  in  law  by  seemingly
    misapplying HJ(Iran) [2010] UKSC  31  to  the  Appellant's  case.  This
    occurs when the Judge says at [41] that the Appellant's  occupation  as
    "a woman's (sic) hairdresser" is "intrinsic to what he does", "it is  a
    fundamental right for him to practice his profession"  and  "he  should
    not have to alter his behaviour to avoid the persecution".

 6. Further it is said that the Judge has not given  adequate  reasons  for
    his findings of fact at [41] where he says,

         "...Whilst in the United Kingdom society ascribes nothing  to  such
         work related tactility and proximity, that is not the same in other
         cultures. It is a fundamental right for him to be able to  practice
         his profession as he sees fit and  not  have  to  worry  about  the
         perception others ascribe to that work. I have of course considered
         the authorities to which I have made  reference  earlier  regarding
         alterations to one's behaviour to avoid persecution. In  this  case
         he  should  not  have  to  alter  his  behaviour   to   avoid   the
         persecution."

 7. Permission to the UT was granted by FtT  Judge  Osborne.  The  relevant
    grant of permission reads as follows;

         "In an otherwise careful and well-reasoned decision and reasons  in
         which the Judge set out the  pertinent  issues,  law  and  evidence
         relating to the facts of  the  appeal,  together  with  proper  and
         adequate reasons for his findings, it is nonetheless arguable  that
         in relation to the issue of the Appellant's occupation as a woman's
         hairdresser, it is a fundamental right of the Appellant to be  able
         to practice that profession as he sees fit. It is arguable that the
         Appellant has no right to carry on  his  employment  as  a  women's
         hairdresser which  is  arguably  not  as  much  an  aspect  of  his
         personality and inner self as would be his sexual orientation  such
         that , following HJ (Iran) it would not be reasonable to expect the
         Appellant to suppress that aspect of  his  personality.  It  is  at
         least arguable that the Judge misapplied HJ (Iran) in  relation  to
         this Appellant. It is arguable that  one's  profession  is  not  an
         immutable characteristic."

Error of Law

 8. I find that the submissions entered on behalf of the Respondent have no
    merit. Judge Saffer assessed and weighed  the  evidence  that  was  put
    before him. He accepted that the Appellant presented essentially  as  a
    credible witness. The Respondent had doubted the  authenticity  of  the
    Appellant's claim on several counts. Those matters are set out at  [26]
    of the Judge's decision. The relevant ones for  the  purposes  of  this
    decision are set out as follows;

      . The delay in claiming asylum undermines his credibility,

      . the documents purporting to be death certificates  and  threatening
        letter are  copies  and  of  little  evidential  weight  given  the
        availability of fraudulent death certificates,

      . he had failed to establish his wife and child had been  killed,  or
        in the manner claim, or by the group claimed, or  for  the  reasons
        claimed, or if they were that it was anything other than  a  random
        act of violence,

      . it would not be unduly harsh for him to internally relocate, and

      . he could seek state protection even if he had the problems claimed.



 9. Judge Saffer found  little  in  the  Respondent's  assertion  that  the
    Appellant's delay in  claiming  undermined  his  credibility.  He  also
    accepted in [37], giving  reasons  why,  he  was  satisfied  about  the
    authenticity of the death certificates relating to the Appellant's wife
    and child. He said that he had no  reasons  to  doubt  the  photographs
    produced by the Appellant to show that his house and car were destroyed
    in a targeted bomb attack. The bomb was meant  for  the  Appellant  but
    resulted instead in taking the lives of his wife and child.

10. The Judge also made findings at [40] and said as follows;

         "I accept it is reasonably likely if he returned he would still  be
         at risk from the Mujahideen locally as I  accept  that  the  terror
         they wish to instil relates not only  to  shutting  businesses  but
         also to silencing individuals. Rationality appears to play a  minor
         role in their actions."

11. None of these findings were challenged by the Respondent  when  seeking
    permission. What  has  been  challenged  is  paragraph  [41].  In  some
    respects paragraph [41] can be said to be an  unnecessary  addition  to
    the sustainable findings already made  by  the  Judge.  The  Respondent
    seeks to say that the Appellant could return to Iraq  by  changing  his
    career. Whether that is right or not, the central issue in this  appeal
    is whether the Appellant can safely return to Iraq. Therefore [41] must
    be looked at in the context of [40].  In  [40]  the  Judge  is  clearly
    saying that this Appellant is at risk whatever - he is at risk  in  the
    future because of his past engagement as a ladies hairdresser.  Whether
    or not he changes his career  the  Judge  forms  the  view    that  the
    Appellant is effectively  a  marked  man  because  of  his  past  since
    according to the Mujahideen his past occupation, is against Sharia Law.



12. The Judge deals fully with the question of why  the  local  authorities
    are unable to offer effective protection to the Appellant. At  [39]  he
    says;

         "I accept it is reasonably likely he sought police  protection  but
         they were unable or unwilling to assist. I do not accept it  was  a
         random act of violence as I am  satisfied  that  it  is  reasonably
         likely he  was  targeted  by  the   Mujahideen  who  have  ascribed
         political and religious connotations to his  chosen  profession  of
         being a woman's (sic) hairdresser as being against their  religious
         or political convictions."

13.  I find on a full reading of the decision the Judge has done that which
    he is tasked to do; namely looked at the evidence in the round.  It  is
    for him to carry out the task of assessing the evidence  in  the  round
    and to determine whether that evidence shows that there is a reasonable
    likelihood that this Appellant faces a future risk if returned  to  his
    country of origin, on account of his imputed political/religious views.
    He then has to make adequate findings on that evidence. This is what he
    has done. For the foregoing reasons the Judge's decision stands.

Decision

14. This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made



Signature     Dated

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
