
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07700/2014
                                                               AA/07692/2014
                                                               AA/07694/2014
                                                               AA/07698/2014
                                                               AA/07699/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2016                     |On 14 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                    [A A]
                                    [B A]
                                   [O E A]
                                   [O O A]
                                   [A O A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss. C. Warren, Counsel instructed by Binas
Solicitors Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J.D.L.  Edwards,  dated  10  March  2015,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decisions to
    refuse to grant leave to remain on the grounds of  family  and  private
    life.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "It is arguable that the Judge failed to demonstrate  that  he  had
         considered  the  best  interests  of  the  children  as  a  primary
         consideration."

 3. The first and second Appellants attended  the  hearing,  together  with
    their youngest child.

 4. I announced at the hearing that I found that the decision involved  the
    making of a material error of  law.   I  set  the  decision  aside  and
    remitted it to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  My  reasons  are
    set out below.

Error of law

 5. The findings in this decision run to only  seven  paragraphs,  [24]  to
    [30].  Paragraph [30] contains the full extent of the consideration  of
    the best interests of the children who were aged nine, seven,  and  one
    year old.  It states as follows:

         "This decision safeguards the welfare of Appellants B, C & D.  They
         will remain with their parents.  Their best interests are to do so,
         to be brought up and educated in their own culture and  to  get  to
         know their extended family.  Returning them to Nigeria  will  allow
         that to happen.  The respondent's decision is complaint (sic)  with
         Section 55."

 6. I find that not only  has  the  judge  not  recognised  that  the  best
    interests of the children should be a primary consideration, given that
    it is the last matter to which he has turned his  attention,  but  also
    that he has failed to give adequate  consideration  to  the  children's
    circumstances.   There  is   no   detailed   consideration   of   their
    circumstances at all.  I find that this failure to  consider  the  best
    interests of the children as  a  primary  consideration,  and  to  give
    adequate consideration to the children's circumstances, is  a  material
    error of law.

 7. Further, given that the children were born in the UK, that one is  nine
    years old and one is seven years old,  there  is  no  consideration  of
    whether it is reasonable to expect them to return  as  is  required  by
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The judge simply  states  in  paragraph  [28]
    that the  Appellants  "cannot  qualify  under  either  Rule  276ADE  or
    Appendix FM" without any  consideration  of  the  requirements  of  the
    rules, and without giving any reasons.  I find that the failure to give
    reasons for why  the  Appellants  fail  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE, with particular reference to the children, or why the
    parents fail to meet the requirements of Appendix FM with reference  to
    paragraph EX.1, is a material error of law.

 8. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. At the hearing the Appellants' representative  stated  that  the  third
    Appellant now had British citizenship, and the fourth Appellant had put
    in an application for British citizenship, although she  did  not  have
    any evidence of this.  Mr. McVeety stated  that  he  would  inform  the
    Respondent of this, so that the applications could be looked at  again.
    It was agreed that, if necessary, this could also be addressed  in  any
    Case Management Review in the First-tier  Tribunal.   However,  without
    the evidence,  and  without  the  Respondent  having  carried  out  the
    necessary checks, I considered that the appeal  was  not  suitable  for
    disposal on this basis alone.

Notice of Decision

The decision involves the making of a material error of law  and  I  set  it
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


Signed   Date 12 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
