

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: AA/07231/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |                             |
|on    22 January 2014                         |Determination Sent:          |


Before:
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

Between:
                                     R D
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:  Ms Loughran, instructed by Luqmani Thompson & Partners
                    Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                                  Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.  Having  regard  to
the history and potential vulnerability of the  appellant  I  continue  that
order under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008).



                                DETERMINATION

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. She appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the respondent's decision dated 11 July 2013 to remove
    her to Nigeria following  the   refusal  of  her  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights claims.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal  (Judge R B L Prior) dismissed  the  appeal  on
    all grounds in a determination dated 5 September  2013.  The  appellant
    appealed against that decision to the Upper Tribunal and permission  to
    appeal was granted on 1 October 2013.

 3. In a decision issued on 2 December 2013  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Gibb found an error on a point of law in the determination of the First-
    tier  Tribunal  such  that  it  had  to  be  set  aside  and   re-made.
    Consideration was given to  remitting  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  but agreement between the parties was that in order to  avoid
    delay the matter should remain in the Upper Tribunal.

 4. The appeal was listed before me on 22 January 2013.

 5. Neither party had complied with directions.

 6. The appellant's representatives had applied two days before the hearing
    for an adjournment as they wanted further time to obtain and serve  new
    evidence. As in the refusal of the adjournment request, the application
    appeared to be somewhat at odds with the earlier concern that there  be
    minimum delay in a final determination of the appeal.

 7. Two days later, in any event,  the  new  evidence  was  served  on  the
    morning of the hearing.

 8. The respondent did not serve the visa application information  in  line
    with the specific direction of Judge Gibb. At  the  hearing  Mr  Walker
    confirmed that this information was not available to the  respondent. I
    was unable to ascertain why the  Tribunal  and  the  appellant's  legal
    representatives were not informed of this prior to the hearing.

 9. Mr Walker required time to read and consider the new  materials  served
    for the appellant, a psychiatric report, an expert report and a 28 page
    skeleton argument with 4 annexes.

10.  Having  considered  the  new  materials,  Mr  Walker  applied  for  an
    adjournment in order for the respondent to reconsider her  decision  in
    the light of the new materials. Ms Loughran indicted that she  did  not
    object to an adjournment on that basis.

11. I did not accept that an adjournment was necessary  or  appropriate  in
    order for the appeal to determined fairly and justly. Mr Walker was  in
    a position to deal with the new materials and indicate  any  change  in
    the respondent's position on the basis of those materials.  The  appeal
    has been litigated for some time and the principal of  finality  is  of
    importance. I indicated that I would not  adjourn  the  appeal  on  the
    ground put forward.

12. Mr Walker then took instructions and withdrew orally  the  respondent's
    decision of 11 July 2013. This withdrawal  of  the  underlying  removal
    decision,  from  which  arose  the  appeal  right  under  s.82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, did not equate to a  s.17
    withdrawal of the respondent's 'case' before the  Upper  Tribunal,  for
    which the permission of the Tribunal was required.  The respondent  had
    power at any time to withdraw  the  underlying  decision.  Indeed,  the
    respondent has the implied power,  subject  to  general  principles  of
    public law, to withdraw any decision taken under statute,  unless  such
    power is expressly excluded.

13. The appeal is dismissed as a nullity but there is no longer any removal
    decision against the appellant and her application  for  leave  remains
    before the respondent to be decided. Mr Walker undertook that in so far
    as it lay within his power the new decision would be  provided  at  the
    earliest opportunity. I also noted the undertaking in  paragraph  7  of
    the previous refusal letter to refer the appellant's claim to have been
    trafficked to  the  National  Referral  Mechanism.  I  could  not  find
    anything to show that this had been done. That would also appear to  be
    an outstanding matter for the respondent to address.

14. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed: [pic]                           Dated:
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt




