
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07627/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|on 8th March 2016                         |on 31st March 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    [R R]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Maguire
Solicitors    (Scotland) Ltd

For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born on [ ] 1986.  He has not asked
    for an anonymity direction.  He was detected on 10th November  2014  as
    an illegal entrant to the UK in the rear of a heavy goods vehicle,  and
    then sought asylum.

 2. The appellant has not disputed the respondent's summary of his original
    claim,  as  derived  from  the  information  he  gave,  summarised   at
    paragraphs 1 and 2 of the  respondent's  refusal  decision  dated  27th
    April  2015.   He  was  educated  to  first   year   university   level
    (sports/physical  education)  and  was  the  proprietor  of  a  women's
    clothing shop.  His father had been in the jash militia.  In their home
    area the population was 75%  Arab.   The  appellant  thought  that  the
    peshmerga would target him due to his father's and uncle's  involvement
    with the jash and with the  Ba'ath  party.   On  7th  August  2014  the
    appellant was warned of an impending ISIS incursion into his area.   He
    fled across the border and eventually to the UK.  His  fear  on  return
    was of ISIS, a risk increased due to his Kurdish background.

 3. The respondent accepted that the appellant is a Kurdish Iraqi national.
     His claim was considered to suggest no increased risk beyond  that  of
    the general Iraqi Kurdish population, and was considered "at  highest".
    The respondent held that there was  a  viable  relocation  alternative,
    namely to the Kurdish regions which had been affected only to a  lesser
    degree by ISIS offensives,  and  where  Kurdish  security  forces  were
    actively engaging against ISIS incursions (paragraph 16).  As a further
    alternative, the appellant might relocate to  Baghdad  (paragraph  17).
    The country guidance cases did not apply to his benefit.   The  general
    country situation did not establish a need for protection under Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive ("QD").

 4. In his rather sketchy grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the
    appellant said that he qualified as a refugee  on  grounds  of  imputed
    political opinion and of his Kurdish ethnicity; that Articles 2, 3  and
    8 of the ECHR applied; that he qualified for  humanitarian  protection;
    and that "sufficiency of protection [is] not an option in Iraq".

 5. Judge Fox heard the appeal at Glasgow on 22nd July  2015.   Mr  Caskie,
    who appeared at that stage, confirmed that the appellant did not insist
    on any case under Article 8 of the  ECHR  and  made  his  case  on  the
    background evidence such that he could not safely return to Iraq, based
    on a level of indiscriminate violence  meeting  the  terms  of  Article
    15(c) of the QD.

 6. At paragraph 18 of his decision  promulgated  on  21st  September  2015
    Judge Fox held that the figures referred to by Mr  Caskie  did  show  a
    slight increase in the level of violence but "nothing comparable to the
    previous full scale war";  that  there  were  certain  pockets  of  the
    country subject to violence, but these were  well  defined,  and  other
    areas were relatively calm; and that there was not a general  level  of
    indiscriminate violence throughout the country such that any individual
    was at real risk (paragraph 18).  At paragraph 24, the judge said  that
    he had taken account of the UNHCR's views published in October 2014.

 7. The appellant's Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal are as follows:

         "1.  The appellant predicated his case upon Article  15(c)  of  the
             Qualification Directive.

           2. The evidence before the judge arguably  established  that  the
             situation in Iraq had sufficiently deteriorated so as to allow
             the appeal [reference is made to an unreported decision, which
             was not followed up at the hearing in the UT].

           3. In light of R (EM (Eritrea)) [2014] UKSC 12 the judge arguably
             erred in limiting his consideration of the views of UNHCR.

           4. At paragraph 19 the judge drew a comparison between  the  rate
             of violence in Iraq and that in Northern Ireland from 1968  to
             1998, and so arguably had regard to an irrelevant matter.

           5. The judge suggested the situation in  Iraq  was  substantially
             better than five years ago.  Five years ago the  killing  rate
             was half of what it is now albeit nine to seven years  ago  it
             was higher.  The judge arguably failed to  accurately  analyse
             the evidence of the changing rate  of  atrocity  in  Iraq  and
             failed to provide adequate reasons.

           6. At paragraph 22 the judge stated accurately that  the  Country
             of Origin Information  Report  indicated  that  the  appellant
             could  move  to  Baghdad,  but  he  provided  no  reasons  for
             preferring that over the UNHCR evidence, despite the  guidance
             of the Supreme Court  of  the  weight  to  be  given  to  such
             evidence.

           7. The judge repeatedly referred to the most recent Iraq  country
             guidance cases, but in a country so changed he arguably  erred
             in law in doing so."

 8. On 12th November 2015 UT Judge Bruce granted permission, observing that
    the appellant is from a contested area within Iraq and  that  following
    AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 it was arguable  that  the
    judge erred in rejecting the  appellant's  submissions  in  respect  of
    Article 15(c), and that the findings on whether he  would  be  able  to
    internally relocate were unclear and incomplete.

 9. Rule 24 response by the respondent.  The conclusion reached by the  FtT
    on Article 15(c) was open to it, and properly takes  into  account  the
    background evidence  which  was  before  it.   Although  the  grant  of
    permission suggests there may be error in light of  AA,  that  decision
    was promulgated after the determination of the present appeal,  so  the
    FtT could not be criticised for  failing  to  refer  to  it.   The  FtT
    properly considered the case in light of the  background  evidence  and
    country guidance as it stood.

10. Submissions for appellant.  It  was  accepted  that  AA  had  not  been
    available to the FtT.  The sensible outcome in light of AA would be  to
    remit the case to the FtT to reach a fresh decision  in  the  light  of
    that case.  The relevant questions posed in AA had not been  asked  and
    answered in the FtT decision.   The judge referred at paragraphs 22 and
    24 to the respondent's Country of Origin Information Report and to  the
    UNHCR recommendations, but gave no reason for preferring one  over  the
    other.  At paragraph 19 the judge erred in his comparison of  rates  of
    violence, which was arithmetically  wrong.   Although  there  was  some
    force in the respondent's Rule 24 point, it was an error not to ask and
    answer the central questions even if these had not then been  laid  out
    in country guidance.  The judge had  effectively  been  invited  to  go
    beyond country guidance,  and  had  not  adequately  explained  why  he
    declined to do so.

11. Submissions for respondent.  The judge's  findings  were  sound,  based
    upon the country guidance and the background evidence before him.   The
    judge correctly said that the appellant could relocate in Baghdad or in
    Kurdish areas.  He did  not  explicitly  say  why  the  UNHCR  position
    recorded at paragraph 24 did not lead him to another view, but  he  was
    not bound to reach another conclusion, and he plainly took the evidence
    into  account.   The  judge  might  have  erred  in  his   arithmetical
    comparison of  levels  of  violence  in  Northern  Ireland  during  the
    troubles and in recent years in  Iraq,  but  the  general  analogy  was
    tenable and in any  event  those  observations  could  be  regarded  as
    irrelevant to the  rest  of  the  decision.   There  was  no  case  for
    remitting to the FtT.  It had not been shown  that  the  appellant  was
    likely to benefit from the guidance in AA.

12. Reply for appellant.   The  comments  of  Lord  Kerr  in  EM  on  UNHCR
    recommendations showed that these were more than part  of  the  general
    evidence, and merited "a  gold  star".   The  respondent's  Country  of
    Origin Information Report might properly be preferred, but  only  if  a
    good reason was given.  The appellant would succeed on an  analysis  in
    terms of AA because he "ticked at  least  five  of  the  seven  boxes",
    missing out only on not being a "lone female".

13. I reserved my determination.

14. I was not referred directly to  what  EM  (Eritrea)  said  about  UNHCR
    statements.  I note that UNHCR criticisms  about  Dublin  transfers  to
    Italy were given significant weight, but I detect no ruling that  UNHCR
    was a source of evidence generally to be  preferred  over  others.   At
    paragraph 74 Lord Kerr said:

         "The UNHCR material should form part of the overall examination  of
         the particular circumstances of each of the appellant's  cases,  no
         more and no less."

15. The UNHCR material referred to in this case states a position taken  on
    returns to Iraq in October 2014.  The conclusion reached  at  paragraph
    27 is that as the situation:

         "... remains highly fluid and volatile, and since all parts of  the
         country are reported to have been affected, directly or indirectly,
         by the ongoing crisis UNHCR urges states  not  to  forcibly  return
         persons originating from Iraq until tangible  improvements  in  the
         security and human rights situation have occurred."

    That is a recommendation, and not strictly a conclusion  about  general
    level of risk throughout the country.  UNHCR does go on to  state  that
    in principle denial of protection on the basis of  internal  flight  or
    relocation is not considered appropriate, but  that  does  not  exclude
    state parties to the  Refugee  Convention  reaching  other  conclusions
    either in particular cases, or in relation to different parts of Iraq.

16. The question here is not  what  UNHCR  recommended  at  the  time,  but
    whether the judge went wrong in law by concluding that  the  background
    evidence as a whole failed to establish the case of the appellant,  who
    had invited a finding of a  state  of  affairs  throughout  Iraq  which
    justified protection for all Iraqis under Article 15(c) of the QA.  The
    judge declined so to find.  So did the UT subsequently  in  AA,  having
    considered much more extensive evidence.

17. The UT in AA found a state of internal armed conflict in certain  parts
    of Iraq, but  not  all.   The  evidence  in  AA  included  the  UNHCR's
    position.  Relocation to certain areas was not found  to  be  generally
    unreasonable or  unduly  harsh.   In  assessing  such  issues,  certain
    factors are set out at paragraph 15(a) to (g).  There is no  conclusion
    that by ticking a certain number of  those  boxes  an  individual  will
    qualify for protection.  Nor is  it  clear  that  the  appellant  would
    readily meet as many of the factors as was claimed.  That assertion was
    made without going through the specific matters.  For example, there is
    no immediately obvious reason why the appellant would not  be  able  to
    obtain suitable identification.  He would be offered support on  return
    by the respondent.  There appears also to  be  some  support  available
    internally within Iraq.  He said at his initial interview that he spoke
    Kurdish Sorani and "a little Arabic", but that claimed minimal level of
    Arabic might be thought a little surprising, given his quite high level
    of education and his evidence that his home village of Gwer had  a  75%
    Arab population.

18. The conclusions of Judge Fox are broadly consistent  with  AA,  a  case
    contested in much more copious detail  between  the  parties  upon  all
    background evidence available at a hearing in May 2015.  This case  was
    decided in July  2015.   It  was  not  suggested  that  there  was  any
    significant  difference  between  the  background  evidence  at   those
    respective dates.

19. Indeed, there appears to have been reference in AA to information  from
    UNHCR which was more recent than that before Judge Fox about protection
    of civilians in the armed conflict in Iraq - see Appendix A,  page  62,
    citing UNHCR sources dated 23rd February 2015 and 17th March 2015.

20. The appellant has not shown  that  the  judge  ought  to  have  reached
    conclusions which were any more favourable to his case,  based  on  the
    background evidence before him.

21. If the appellant does  consider  that  he  can  construct  a  case  for
    protection under reference to the guidelines later produced in  AA  his
    route is by way of fresh submissions, not by identifying error in  this
    case.  I am fortified in the conclusion  that  there  was  no  material
    error by noting that it is not obvious that the  appellant  necessarily
    has any better a case once reference is made to the  detailed  findings
    in AA.

22. The judge's arithmetic about casualty rates in  Iraq  and  in  Northern
    Ireland was wrong, but that is irrelevant.

23. The determination of the FtT shall stand.

                           [pic]


                           14 March 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
