
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07284/2014
                                                               AA/07364/2014
                                                               IA/28183/2013
                                                               IA/42143/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 February 2016                  |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MS S V
                                   MS N V
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Braganza, Counsel instructed by Camden
                    Community Law Centre


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.   On  the  facts  of
this case, it is appropriate to continue that anonymity direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

      1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
         reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in the  First-
         Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the
         Appellant in  this  particular  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
         appeals against a decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Miller
         promulgated on 16 September  2015  ("the  Decision")  allowing  the
         Appellants' appeals on human  rights  grounds  but  dismissing  the
         appeals on protection grounds.  Permission to appeal was granted to
         the Respondent by a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
         dated 2 October 2015 on the  basis  that  in  allowing  the  Second
         Appellant's appeal on health grounds under Articles 3 and  8  ECHR,
         the Judge erred in not applying the guidance in  N  v  SSHD  [2005]
         UKHL 31 and that this error may have infected the allowing  of  the
         First Appellant's appeal.

      2. At the outset of the hearing, I raised  with  Ms  Braganza  whether
         there is a  cross  appeal  in  this  case.   It  is  noted  in  the
         Appellants' Rule 24 response.  There did not though  appear  to  be
         any formal application for permission to appeal  or  any  grant  of
         permission in relation to that ground.   Ms  Braganza's  solicitors
         were not present to check the  position  with  them.   I  therefore
         checked  the  Tribunal  file  and  confirmed  that  there  was   no
         application for permission to appeal filed by  the  Appellants  nor
         any grant of permission other  than  that  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Andrew.   Ms  Braganza  accepted  that  any  application  for
         permission to appeal would now be  out  of  time  and  the  hearing
         thereafter focussed only on the Decision in relation to the appeals
         on human rights grounds.

      3. The background facts so far as it is necessary to recite  them  are
         that the First Appellant is the mother  of  the  Second  Appellant.
         Both are nationals of India.  The Appellants arrived in the UK  and
         the First Appellant claimed asylum with the Second Appellant as her
         dependent.  This claim was based on the First Appellant's  fear  of
         her husband based on  past  incidents  of  domestic  violence.  Her
         husband (and the Second Appellant's father) is, it appears, now  in
         India. The Judge accepted the First Appellant's  account  including
         of an incident which occurred in the  UK  in  November  2011.   The
         Judge did not accept however that she would any longer be  at  risk
         on that account due to the passage of time.  It is worth noting  at
         this point that the Second Appellant does maintain contact with her
         father and he therefore appears to be aware of her and her mother's
         whereabouts.   The  Judge  found  in  the  alternative   that   the
         Appellants could internally relocate in India.  As I  note  at  [2]
         above, there is  no  valid  appeal  against  the  findings  on  the
         protection claim and I do not  therefore  need  to  dwell  on  this
         further.

      4. The Second Appellant was born on 27 March 1993.  She  is  the  only
         child of the First Appellant and her husband.  In 2003, the  Second
         Appellant was diagnosed with auto-immune haemolytic  anaemia.    In
         December 2011, whilst the Second Appellant was in the UK  with  her
         mother, her health deteriorated.  She was admitted to hospital  and
         diagnosed as having a lymphoma.  Following an application  on  this
         basis on compassionate grounds, she was granted three months  leave
         from January to April 2013.  She applied for an extension  to  that
         leave and the appeals against that refusal decision were stayed  so
         that consideration could also be given to the  asylum  claim  which
         was refused on 5 September 2014.  The  Second  Appellant's  current
         medical condition, prognosis and availability of treatment in India
         are the focal points of this appeal and I will  therefore  need  to
         return to those in more depth below.

      5. Following the grant of permission in relation to  the  allowing  of
         the appeal on human rights grounds, this appeal comes before me  to
         determine whether the Decision contains a  material  error  of  law
         and, if so, to either remit the appeals  or  re-make  the  Decision
         insofar as it relates to the human rights claims.

    Submissions

      6. Mr Avery relied on the Secretary of State's grounds as set  out  in
         the application for permission to appeal.  The main ground is  that
         the Judge erred in failing to follow the guidance in N v SSHD.   Mr
         Avery accepted that the  First  Appellant's  appeal  hangs  on  the
         outcome of the Second Appellant's appeal following the dismissal of
         the asylum claim.  He referred to the case of GS (India) and others
         v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and
         to the very high threshold required for a medical claim to  succeed
         under Article 3 ECHR.  This is  not,  he  submitted,  a  so  called
         "death bed" case.  It is not permissible to use Article 8  ECHR  to
         circumvent the high threshold in Article 3 and the Court of  Appeal
         made the point in GS that if a case could not succeed under Article
         3, it was highly unlikely that it could  succeed  under  Article  8
         absent the presence of other factors (see in particular  [111]  and
         following in GS).

      7. The Judge in this case allowed the appeal  on  the  basis  of  both
         Article 3 and Article 8.  I queried  with  Mr  Avery  whether  that
         would lead to the same result  in  relation  to  the  leave  to  be
         granted.  He confirmed that in both cases the period of leave would
         be  the  same  as  the  leave  in  medical   cases   is   essential
         discretionary  on  either  basis.  I  also  pointed  him   to   the
         Respondent's internal guidance on what constitutes a medical  claim
         which could succeed and asked if the Respondent's case is that  the
         Second Appellant's claim does not meet the  threshold  set  out  in
         that guidance.  He  submitted  that  this  guidance  is  simply  an
         expression of what was said by the Court  of  Appeal  in  GS.   The
         Respondent's position is therefore that the Second Appellant's case
         does not meet that test.

      8. Ms Braganza submitted that the Judge clearly had in mind  the  high
         threshold for a medical claim to succeed.  She pointed out that N v
         SSHD was referred to in the Respondent's decision letter  to  which
         the Judge has regard at [7] of the Decision.   She  submitted  that
         the Decision should be read as a whole, particularly in relation to
         the crucial evidence from the Second Appellant's  consultant.   The
         Second Appellant's condition is both extremely severe and rare. The
         evidence before the Judge  was  that  treatment  is  not  available
         except in the UK, the US and Germany.  She submitted that  this  is
         in fact a "death bed" case.

      9. Ms Braganza pointed  out  that  the  Presenting  Officer  asked  no
         questions of the consultant [19].  The Presenting Officer also made
         no submissions about the  evidence  from  the  consultant  and  the
         medical claim [21].  The Presenting Officer also indicated that she
         had no questions to put to the Appellants and they  were  therefore
         not called to give evidence [5].  Ms Braganza  submitted  that,  by
         appealing the Decision, the Respondent is seeking to have a  second
         bite of the cherry when no challenge was taken  previously  to  the
         evidence.  She submitted that this does not sit well with  what  is
         in essence a perversity challenge (even though  that  was  not  the
         basis for the grant of permission).

     10. In relation to Article 8, Ms Braganza submitted that this is on any
         view an exceptional case.  In relation to the First Appellant,  the
         evidence of the Second Appellant's consultant  is  that  the  First
         Appellant attends most appointments with her daughter.   She  noted
         in any event the Respondent's acceptance that the First Appellant's
         case probably stands or falls with the Second Appellant's case.

    Discussion and conclusions

     11. As I note at [4] above, the focal  point  of  this  appeal  is  the
         Second Appellant's medical condition.  As such, and  although  that
         evidence is already set out in some detail at [9] to  [17]  of  the
         Decision, I set out below a  summary  of  that  evidence   and  the
         Judge's findings about it as those are crucial to understanding how
         the Judge approached this issue.

     12. The medical evidence  in  relation  to  the  Second  Appellant  was
         presented to  the  Judge  by  Dr  Seneviratne  who  is  the  Second
         Appellant's lead  consultant  based  at  the  Royal  Free  Hospital
         national referral centre for immune deficiency which is the largest
         in Europe.  The Judge described him at [30] as  "one  of  the  most
         impressive witnesses I have seen in court".  In short summary,  the
         consultant's evidence is that the Second Appellant was referred  to
         the centre following the diagnosis of the lymphoma because her anti-
         body levels were so low.  She was diagnosed  with  Common  Variable
         Immune Deficiency (CVID).  Dr Seneviratne says  that  his  unit  is
         treating about three hundred patients with this  disorder  of  whom
         fifty have Combined Immune Deficiency (CID).

     13. In September  2014,  the  exact  mutation  from  which  the  Second
         Appellant  is  suffering  was  diagnosed  as  CTLA4.   The   Second
         Appellant's case is, according to Dr Seneviratne, the only case  in
         the UK and there are less than  forty  cases  in  the  world.   The
         Second Appellant has been considered for a marrow transplant but  a
         complete match could not be  found  as  the  First  Appellant  also
         carries the mutation.  The Second Appellant is being considered for
         a transplant  on  the  basis  of  the  best  available  match.   Dr
         Seneviratne's evidence is that this will improve her prognosis  but
         the evidence before the Judge was that with or without a transplant
         her prognosis is not good and even a transplant may not improve her
         chances of  survival.   Dr  Seneviratne  says  that  he  was  given
         permission to start the Second Appellant on a trial drug which  has
         had some success in Germany but there are known  complications  and
         lack of success  in  many  cases  so  a  transplant  remains  under
         consideration.  The Judge noted at [30] that the Second Appellant's
         prospects of survival even with a transplant  are  no  better  than
         50%.

     14. Dr Seneviratne's evidence in relation to treatment in India is that
         South Asia is not good on immunology.  He also works in  Sri  Lanka
         so has some experience.  He says however that he could  not  manage
         the Second Appellant's case there because her treatment requires  a
         team effort.

     15. The Judge's findings on the Second  Appellant's  medical  condition
         and the impact of that on the removal of  both  Appellants  are  at
         [30] to [34] of the Decision and  bear  repetition.   I  start  the
         citation however with the Judge's conclusion on the asylum claim at
         [29] because, as Ms Braganza points out, the juxtaposition  of  the
         two is essential to consideration of the Judge's thinking:-

             "[29]     It follows from what I have said above that I do not
             consider  that  either  the  first  Appellant  or  the  second
             Appellant, as her dependent, would be at risk of serious  ill-
             treatment  such  as  to  engage  Article  3,   or   that   the
             circumstances are such that they are entitled to  humanitarian
             protection.

             [30]      With regard to the second Appellant's condition, and
             the problems that this poses the position could hardly be more
             different.  I found Dr Seneviratne one of the most  impressive
             witnesses I have seen in court.  He is clearly intelligent and
             as expert in his field as it is possible to be.  I detected no
             suggestion whatsoever  that  anything  he  said  was  slanted,
             exaggerated or presented in such a way as to suggest  that  he
             was being anything other than objective.  It is clear that the
             second Appellant's condition  is  extremely  severe,  and  her
             prospects of survival, even  if  she  obtains  a  bone  marrow
             transplant, are no better than 50%.

             [31]       In  the  second  Appellant's  refusal  letter,  the
             Respondent  has  referred  to  the  availability  of   medical
             services, and the drugs which the Appellant was taking at  the
             time in India.  In most cases, this  is,  of  course,  a  very
             reasonable approach for the Respondent to take.   However,  Dr
             Seneviratne made clear that the level of expertise required in
             the second Appellant's case is simply  not  available  outside
             the UK, the USA and Germany.  Indian hospitals would be better
             than UK hospitals if a patient was suffering from TB  or  very
             many other  diseases.   However,  in  a  world  of  increasing
             specialisation, immunology, particularly at the level required
             for treatment of the second Appellant is simply not  available
             in India.

             [32]      I am in no doubt that, were the second Appellant  to
             be returned to India, she would be dead within a short  period
             of time.  This is  not,  of  course,  to  say  that  her  life
             expectancy in the UK is necessarily good.  However, the  facts
             are such that I find her circumstances are sufficiently severe
             to constitute a breach of Article 3, were she to be removed to
             India.

             [33]      With regard to Article 8 of ECHR,  whilst  it  would
             not appear that the second Appellant meets the requirements of
             paragraph 276ADE or Appendix  FM,  I  also  have  to  consider
             whether there are any exceptional  circumstances  which  might
             warrant justification of a grant of leave  to  remain  outside
             the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   For  the  reasons
             which I have previously given I  do  not  see  that  it  is  a
             practical option for the second Appellant to travel  to  India
             at the present time.  It  would  mean  a  severance  from  the
             course of treatment which she  has  been  undergoing  in  this
             country, and it would involve a complete change in the medical
             team  responsible  for  her  health.   The  circumstances  are
             exceptional indeed, and it would be extraordinarily harsh  for
             her to be removed.  I therefore find that  her  removal  would
             breach Article 8.

             [34]      Turning to the position of the first Appellant,  any
             course  of  action  which  resulted  in  her  and  the  second
             Appellant being separated would be inhumane.   As  the  second
             Appellant's closest relative (along with her father who  would
             appear to  have  returned  to  India),  the  second  Appellant
             clearly needs her mother, even allowing for the fact that  she
             is now 22 years old.  Suffering from appalling illnesses,  and
             facing a very uncertain  future,  the  second  Appellant  will
             inevitably need somebody close, to whom she can  talk  and  if
             necessary share  her  innermost  feelings.   Equally,  as  her
             mother, the first  Appellant  is  clearly  anxious  about  her
             daughter and it would not be appropriate to  take  any  course
             which would result in the first  Appellant  being  removed  to
             India whilst her daughter remains in  the  country  undergoing
             treatment."

     16. Mr Avery invited  me  to  read  carefully  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         judgment in GS (India) and others as setting out the applicable law
         in relation to a medical claim such as the Second  Appellant's.   I
         of course accept that the Judge did not do this and in spite of  Ms
         Braganza's submission that the Judge must  be  taken  to  have  had
         regard to the guidance in N v SSHD because it was  referred  to  in
         the Respondent's decision letter, there is nothing on the  face  of
         the Decision which indicates that this has  been  done.   There  is
         however, an indication at [32] that the Judge recognised the  level
         of severity required to justify a finding of a breach of Article  3
         ECHR.  It is of course the case, as N  v  SSHD  makes  clear,  that
         medical claims are in a different category to  claims  against  the
         State for its own actions. However, this is an indication that  the
         Judge recognised that the threshold was a high one.  As Ms Braganza
         also pointed out, the juxtaposition of the  Judge's  conclusion  in
         relation to the asylum claim and the medical claim also shows  that
         the Judge was aware that the ill  treatment  required  to  found  a
         successful Article 3 claim is high.   The issue for me  is  whether
         the Judge's conclusion that the threshold is reached in  this  case
         for the reasons he gives is justified when considered in the  light
         of the judgment in GS (India).

     17. The facts of the cases in  GS  (India)  were  also  extreme.   They
         varied but the main cases concerned individuals who were  receiving
         kidney dialysis in the UK, some of whom it  was  envisaged  may  be
         able to receive transplants in the UK and some  of  whom  would  be
         unable to access dialysis in their home countries due either to the
         cost of that treatment or the lack of availability of it.   I  note
         at once though that for the most part, the lack of treatment in the
         home country was based not on a complete lack  of  availability  of
         treatment but on an inability to access it due to cost or  lack  of
         resources.  In practical terms, that may make little difference  if
         an individual is nonetheless unable to receive  treatment  but  the
         complete lack of availability of treatment in her home country is a
         distinguishing feature of the Second Appellant's case.

     18. I also note the reference at [70] to GM's case and the fact that GM
         had by then been accepted by Guy's Hospital for a transplant and  a
         donor had been found.  The Second Appellant does not  yet  have  an
         available donor but her consultant has indicated the  intention  of
         his centre to carry out a transplant of the best available match in
         order to increase her chances of survival.   The  Court  of  Appeal
         observed that on the changed circumstances in GM's  case  based  on
         the acceptance by the Hospital that he should receive a  transplant
         and having identified a donor, it was possible that  removal  prior
         to that transplant would breach Article 3 "on the specific  footing
         that to deprive him of such an imminent and transformative  medical
         recourse amounts to inhuman treatment".

     19. I turn then to what the Court of Appeal held to  be  the  essential
         ratio of N v SSHD in order to consider that against  the  facts  of
         the Second Appellant's case.  That is cited at [65] of  GS  (India)
         as follows:-

             "[15]     Is there, then, some other rationale [sc. other than
             the pressing nature of the humanitarian claim] underlying  the
             decisions in the many immigration cases where  the  Strasbourg
             court has distinguished D's case?  I believe  there  is.   The
             essential distinction is  not  to  be  found  in  humanitarian
             differences.  Rather it lies in  recognising  that  article  3
             does  not  require  contracting  states   to   undertake   the
             obligation  of  providing  aliens  indefinitely  with  medical
             treatment lacking in their home countries.  In the cases of  D
             and  in  later  cases  the  Strasbourg  court  has  constantly
             reiterated that  in  principle  aliens  subject  to  expulsion
             cannot claim any entitlement to remain in the territory  of  a
             contracting state in order to benefit from medical, social and
             other forms of assistance provided  by  the  expelling  state.
             Article  3  imposes  no  such  'medical  care'  obligation  on
             contracting states.  This is so even where, in the absence  of
             medical treatment, the life of the would-be immigrant will  be
             significantly shortened.  But in the case  of  D,  unlike  the
             later cases, there was no question of imposing any  obligation
             on the United Kingdom. D was dying and  beyond  the  reach  of
             medical treatment then available" (per Lord Nicholls)

             "[36]     What was it then that made the case exceptional?  It
             is to be found, I think, in the  references  to  D's  'present
             medical condition' (para 50) and  to  the  fact  that  he  was
             terminally ill (paras 51: 'the advanced states of  a  terminal
             and incurable illness'; para 52: 'a terminally ill man';  para
             53: 'the critical stage now reached in the  applicant's  fatal
             illness'; Judge Pettiti: 'the final  stages  of  an  incurable
             illness').  It was the fact that he was already terminally ill
             while still present in the territory of  the  expelling  state
             that made his case exceptional" (per Lord Hope)

             "[69]     In my view, therefore, the test,  in  this  sort  of
             case, is whether the applicant's illness has  reached  such  a
             critical stage (ie he is  dying)  that  it  would  be  inhuman
             treatment to deprive him of the care  which  he  is  currently
             receiving and send him home to an early death unless there  is
             care available there to enable him  to  meet  that  fate  with
             dignity." (per Lady Hale)

     20. As the Judge observed in relation  to  the  Second  Appellant,  her
         condition is extremely severe and even if she receives a transplant
         her chances of survival are less than evens [30].  The  Judge  also
         accepts the proposition as set out in N v SSHD and GS (India)  that
         in most cases it is reasonable to point to availability of care  in
         a person's home country as an answer.  However, as the Judge notes,
         the  Second  Appellant's  condition  is  extremely  rare  and   the
         treatment is simply not available in India.  This  is  not  a  case
         where the treatment is available but limited by resources in India,
         of inferior quality to the UK or  too  costly  for  the  person  to
         access.  This is a case where the treatment simply does  not  exist
         there.  This is also a case where  the  Judge  has  found  (without
         challenge) that if the Second Appellant were returned to India  she
         would be dead within a short time (although the Judge accepts  that
         her prognosis may not be good in the UK  either).   Unlike  in  the
         case of D, there is no suggestion that the Second  Appellant  would
         be faced with destitution on return to India and  would  suffer  an
         inhuman death there by reason of the lack of  family  to  care  for
         her.  However, her condition is, by reason of the factors which the
         Judge has identified and which I set out above, extremely  serious.
         This is also a case where, as I note  at  [13]  above,  the  Second
         Appellant's consultant in the  UK  has  accepted  that  she  should
         receive a transplant.  Unlike the cases in GS (India),  this  might
         not mark the end of the medical intervention needed to  ensure  her
         survival because of the likelihood that  her  immune  system  would
         reject the transplanted marrow.  As is noted in the account of  the
         evidence at [14] and [15] of the Decision even a marrow  transplant
         carries  a  high  risk.   However,  if  she  does  not  receive   a
         transplant, the consultant marks her  life  expectancy  in  months.
         The same is said if treatment were withdrawn.

     21. Although I accept that the Judge has not carried out  the  analysis
         of the case law and guidance when considering  whether  removal  of
         the Second Appellant would breach Article 3, I am  satisfied  that,
         properly understood and on the extreme facts of this case, there is
         no misdirection as to the threshold and that the finding that there
         would be a breach of Article 3 is one which was open to the  Judge.
         The issue for me is not whether  I  would  have  reached  the  same
         conclusion but whether the conclusion reached is one which was open
         to the Judge on the evidence and taking into account the very  high
         threshold.  This is a borderline case but I am satisfied  that  the
         factual circumstances of this case are so unusual and extreme  that
         they warrant the finding made.

     22. I noted at [7] above that  the  Home  Office  guidance  on  medical
         claims suggested to me that this may be an appropriate case  for  a
         finding of a breach of Article 3.  Although this was not  something
         considered by the Judge - perhaps  unsurprisingly  given  that  the
         Presenting Officer made no submissions on the medical claim - it is
         convenient to set out the  guidance  since  it  is  said  to  be  a
         statement of the Home Office  policy  and  also  because  Mr  Avery
         accepted that it is designed to reflect the guidance  in  the  case
         law (and indeed it closely reflects the wording of [69] of GS) :-

             "... Home Office policy  is  to  accept  that  an  applicant's
             article 3 (medical) rights would be  breached  by  removal  to
             their country of origin only if:

                . Their illness has  reached  such  a  critical  stage  (the
                  applicant is dying) and the conditions to which they  will
                  be returned are such that it would be inhuman or degrading
                  treatment to:

                    o  deprive  them  of  the  care  they   are   currently
                      receiving, and

                    o send them home to an early  death  (unless  there  is
                      care available  there  to  allow  them  to  die  with
                      dignity)"

         On the facts of this case, that test would appear to  be  met.    I
         make clear that I intend no criticism of  the  Respondent  for  not
         accepting that the Second Appellant's case meets this test.   As  I
         have noted, this is  a  borderline  case  and  in  any  event,  the
         evidence before the Respondent at the time of her decision  appears
         to have been less detailed than the evidence before the Judge.

     23. For the foregoing reasons I am satisfied that, notwithstanding  the
         Judge's failure to make reference to the guidance in  the  relevant
         case law, the finding that removal of the  Second  Appellant  would
         breach her Article 3 rights is  not  in  error.   There  was  ample
         evidence to support that finding and the Judge  did  not  misdirect
         himself as to the threshold required to meet that test.

     24. In light of that conclusion, I do not, strictly, need to deal  with
         the Judge's finding that the Second Appellant could succeed in  any
         event under Article 8 ECHR.  If I had found an error of law in  the
         Judge's consideration of whether Article 3  would  be  breached  by
         removal in this case, I would agree with the  Respondent  that  the
         Judge misdirected himself in relation to Article  8.   As  is  made
         clear at [111] and following in GS (India),  Article  8  is  not  a
         makeweight for a medical claim which cannot succeed  under  Article
         3.  There may in the circumstances of this case  be  other  factors
         which could be  prayed  in  aid  in  consideration  of  the  Second
         Appellant's Article 8 private and family life.  However,  the  only
         factor relied upon by the Judge at [33] is her  medical  condition.
         As I indicate above, the finding that she succeeds  on  that  basis
         under Article 3 is one which was open to the  Judge.   However,  if
         the finding had been otherwise in that  regard,  the  reasoning  at
         [33] is an inadequate basis for a finding that her Article 8 rights
         are breached by  removal.   There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Second
         Appellant's medical condition is an exceptional circumstance but if
         that could not succeed  under  Article  3  (which  is  an  absolute
         right), it could not on  its  own  succeed  under  Article  8  when
         balanced against the public interest.

     25. Mr Avery accepted that the First Appellant's case stands  or  falls
         with the Second Appellant's.  The  challenge  in  the  Respondent's
         written grounds is to the absence of reasons  for  finding  in  the
         First Appellant's favour.  However, as Ms Braganza  submits  and  I
         accept, the Judge  has  made  findings  that  the  First  Appellant
         provides emotional support to the Second Appellant  in  the  UK  so
         that, notwithstanding the Second Appellant's  adulthood,  there  is
         clearly  an   emotional   dependency.    The   Second   Appellant's
         consultant's evidence is that her mother usually accompanies her to
         appointments.  The reasoning at [34] for the Judge's conclusion  is
         admittedly short.  However, once it is  accepted  that  the  Second
         Appellant cannot be removed, the reasoning is adequate on the basis
         that this renders the First Appellant's case exceptional.

     26. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is no material
         error of law in the Decision and I uphold it.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point  of  law.  I  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision
promulgated on 16 September 2015 with the consequence that  the  appeals  of
the Appellants are allowed on human rights grounds only.


Signed           [pic] Date   23 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
