
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07432/2014
                                                               AA/07434/2014
                                                               AA/07436/2014
                                                               AA/07429/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                                   SFH (1)
                                   GF (2)
                                   MOF (3)
                                   FF (4)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A  Pretzell,  Counsel  instructed  by  Harris  Ali
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The History of the Appeals

1.   The Appellants, respectively a husband  and  wife  and  their  son  and
    daughter, citizens of Pakistan, appealed against the refusal  of  their
    political asylum applications.  The first Appellant, the father,  sadly
    passed away a week before  the  hearing.   The  appeals  of  the  other
    Appellants were heard on 27 April 2015 at Hatton Cross  by  Immigration
    Judge Housego.  Both parties were represented,  the  Appellants  by  Mr
    Pretzell.  In a decision of 30 May, promulgated on 3  June,  2015,  the
    appeals were dismissed on political asylum and Articles 3 and  8  human
    rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Osborne on 30  June  2015  in
    the following terms:

         "1.  The grounds seek permission to appeal a decision  and  reasons
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego who  in  a  decision  and
             reasons promulgated 3  June  2015  dismissed  the  Appellants'
             appeals on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human  rights
             grounds.

             The appeal of SFH (AA/07432/2014) is discontinued as he died a
             week before the appeal hearings.

         2.   The grounds assert that  the  Judge  misdirected  himself  and
             failed to  consider  relevant  evidence  and  failed  to  give
             adequate reasons for his findings, thereby falling in material
             error of law.  At [80-89] the Judge  identified  a  number  of
             discrepancies in the evidence which led to  his  rejection  of
             the account of events in Pakistan.  In assessing this evidence
             he failed to take into account his own acceptance that MOF  is
             homosexual [92] and had attempted suicide  Pakistan  [91]  and
             the objective evidence about the position  of  homosexuals  in
             Pakistan.  The Judge accepted  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
             homosexual and  that  two  of  the  Appellants  had  attempted
             suicide.  The objective evidence establishes that Pakistan  is
             a country where homosexuals may be at risk.  The Judge  should
             have considered  whether  the  inconsistencies  he  identified
             might represent further embellishment of a genuine  claim  but
             he failed entirely to consider that  possibility.   The  Judge
             made no finding of fact about the reason for  MOF's  attempted
             suicide.  He failed to direct himself or to consider that this
             was an attempted suicide by  a  young  male  homosexual  in  a
             country where homosexual acts are  criminalised,  regarded  as
             sinful, and expose the perpetrators potentially  to  death  or
             very serious harm.  The Judge failed entirely to consider this
             matter beyond rejecting the specific claim to have been caught
             in flagrante.  He failed to  consider  whether  the  attempted
             suicide was likely to be related to  MOF's  homosexuality  and
             the potential consequences.  The Judge accepted that  MOF  had
             adopted a homosexual lifestyle in the United Kingdom but  held
             that he had not done so in Pakistan.  The wording of  [92]  is
             obscure and the meaning of the Judge is wholly unclear.

         3.   In an otherwise careful and focused decision and reasons it is
             nonetheless arguable  that  the  Judge's  words  at  [92]  are
             obscure and unclear.   It  is  arguable  that  the  Appellants
             should know precisely why the appeals were dismissed but it is
             arguable  that  the  wording  of  [92]  is  too  difficult  to
             understand.  The obscure  wording  is  in  itself  capable  of
             amounting to a material error of law.  It is further  arguable
             that the Judge's findings at [95] is a further material  error
             of law.  If MOF has adopted a gay lifestyle in the UK but  the
             Judge finds that he would not do so in Pakistan then the Judge
             arguably should have gone on to consider why he would  not  do
             so in Pakistan.  If the answer to that question is  due  to  a
             fear of persecution, then it is arguable that the Judge should
             have decided the appeal differently.

         4.   As these arguable errors of law have been identified, all  the
             issues raised in the grounds are arguable."

3.   In a Rule 24 response of 7 July 2015 the Respondent submitted that  the
    decision did not reflect any error of law and should be upheld.

4.   The second, third and fourth  Appellants  attended  the  error  of  law
    hearing before  me  on  8  October  2015.   Both  representatives  made
    submissions, Mr Pretzell  expanding  upon  his  comprehensive  skeleton
    argument.  I reserved my decision.

Decision

5.   My  findings  are,  concisely,  those  which  Judge  Osborne  found  at
    paragraph 3 of his decision to be arguable.  In relation to the  second
    Appellant, the key paragraph in the decision is  paragraph  92.   Sadly
    this is obscure to the point of being unintelligible.  At paragraph  12
    of  his  skeleton  argument  Mr  Pretzell  discusses   three   possible
    constructions of it.  Paragraph 95 does not explain how it is that  the
    Appellant can reasonably be expected to adopt a discreet  lifestyle  in
    Pakistan, the more so in the light  of  HJ  (Iran)  and  HT  (Cameroon)
    [2010] UKSC 31 with the "Lord  Hope  test"  in  paragraph  35  of  that
    judgement.

6.   Paragraph 93 of the decision treats as irrelevant  the  action  of  the
    fourth Appellant which, according to her evidence, was a consequence of
    the second Appellant's orientation.  To  decline  to  reach  a  finding
    about this was itself a material error of law.

7.   Although in other respects full and careful, the key  findings  in  the
    decision of Judge Housego are uncertain and flawed to the  extent  that
    the decision cannot stand.  I have therefore to set it aside.

Disposal

8.   In this event Mr Pretzell urged me to allow the appeal  of  the  second
    Appellant, on the basis that, based upon  the  judicial  findings,  the
    weight of the background evidence so dictated.  He  accepted  that  the
    appeals of the third and fourth Appellants would have  to  be  reheard.
    Mr Tarlow submitted that the circumstances of the three Appellants were
    inseparable, so that their appeals should be reheard together.

9.   I recognise the force of Mr  Pretzell's  submission  in  narrowing  the
    issues for decision.  I have however concluded that, since all  of  the
    appeals turn upon the orientation of the second Appellant, I ought not,
    as a judge who  has  not  heard  evidence,  to  reach  a  determinative
    finding, based upon a decision which I  have  set  aside,  which  would
    limit the fact-finding scope of the judge who has to hear  evidence  of
    the third and fourth and perhaps in any event of the second  Appellant.
    I have therefore concluded that the three appeals require to be reheard
    in their entirety.  No part of the first decision is preserved.   Since
    this will involve traversing a substantial volume of  evidence,  it  is
    appropriate for the appeals to be reheard in the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    by any judge other than Judge Housego.

Decision

10.  The original decision contained an error of law and is set aside.

11.  The appeal is to be reheard in the First-tier  Tribunal  by  any  judge
    other than Judge Housego.

12.  The anonymity direction is preserved.


Signed   Dated: 12 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

