
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07184/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 September 2015                          |On 23 March 2016              |



                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                    [Z M]
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W Evans, Templeton Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, [ZM], was born on [ ] 1990 and claims to be a citizen of
    Somalia.  The appellant was refused asylum on 8 September 2014  when  a
    decision was also taken to remove her from  the  United  Kingdom.   She
    appealed against that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  K
    Henderson)  which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  1  December  2014
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The basis of the appellant's claim was that she is  a  Somali  national
    from Chula Island which is part of the Bajuni Island complex  and  that
    she is of Bajuni ethnicity.  She claimed to have been raped by  members
    of the majority Darood clan who also killed  her  mother.   She  claims
    asylum on the basis of her ethnicity and that she will be at real  risk
    of persecution or ill-treatment at  the  hands  of  majority  clans  in
    southern Somalia.  She relied upon an  expert  report  prepared  by  Dr
    Derek Nurse.

 3. At [51], the judge concluded her analysis by finding that the appellant
    was not a credible witness and that she was not a  citizen  of  Somalia
    and that she would not be returned to that country.

 4. Granting permission to appeal, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  noted
    that the judge had concluded that she should prefer the Sprakab  Report
    upon which the respondent relies, rather than the report of  Dr  Nurse.
    The question is whether  the  judge's  conclusions  are  equivocal  and
    unclear (as Judge McWilliam found that it was arguable that they  were)
    or, indeed, perverse.  The grounds of appeal  exclusively  concern  the
    report of Dr Nurse upon which the appellant relies.

 5. The judge was concerned [28] that Dr Nurse had never met the appellant.
     She also noted that there  was  no  full  transcript  of  a  telephone
    interview upon which Dr Nurse had  relied.   The  judge  considered  Dr
    Nurse's report against that from Sprakab and concluded,

       When I compare the depth of the Dr Nurse's report  in  terms  of  the
       linguistic analysis of the Appellant with the Sprakab report it  does
       emphasise  that  the  expert  has  very  carefully   considered   the
       Appellant's language and accent. I note  that  he  has  made  general
       criticisms of the interview. However he has  specifically  considered
       the linguistic analysis and  the  conclusions.  He  agrees  with  the
       expert that the  Appellant's  mother  tongue  is  Swahili.  He  notes
       however that the assertions regarding exactly where  the  Appellant's
       Swahili  originates  includes  the  coastal  regions  of  Kenya   and
       Tanzania. He notes however that these are not mentioned in  the  data
       analysis. He also notes that in the first paragraph (section 2.2)  of
       the Sprakab report five Swahili words are listed in  support  of  the
       claim that her speech exhibits "phonological features congruent  with
       those of Kenyan Swahili." He comments that the phonological  features
       characterise not just Kenyan Swahili but Swahili spoken  by  tens  of
       millions of people in all countries where Swahili is spoken. He notes
       that the Sprakab analysis ignores material in Bajuni. He  notes  that
       the  second   paragraph   of   the   report   refers   to   5   short
       sentences/phrases and states that the  Appellant  uses  grammatically
       correct Swahili. He agrees with this but he does not agree that these
       are Kenya specific features.  He  submits  that  these  are  features
       present in the Swahili spoken by tens of millions in Kenya, Tanzania,
       Burundi, southern Somalia and Rwanda. He states it would be clear  by
       putting them side-by-side with the same Bajuni sentences to show that
       they are in fact identical.

 6. The judge's detailed analysis continued at [34-38]:

          With regard to the third paragraph of the report (section 2.4)  Dr
       Nurse notes that the Sprakab report refers to the use of  five  words
       to support the claim  that  her  speech  "exhibits  lexical  features
       congruent with those of Kenyan Swahili." He states firstly that these
       words are not particular to Kenyan Swahili and are used widely across
       the Swahili speaking word and that three of the five words are wrong.
       He gives his explanation as to why these three words  are  incorrect.
       He notes that other  than  supporting  the  general  claim  that  the
       Appellant speaks Swahili all the other  datasets  do  not  prove  the
       claims advanced.

          The expert notes that the Appellant does not speak Bajuni but  has
       Bajuni elements in her Swahili. He states that this may be  explained
       in two ways. Either she is not really a Bajuni and  has  learnt  bits
       and pieces which she inserts into her Swahili base, or  that  she  is
       "code switching." He explains code switching in  his  report  as  the
       process whereby individuals mix the two  language  varieties  whereby
       one acts as the  matrix  language  and  the  other  as  the  embedded
       language.

          The expert notes that there  is  no  supporting  evidence  to  the
       assertion that the Appellant speaks a variety  of  Swahili  found  in
       Kenya. He states that the only evidence given consists of  the  three
       words under linguistic data and that they do not support  this  claim
       because they are used by millions  of  Swahili  speakers  in  several
       countries Kenya. He also asks  the  question  what  are  the  general
       features of Kenyan Swahili? He also notes that several  varieties  of
       Swahili (not Bajuni) used in Somalia derived from those in Kenya  and
       so it is hardly surprising there is no clear line between those kinds
       of Swahili and that of Kenya. It is also his opinion that there is no
       supporting evidence for the assertion that "it is very unlikely" that
       she speaks the type of Swahili found in Somalia. He  notes  that  the
       Sprakab report does not state which variety  of  Somali  Swahili  the
       applicant does not speak he notes that there are  five  varieties  of
       Swahili which  have  been  or  are  spoken  in  southern  Somalia  by
       minorities.

          I accept from the information I have given above that the  experts
       report should be given  weight.  He  has  provided  a  very  detailed
       analysis of the Appellant's  language  and  I  conclude  logical  and
       detailed reasons for rejecting the Sprakab report. My  conclusion  is
       that the expert has given clear facts to support the  conclusions  he
       has come to. I make this finding taking into account that this expert
       has a very jaundiced view of Sprakab reports.

          Dr Nurse has also considered the Appellant's local  knowledge.  He
       notes that she was allegedly born in 1990 just before the  exodus  to
       the Kenyan refugee camp occurred. She would have  had  little  or  no
       opportunity to acquire local knowledge or traditional lore. He  notes
       that she had no formal secular education and  that  judgements  about
       large numbers, dates, distance, numbers and time  are  likely  to  be
       unreliable. He has considered the questions  asked  about  Chula  and
       Bajuni life. He notes that the Appellant has answered correctly. Most
       of her answers are generic and anyone on the coast would give similar
       answers. Others are Bajuni specific although not Chula  specific.  He
       also notes that two of the replies are useful information because  it
       is detailed information known only to local Bajunis.  He  also  notes
       that the Appellant cannot be blamed for not mentioning  what  she  is
       not asked. I agree with him that the depth of the questions asked  is
       not clear  from  the  knowledge  assessment.  In  order  to  properly
       consider the Appellant's  knowledge  it  is  necessary  to  see  what
       questions were asked and what kind of knowledge is required  to  show
       her particular origins.

 7. The judge considered that  Dr  Nurse  had  expressed  "valid  concerns"
    regarding the Sprakab analysis [41],  notwithstanding  those  concerns,
    the judge went on to reject Dr Nurse's conclusions.   She  did  so  for
    reasons set out at [43-49] of her decision:

          There remain however significant difficulties with the Appellant's
       account and inconsistencies which the expert does not appear to  have
       thought relevant but are important factors to be taken into  account.
       The expert does appear to concentrate on the positive aspects of  the
       Appellants language and knowledge. For example I would  question  how
       the Appellant would not know how fishermen  catch  fish  if  she  has
       lived all her life on Chula in a fishing community. He omits analysis
       of certain information for example the Appellant's response  to  what
       crops are grown on Chula island.  The  Appellant  states  that  corn,
       maize, sorghum, banana and tomatoes are all grown. Is this correct or
       is it simply generic information?

          The Appellant states the name of a mosque on Chula  and  that  she
       does not know the other ones. The expert does not comment on that. If
       there is just one mosque then why does the Appellant not state  this?
       I question why she would not know the names of all the mosques if she
       is living on an island where she has lived her  whole  life  and  the
       island can be walked from north to south in ninety minutes.  Even  if
       she does not visit the whole island I find it  implausible  that  she
       would not get to know the names of these mosques  during  the  twenty
       three years she lived there.

          A further question I have is  over  Dr  Nurse's  analysis  of  the
       Appellant's type of Swahili. He states in his expert report  that  at
       one end of the scale there is more or less full fluency in Bajuni and
       that such individuals "tend to be elderly and living on the islands."
       He contrasts that with the language shift which occurred as a  result
       of the refugee camps in Kenya. I am puzzled as to why  the  Appellant
       would not speak full fluent Bajuni if she remained on the island  and
       did not experience this movement to Kenya. Her account  is  that  she
       remains living on the island with her mother. Her mother was of  that
       older generation. Putting this into the background presented  by  the
       expert I am puzzled as to why the Appellant would not  have  retained
       fluent Bajuni given her upbringing with people who had  always  lived
       on the island and because she was remained  there.  Where  would  the
       dilution have occurred in her case? Why would her Bajuni be like that
       of those in the refugee camps if she had never been  in  those  camps
       and remained on the island? There is a gap  in  the  explanation  for
       this scenario. The language analysis describes what would  happen  if
       the Appellant was living or had lived in the refugee camps.  It  does
       not explain her circumstances.

          A further factor became apparent during the hearing. I  asked  the
       Appellant to clarify whether or not she had any education. I noted in
       her interview that she stated that she had never been to  school  and
       that she had always lived on Chula Island and never travelled to  the
       mainland except when she left. I asked how she was able to write  her
       name at the end of the interview. She at first stated  that  she  had
       been able to learn this as a result of classes. I noted however  that
       although the Appellant had  not  signed  a  screening  interview  the
       substantive interview took place 19 days later and she then wrote her
       name. She stated that she was able to look at the paper and copy  her
       name. I noted that the Appellant has signed her name in  the  western
       script four times throughout the substantive interview. She signed in
       her full name. Whilst I am not an expert in handwriting or literacy I
       do not accept that it is credible that she would have  obtained  this
       knowledge within two weeks of arriving in the United Kingdom or  that
       she would have been able to simply copy the letters.

          The interviewer asked the Appellant to  give  specific  dates  and
       times of departure and various incidents of her life.  My  experience
       in dealing with individuals who have no education is  that  they  may
       have difficulties in recalling specific dates. However her  responses
       to questions asked  indicates  that  she  is  aware  of  the  western
       calendar and she is also able to gives precise information  in  terms
       of times.  I  am  aware  that  she  may  have  learnt  some  of  this
       information from some source. However the reading  of  her  interview
       would indicate that she does have a knowledge of not only  times  and
       calendars but also basic numbers.

          The Appellant has stated that a neighbour helped her to leave  the
       island and paid an agent taken from the island. It is unclear  why  a
       neighbour would agree to spend what must be a sizeable  sum  for  her
       departure not only from Somalia but  through  several  other  unknown
       countries and to cover the costs of false documents and the expertise
       of an agent. I do not find it credible  that  a  neighbour  would  be
       willing to spend this money in assisting the Appellant. The  decision
       to bring the Appellant  to  the  United  Kingdom  indicates  detailed
       planning including a specific end destination.  The  Appellant  would
       have to cross many borders and take several  flights  with  documents
       which would be scrutinised in a number of airports.  I  question  for
       example why the neighbour would simply not arrange for the  Appellant
       to go to Kenya with her child to avoid immediate risk.  This  journey
       would have been quicker and cheaper. She would also  be  going  to  a
       place with a sizeable Somali diaspora.  My  conclusion  is  that  the
       Appellant's account is not credible in terms of her exit from Chula.

          The Respondent raised the  issue  of  the  Appellant  leaving  her
       child. Whilst I accept that many mothers take desperate  measures  in
       desperate situations I do find it odd that she would  not  have  some
       means of contacting the neighbour to make sure that plans  were  also
       in place for her daughter to be protected. It  does  not  make  sense
       that she would leave her daughter in the hands of a neighbour when  a
       specific threat had been made against  her  and  her  daughter.  This
       would surely place the neighbour at risk.  It  is  also  likely  that
       leaving her daughter would mean problems in finding out  if  she  was
       safe and well cared for. I am unclear as to how there would  be  such
       trust placed in a neighbour and why this neighbour would  be  willing
       to put herself in danger and make such a large financial contribution
       to the Appellant's safety.

 8. The judge summarised her findings at [50]:

          I cannot speculate about the Appellant's background in any  detail
       but if as the expert has concluded she speaks the Swahili  associated
       with Bajuni exiles as a result of time in Kenya  then  the  Appellant
       has not been straightforward regarding her connections and background
       in Kenya. I am not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  provided  a
       credible account regarding her origins and nationality. My conclusion
       is that she is not from Chula but she has knowledge of Chula.  It  is
       entirely plausible that she has some connections in the past with the
       Bajuni Islands and this would account for her local knowledge. I have
       some information on this in the expert Professor Nurse's report  when
       he refers to the historical and current connections between Zanzibar,
       coastal Tanzania and Kenya. I do not accept  that  she  has  recently
       lived on the island of Chula or that  she  left  a  daughter  on  the
       island.

 9. I have Dr Nurse's comments  on  Judge  Henderson's  decision  but  that
    document is, of  course,  not  relevant  to  my  consideration  of  the
    question as to whether Judge Henderson  erred  in  law  such  that  her
    decision falls to be set aside.  I find that she did not so err.  I say
    that  for  the  following  reasons.   First,  I  do  not  identify  any
    perversity in the conclusions of Judge  Henderson  including  those  at
    [50].  The judge accepted that the appellant had  a  knowledge  of  the
    island of Chula, she was not an ethnic Bajuni and  had  not  lived  and
    suffered persecution and ill-treatment on the island  as  she  claimed.
    That is not a perverse finding, in my opinion.  There was no reason for
    the judge necessarily to conclude, as the appellant now  asserts,  that
    because the appellant had some knowledge of life  on  Chula  she  could
    only have acquired that knowledge by living  her  entire  life  on  the
    island and being of Bajuni ethnicity.  Quite rightly, the judge did not
    speculate as to how the appellant acquired her knowledge of  Chula  but
    she has given very careful reasons to explain, why in her judgment, the
    appellant is not a Bajuni as she claimed.  It may well be arguable that
    an individual arriving in the United Kingdom and having a knowledge  of
    life on the island of Chula is more likely to be an ethnic  Bajuni  who
    had lived on that island, rather than a  non-Somali  national  who  had
    acquired knowledge of  life  on  the  island.   However,  that  is  not
    necessarily the case so the submission of perversity  simply  does  not
    stand  up  in  this  instance.   Having  rejected  the  submission   of
    perversity, the grounds of appeal amount to no more than a disagreement
    with findings which the judge has made both as regards the  appellant's
    evidence and in relation to the expert reports which were open  to  the
    judge on the evidence.   The  Upper  Tribunal  should  hesitate  before
    interfering with the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal  where
    those findings are not perverse and where they are supported  by  clear
    and cogent reasoning, as is the case here.  In the  circumstances,  the
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed.

11. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 10 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.




Signed                              Date 10 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

