
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07479/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2016                            |On 14th April 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                                    [f b]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. In a determination promulgated after a hearing of 27th October 2015,  I
    set aside a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  had  been
    promulgated on  31st  July  2015,  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision of 10th April 2015 refusing to  grant
    him entry clearance or any other form of international protection.

 2. My reasons for setting the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  aside
    are set out in full in my determination but, very  broadly,  I  thought
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in the way in which it had gone about
    assessing the Appellant's credibility.

 3. Having set the decision aside I decided that the decision ought  to  be
    remade in the Upper Tribunal on a later occasion.  I made that decision
    on  the  basis  of  the  information  which  was  then  before  me.   I
    anticipated that the Appellant, with respect to  the  remaking  of  the
    decision, would simply rely upon the  original  basis  for  his  asylum
    claim which was, again in very broad terms, to the effect that he would
    be at risk upon return on the basis of imputed political opinion.

 4. The matter was listed before me, for remaking, on 4th April  2016.   In
    considering the file of papers I noted that the Appellant had, since my
    decision, indicated that he had converted to Christianity and  that  he
    now claimed to be at risk upon return to Iran on that  basis  too.   It
    was clear that the Appellant intended me to consider this new  part  of
    his claim when remaking the decision.  It is also clear that nothing of
    the detail of that claim has ever been  or  could  possibly  have  been
    before the original decision-maker nor the First-tier Tribunal.  In the
    circumstances I expressed, to the representatives,  some  doubt  as  to
    whether it would still be appropriate for me to remake the decision  in
    the Upper Tribunal as  this  would  effectively  mean  a  second  stage
    Appellate  Tribunal  having  to  make  initial  findings  of  fact   in
    circumstances where there had been no  previous  findings  or  previous
    consideration of the Christianity claim at all.

 5. After considering her position and discussing matters with  her  client
    and her instructing solicitors, Ms Patel did indicate  she  now  wished
    the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  and  so  applied.
    Mrs Pettersen did not oppose that application.  It does seem to  me  in
    these unusual circumstances that, despite my initial view that remaking
    in the Upper Tribunal  would  be  appropriate,  it  is  now  much  more
    appropriate for that task to be undertaken by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in its capacity as an expert first instance fact-finding body.

 6. Accordingly, therefore, my having already set the decision  aside,  the
    case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with nothing preserved from
    the previous determination of Judge Dickson.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal upon Remittal

A.   The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a  judge
    other than Judge N P Dickson. It shall be heard at the Bradford Hearing
    Centre.

B.   Nothing shall be preserved  from  the  previous  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

C.   There shall, in this case, be a Case Management Review  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal as this will give that body the opportunity  to
    consider how it should deal with the new aspect of the appeal being the
    claimed Christian conversion.  It will also  be  appropriate,  at  that
    hearing, to consider the  time  estimate  for  the  full  hearing,  any
    matters of witness availability and any interpreter requirements.

D.   There are two bundles on  the  Upper  Tribunal  file  which  have  been
    lodged by the Appellant's solicitors.  These bundles  were  sent  under
    covering letters of 13th July 2015 and 24th December 2015.  It  is  not
    necessary for the  Appellant's  solicitors  to  re-file  the  documents
    contained within  those  bundles  but  if  any  further  documentation,
    including witness statements and background country material, is to  be
    relied upon by the Appellant then this must be sent to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (and a copy sent  to  the  Respondent),  in  a  paginated  and
    indexed bundle with a schedule of essential reading if appropriate,  at
    least five working days prior to the date which will be fixed  for  the
    hearing.   Similarly,  if  the  Respondent  seeks  to  rely  upon   any
    documentation not previously filed, she must also adhere  to  the  same
    requirements.

E.   The First-tier Tribunal, insofar as is practicable, shall  have  regard
    to the availability of Canon David Mumby, who is  to  be  called  as  a
    witness concerning the claimed Christian conversion, when relisting the
    matter.  He is currently available on any Monday in May, June, July and
    August  other  than  23rd  May  and  8th  and  15th  August   although,
    realistically, I appreciate it may not be possible to have  the  appeal
    listed as soon as that.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  has  already  been  set  aside  on
account of legal error.  The  appeal  is  now  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal so that the decision may be remade.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and there cannot, therefore be any fee award.



Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

