
IAC-AH-KEW-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07301/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th December 2014                         |On 23rd February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               MR KYUNG HO KIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G O'Ceallaigh, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of North Korea who was born on  5th  January
    1983.  He has no siblings and was raised by his mother after his father
    passed away when he was aged 7.  The Appellant and his partner (now his
    wife) left North Korea and escaped to China in 2006.  Using  what  they
    believed to be fake passports and with the assistance of an  agent  the
    Appellant left Beijing on 18th October 2007 arriving in the UK on  20th
    October 2007.  On 22nd October 2007 the Appellant claimed asylum in the
    UK.

 2. The Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application  for  asylum
    in a detailed Notice for Refusal dated 16th December 2009.  The factual
    history relating to the Appellant's claim is set  out  in  considerable
    detail within that Notice of Refusal at paragraph 6.  The basis of  the
    Secretary of State's refusal is set out at paragraph 16  therein  where
    it was considered that under the Constitution  of  South  Korea,  as  a
    national of North  Korea  that  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to  claim
    citizenship in South Korea and that even if that were not the case  the
    Appellant will be able to seek legal residency  in  South  Korea.   The
    Secretary of State's Notice of Refusal  considered  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate to South Korea.

 3. The immigration history  of  this  matter  is  lengthy  and  extensive.
    Firstly it is accepted by the Secretary of State that it took over  two
    years for the Notice of Refusal to be issued.  The  Appellant  has  two
    children.  The eldest now aged  8  arrived  here  as  a  baby  and  the
    youngest who is aged 5 has been  here  all  her  life.   The  Appellant
    appealed the Notice of Refusal and the appeal came  before  Immigration
    Judge Chana sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  2nd  September  2010.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 13th September 2010 the Appellant's appeal
    was dismissed under the Refugee Convention and on human rights  grounds
    pursuant to Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention of Human Rights
    and the  Appellant  was  found  not  to  be  in  need  of  humanitarian
    protection.  It was noted in paragraph 57  of  the  determination  that
    there was no application before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  pursuant
    to Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 4. On 5th October 2010 Grounds of  Appeal  were  submitted  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds contended:-

      i) That there had been a failure by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to
         make findings on material matters;

     ii) that the judge had materially misdirected himself in law;

    iii) that the judge had failed to give reasons or any  adequate  reasons
         for a material finding; and

     iv) that there had been a material mistake of fact made by the judge as
         to whether or not there had been a theft by  the  Appellant  of  an
         antique  bowl  and  the  material  mistake  of  fact  affected  the
         Immigration Judge's view of the Appellant's credibility.

 5. On 15th October 2010 permission to appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was  granted  by  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Nichols.    In   granting
    permission Judge Nichols considered that it was arguable that the judge
    had failed to take into account expert evidence before her  as  to  the
    issues of the risk to the Appellant's family in South  Korea  from  the
    North Korean government and spies who have  infiltrated  the  area  and
    secondly as to whether or not the Appellant would in  fact  be  granted
    protection in South Korea.  Further it was arguable that the judge  had
    failed to have due regard to  the  expert  evidence  submitted  by  the
    Appellant in respect of the likelihood that he  would  be  entitled  to
    South Korean citizenship and that it was also arguable that  the  judge
    may have made a  mistake  of  fact  in  relation  to  the  account  the
    Appellant gave as to his background.

 6. On 26th August 2011 Senior Immigration Judge McKee gave  directions  in
    this matter.  It is interesting to note that  Judge  McKee  starts  his
    directions by stating "it is regrettable that a year has gone by  since
    Judge Chana heard the appeal."

    Judge McKee noted that an addendum report  of  objective  evidence  had
    been served by the Appellant dated 2nd March 2011 and that if an  error
    of law was found the report by Christopher Bluth on North  Korea  could
    be considered by the Upper Tribunal in the event that an error  of  law
    was  found.   Further  the  directions  stated  that  should  that   be
    established the Tribunal would also be  amenable  for  hearing  further
    oral evidence from  the  Appellant  if  his  representatives  think  it
    necessary and that it would be appropriate for the Tribunal to consider
    KK and Others (Nationality: North Korea) CG [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC).

 7. On 13th October 2011 the appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Harries to determine whether or not there was a material error  of  law
    in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Judge  Harries
    accepted  the  submission  that   the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge's
    credibility findings were tainted by errors of fact and gave directions
    that the hearing was to be resumed on a date to be fixed with a view to
    the decision being  re-made  on  all  issues  and  at  that  stage  the
    authority of KK and Others would be considered.

 8. It is on that basis that the appeal comes  before  me  for  re-hearing.
    The Appellant appears by his instructed  Counsel  Mr  O'Ceallaigh.   Mr
    O'Ceallaigh is extremely familiar with this matter.  He is  the  author
    of the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal and he appeared  on  the
    hearing to determine whether or not there was a material error  of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   The  Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr  Shilliday.   It
    is appropriate to mention two other factors.  Firstly it is normal when
    an Upper Tribunal Judge makes an error of law that that judge will then
    go on to consider either at the original hearing or on a re-hearing the
    reconsideration of the matter.  The administration acknowledge that  in
    this instant case  they  have  confused  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Harries  with  myself.   This  is  acknowledged  as  well  by  both  Mr
    O'Ceallaigh and Mr Shilliday.  Both legal representatives  are  of  the
    view that it is perfectly appropriate for me to rehear the  matter  and
    the appeal will proceed therefore on  that  basis.   The  second  issue
    which is of concern to me is the length of time this matter  has  taken
    to come before the Tribunal.   From  the  date  the  Appellant  claimed
    asylum for this matter to reach the Upper Tribunal has taken over seven
    years.  The Appellant arrived here with his wife and  young  baby.   He
    now comes before the Upper Tribunal on the re-hearing  of  this  appeal
    having been resident in this country for over seven years,  with  an  8
    year old child who has been at nursery and school in  the  UK  and  has
    lived virtually all his life here and with a 5 year old child who knows
    of no other life other than that in the UK.  Such delays are completely
    unacceptable.  Article 8 is now raised before the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    this is accepted by Mr Shilliday.  It is against that  background  that
    this appeal now comes before me for reconsideration.

The Law

 9. The law is  now  to  be  found  in  two  authorities.   KK  and  Others
    (Nationality: North Korea) Korea CG [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC).  That case is
    authority for the following propositions

         "(a)     The law and the constitution of South Korea (ROK)  do  not
             recognise North Korea (DPRK) as a separate State.

         (b)  Under South Korean law, most  nationals  of  North  Korea  are
             nationals of South Korea as well, because  they  acquire  that
             nationality at birth by descent from a (North) Korean  parent,
             and fall therefore within category (i) in 1(a) above.

         (c)  South Korea will make rigorous enquiries to ensure  that  only
             those who are its nationals are recognised  as  such  but  the
             evidence does not show that it has a practice of  refusing  to
             recognise its nationals who genuinely  seek  to  exercise  the
             rights of South Korean nationals."

10. That authority was further considered by GP and  Others  (South  Korean
    Citizenship) North  Korea  CG  [2014]  UKUT  00391  (IAC).   That  case
    determined

         "(1) The  Upper  Tribunal's  country  guidance  in  KK  and  others
             (Nationality: North Korea)  Korea  CG  [2011]  UKUT  92  (IAC)
             stands,  with  the  exception  of  paragraphs  2(d)  and  2(e)
             thereof. Paragraphs (2), (3) and (4) of this guidance  replace
             that given in paragraphs 2(d) and 2(e) respectively of KK.


         (2)  South Korean law makes limited provision for dual  nationality
             under the Overseas Koreans Act and  the  Nationality  Act  (as
             amended).


         (3)  All North Korean citizens are also citizens  of  South  Korea.
             While absence from the Korean Peninsula for more than 10 years
             may entail  fuller  enquiries  as  to  whether  a  person  has
             acquired another nationality or right of  residence  before  a
             travel document is issued, upon  return  to  South  Korea  all
             persons from the Korean Peninsula  are  treated  as  returning
             South Korean citizens.

         (4)  There is no evidence that  North  Koreans  returned  to  South
             Korea are sent back to North Korea or anywhere else,  even  if
             they fail the 'protection' procedure, and  however  long  they
             have been outside the Korean Peninsula.


         (5)  The process of returning North Koreans to South Korea  is  now
             set  out  in  the  United  Kingdom-South   Korea   Readmission
             Agreement (the Readmission Agreement) entered into between the
             two countries on 10 December 2011. At present,  the  issue  of
             emergency travel documents under the Readmission Agreement  is
             confined  to  those  for  whom  documents  and/or  fingerprint
             evidence establish that they are already known to South  Korea
             as citizens, or who have registered as  such  with  the  South
             Korean Embassy in the United Kingdom.


         (6)  Applying MA (Ethiopia) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2009] EWCA Civ  289,  North  Koreans  outside  the
             Korean Peninsula who object to  return  to  South  Korea  must
             cooperate with the United Kingdom authorities  in  seeking  to
             establish whether they can avail themselves of the  protection
             of another country, in particular South  Korea.   Unless  they
             can demonstrate that in all of the countries  where  they  are
             entitled to citizenship  they  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution for a Refugee  Convention  reason,  they  are  not
             refugees.


         (7)  If they are not refugees, it remains open to such  persons  to
             seek to establish individual factors creating a risk for  them
             in  South  Korea  which  would  engage  the  United  Kingdom's
             international obligations under the EU Qualification Directive
             or the ECHR.

         (8)  There is no risk of refoulement of any North Korean  to  North
             Korea from South Korea, whether directly or via  China.  South
             Korea does not return anyone to North Korea at all and it does
             not return North Koreans to China. In a small number of cases,
             Chinese nationals have been returned to China. A small  number
             of persons identified by the South Korean authorities as North
             Korean intelligence  agents  have  been  prosecuted  in  South
             Korea. There  is  no  evidence  that  they  were  subsequently
             required to leave South Korea.


         (9)  Once the 'protection'  procedure  has  been  completed,  North
             Korean migrants have the same rights  as  other  South  Korean
             citizens save that they are not required to  perform  military
             service for South Korea.  They  have  access  to  resettlement
             assistance,  including   housing,   training   and   financial
             assistance.  Former  North  Koreans  may  have  difficulty  in
             adjusting to South Korea and there may be some  discrimination
             in social integration, employment and housing, but  not  at  a
             level which requires international protection."

Evidence

11. The Appellant confirms and adopts his witness statements including  his
    additional witness statement dated 5th December 2014.  The  Appellant's
    wife Wha  Kim  further  confirms  and  adopts  her  witness  statements
    including her  additional  witness  statement  of  2nd  December  2014.
    Neither Mr O'Ceallaigh in requesting further evidence-in-chief  nor  Mr
    Shilliday on behalf of the Secretary of State seeks to challenge  these
    witness statements or put further questions to the Appellants.

Submissions/Discussions

12. Mr O'Ceallaigh starts his submissions by relying on the fact  that  the
    Appellant's claim both as a refugee and pursuant to Article  3  of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights  are  dealt  with  in  the  current
    country guidance authorities and that the report  of  Dr  Andrew  Mason
    dated 13th April 2012 confirms that the Appellant has scars  consistent
    or highly consistent with his account of torture and that Dr Mason  has
    considered that it would be hard to conceive of a way in which some  of
    the injuries could have been caused other than the manner described and
    by torture.

13. He further submits the question whether the Appellant can  lawfully  be
    returned to South Korea must include whether such return  is  compliant
    with the Refugee Convention and Article 3 ECHR in  circumstances  where
    that would place the Appellant's mother at  risk  in  North  Korea  and
    submits that returning the Appellant to  South  Korea  in  the  current
    circumstances would or might result in the death of his mother and that
    therefore amounts to persecutory treatment, or exposes him to a risk of
    persecution for a Convention reason or amounts to ill-treatment for the
    purpose of Article 3.  He relies on the expert evidence  submitted  and
    in particular referenced that since  February  2010  the  North  Korean
    government has been engaged in a sustained campaign to  clamp  down  on
    refugees and  that  it  is  targeting  families  of  defectors  and  is
    conducting house to house surveys to verify the people registered at an
    address actually live there.  He points out that the objective evidence
    states that families unable to explain the absence of  individuals  are
    subject to arrest and possibly severe punishment  including  execution.
    He submits in such circumstances that the Appellant's mother  would  be
    exposed  to  considerable  risk  and  further  the  objective  evidence
    indicates that there are spies from North Korea operating within  South
    Korea and that the family unit would be exposed to such spies on return
    when they come to  seek  citizenship  and  residence  following  a  de-
    briefing by the Ministry of Unification.

14. So far as the Appellant's claim pursuant to Article 8 is  concerned  he
    points out that this case pre-dates the July 2012  amendments  and  the
    incorporation of Article 8 claims within  the  Immigration  Rules.   He
    points out that the Appellant's children have been in the UK  for  some
    seven years one having entered at the age of  1  having  been  born  in
    China and the other having spent the whole of her life in the  UK.   He
    submits the whole family including the  children  have  no  links  with
    South Korea and the children would be effectively exiled.   He  submits
    that the Appellant's claim should be allowed both on asylum  and  under
    the European Convention of Human Rights.

15. Mr Shilliday responds  by  pointing  out  that  following  the  country
    guidance authorities it is clear that the Appellant is  not  a  refugee
    because it is possible to return him to South Korea.  The Secretary  of
    State's position is that if South Korea refused to accept him then  the
    Appellant would be a refugee.  So far as the risk of  return  affecting
    his family is concerned to the extent that it is alleged it constitutes
    a breach of Article 3 of ECHR he asked me to find  that  there  are  no
    authorities to support such a contention.

16. He does acknowledge that the Appellant has a strong claim  pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights and  he  does  not
    take the point that the Appellant is here unlawfully but he asks me  to
    give little weight to the Appellant's private life  pointing  out  that
    the Appellant and  his  family  could  reintegrate  into  South  Korean
    society.  He submits that the position regarding the eldest child falls
    to be considered under Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 and  that
    the Appellant would be returning to  a  country  where  he  speaks  the
    language and that it is appropriate to apply a reasonableness  test  as
    to whether or not he should return.  He asked me to refuse the  appeal.



Findings

17. It is always necessary to look at the  evidence  in  the  round.   This
    Appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  over  seven  years  ago  and
    through a series of delays none of which were of the Appellant's making
    it is only now that the  Appellant's  appeal  for  re-hearing  of  this
    matter comes before the Upper Tribunal.  It is impossible not  to  look
    at this case in the context of such delays and the  effects  that  that
    has upon the whole family.   The  Appellant's  case  in  many  ways  is
    completely different to that that it was when  he  arrived  some  seven
    years ago.  At that time neither of the  country  guidance  authorities
    were published, the 2014 Immigration Act had not come into  effect  and
    importantly one child has now spent seven years in this country and the
    other five years and so far as both those children are concerned living
    in the UK is the only life that they have ever known.  It does not mean
    that they can succeed under the Immigration Rules but that  their  case
    is meritorious of due and proper consideration under Article 8  of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights.  Mr Shilliday  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State is candid enough to acknowledge that such claim is a
    strong one.

18. It is against that background that I have to look at this appeal and to
    give due and proper consideration to the  objective  evidence.   It  is
    clear from the guidance given in GP that  there  is  no  evidence  that
    North Koreans who are returned to South Korea are sent  back  to  North
    Korea even if they  fail  the  protection  procedure  and  that  it  is
    difficult to establish that an Appellant  is  entitled  to  succeed  on
    asylum grounds.  Mr O'Ceallaigh seeks to rely  on  the  fact  that  the
    objective evidence indicates the presence  of  North  Korean  spies  in
    South  Korea;  the  willingness  of  North  Korean  spies  to  identify
    dissidents/refugees and the willingness of North Korean spies to murder
    refugees or their family members in North Korea in retaliation for  the
    "treachery" of fleeing.

19. It has to be remembered that this is an Appellant who left North  Korea
    some seven years ago.  If the Appellant's absence alone was to be  such
    as  to  expose  family  members  to  harm  and  risk  then  this  would
    undoubtedly have taken place many years ago.  I am not  satisfied  that
    there is evidence before me that shows that if the  Appellant  were  to
    return to South Korea whether he or his wife would even apply  a  lower
    burden of proof be at risk of being exposed to alleged spies from North
    Korea or would further be at risk to exposing his mother to retaliatory
    revenge for having left the country by the North Korean's  authorities.
    The Appellant it seems to  me  is  in  no  different  position  to  any
    Appellant who has left North Korea where there is no specific  evidence
    that such retaliation will take place.  In fact because  the  Appellant
    left such a long time ago there is probably an even greater  likelihood
    for the reasons set out above that his family members would not  be  at
    risk.  In such circumstances, having  considered  all  the  facts,  the
    objective evidence, the up-to-date authorities, the skeleton  arguments
    and the submission of both legal representatives I  am  satisfied  that
    the Appellant does not have a well-founded fear of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason in that he could be returned  to  live  within  South
    Korea along with family members.  The  Appellant's  appeals  on  asylum
    ground and pursuant to Article 3 of the European  Convention  of  Human
    Rights are  dismissed.   Further  the  Appellant  is  not  in  need  of
    humanitarian protection for all the above reasons.

20. However this appeal succeeds pursuant to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.  It  would  clearly  have  been  much  more
    difficult for the appeal to  succeed  had  the  Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum been dealt with  promptly  on  his  arrival  in  the  UK.   This
    Appellant has been seeking asylum in the United Kingdom for  more  than
    seven years.  He has two children one of whom was born  in  the  United
    Kingdom and has  lived  here  for  approximately  six  years  and  both
    children are entirely integrated I am satisfied  into  UK  society.   I
    acknowledge the submissions made both orally and  by  way  of  skeleton
    argument regarding the Appellant's Article 8 claim by Counsel.  Where a
    child has spent between seven and eight years in the United Kingdom  in
    the absence of countervailing features I am satisfied that  removal  is
    disproportionate.  This premise is supported by the authorities of  E-A
    (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC),  SC  (Zimbabwe)  [2012]  UKUT  00056
    (IAC), and EM (Zimbabwe) [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC).  These cases expand upon
    the original premise set down in LD (Zimbabwe) [2010]  UKUT  278  (IAC)
    which confirm the principle that the welfare of the child as a  primary
    consideration in cases when a child had resided in  the  UK  for  seven
    years normally required regularisation of the immigration  position  of
    the family as a whole.

21. I am provided with extensive documentation  relating  to  the  progress
    that the children have made in the UK including the children's  reports
    from respectively Burlington Infant and Nursery School and from  Davies
    Lane Primary School.  Up-to-date report cards are also produced and  it
    is clear that the children are progressing extremely well  in  the  UK.
    To all intents and purposes these  children  only  know  one  existence
    namely that as children within the UK.  I am satisfied that their  best
    interests clearly require that the family should not  be  uprooted  and
    transferred to South Korea.  The family has no links of any  kind  with
    South Korea which are  cultural  or  familial  and  no  member  of  the
    Appellant's family has, I am advised, ever been to South Korea.

22. The introduction of  the  amendment  to  part  5  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by way of Section 19 of the Immigration
    Act 2014 and the introduction of  Section  117B  by  way  of  providing
    statutory public considerations  applicable  in  all  Article  8  cases
    effectively codified the approach that the judiciary were  expected  to
    take prior to the introduction of the Statute.  I acknowledge that  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public  interest
    and that little weight should be given to private life established by a
    person at a time when the person's immigration  status  is  precarious.
    The  appellant's  status  in  this  case  has  been  precarious  for  a
    considerable number of years due to the failings not of the  Appellants
    but of the appropriate authorities to deal with their  appeals.   These
    are factors to be considered in the proportionality assessment as  well
    as those set out in Zoumbas v The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] UKSC 74 where the Supreme Court acknowledged that the
    best interests of a child are an integral part of  the  proportionality
    assessment under Article 8 but that in making that assessment the  best
    interests of a child must be  a  primary  consideration,  although  not
    always the only consideration; and the child's best interests do not of
    themselves have the status of the paramount consideration.

23. I have given due consideration to the principles set out in Zoumbas and
    I have applied not just on the  children's  behalf  but  on  the  whole
    family's behalf including the Appellant all the varied factors that  it
    is necessary to consider when making an  assessment  under  Article  8.
    These stem back to the original  principles  set  out  in  Razgar.   In
    applying all those principles I am satisfied that this is an  Appellant
    whose claim must succeed under Article 8 and consequently the appeal is
    allowed.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds is dismissed.

The Appellant is not in need of humanitarian protection.

The Appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 3 of the European  Convention  of
Human Rights is dismissed.

The Appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the European  Convention  of
Human Rights is allowed.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 12th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed        Date 12th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

