
                                                       [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07096/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |           Decision & Reasons       |
|                                          |Promulgated                         |
|On 29th January 2016                      |           On 12th February 2016    |
|                                          |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                                     GA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Olley, Counsel instructed by Kanaga Solicitors,
London
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                                  ANONYMITY
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
an anonymity order is made in respect of each of the Appellants. Unless  the
Upper Tribunal or other competent Court orders otherwise, no report  of  any
of the  proceedings  herein  or  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall,
directly or indirectly, identify any of  the  Appellants.  This  prohibition
applies to, amongst others, all parties.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose date of birth is recorded
    as 16 September 1980.  He made application for international protection
    as a refugee on 15 October 2014 and on 8 April 2015 a decision was made
    to refuse the application.  He appealed and  on  20  October  2015  his
    appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Colvin sitting  at
    Taylor House.

 2. The Appellant's case in short was that he  had  inadvertently  come  to
    assist the LTTE.  The Terrorist Investigation  Department  of  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities  became  aware  of  this  and  in  August  2009  the
    Appellant was arrested and detained, during which time he was tortured.
     The police also arrested another,  S,  who  was  associated  with  the
    Appellant and who under  torture  admitted  to  certain  weapons  being
    hidden at the Appellant's premises. On 28 August 2009 the Appellant was
    taken to prison in Colombo and detained until 9 October  2010  when  he
    was released on bail on condition of reporting to the  police  station.
    He was also to inform on the whereabouts of his brother-in-law, B, whom
    it was who had introduced the Appellant to S.

 3. The Appellant was advised to leave Sri Lanka, which he did  in  October
    2009.  The advice of the agent was that the Appellant should not  claim
    asylum in the United Kingdom as his claim  might  be  rejected  and  he
    would be returned.  Subsequently in April  2010  the  Appellant's  wife
    joined the  Appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant  then
    discovered that B had been arrested by the "TID"  in  relation  to  the
    same activities. B  was  detained  for  three  years  and  released  in
    April/May 2013 after the Appellant's sister negotiated with the help of
    an agent.

 4. On the basis that there was to be a bail hearing the  Appellant  booked
    tickets to return to Sri Lanka although in fact it is accepted that  he
    actually booked those tickets prior to the bail  hearing  having  taken
    place in circumstances in which there was always the possibility that B
    would not be granted bail.  Be that as it may the tickets  were  booked
    and were non-refundable. On 6 May 2913 B was released  but  on  2  June
    2013 the Appellant's sister informed the  Appellant  that  B  had  been
    abducted and so the Appellant determined not to return to Sri Lanka.

 5. The above is a summary of the Appellant's case. Whether in fact  it  is
    what occurred will need to be resolved  on  another  occasion  for  the
    reasons which are set out below.

 6. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 7. Not content with that decision by notice  dated  3  December  2015  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and on 15 December 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox  granted
    permission.  He clearly thought that the grounds  were  of  significant
    merit because he said:

         "The grounds are lengthy and detailed,  appropriately  so  in  this
         case, and it is impossible to cover them all here.  In essence  the
         decision  is  impugned  for  lack   of   adequate   reasoning   and
         irrationality.  The grounds in my view make out  an  arguable  case
         for those contentions and I would grant permission on all of them."


 8. The initial position of the Secretary of State as set out in the  'Rule
    24 Notice' was that the decision of the judge was one that was open  to
    her based upon the evidence.

 9. The grounds drafted by Counsel run to 39 paragraphs.  I was grateful to
    Ms Olley and to Ms Everett both for the assistance which they  gave  to
    me and for the realistic approach that they both took  to  the  appeal.
    It was not necessary for me to consider all of the grounds  because  in
    taking the first two points Ms Olley satisfied me that the matter ought
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and Ms Everett agreed without
    making any concession, quite properly, in relation to the other grounds
    upon which I heard no submissions.  I should say also that Ms Olley was
    content for me to determine the matter based on the  first  two  points
    that she raised without more.

10. I was referred to  the  asylum  decision  of  8  April  2015  and  more
    particularly Annex A which are the detailed reasons.  At  paragraph  25
    it reads as follows:

         "In light of the fact you were unable to give any  details  of  the
         court  proceedings  or  to  submit   original   evidence   of   the
         investigation and your bail conditions it has not been accepted you
         were detained and bailed as claimed.  In light of the fact you have
         submitted nothing from your GP or other healthcare professional  it
         is not accepted you are suffering any complaints  as  a  result  of
         your arrest and detention in Sri Lanka."

    The fact that the Secretary of State did not accept that the  Appellant
    was detained and bailed as claimed is not to be taken to mean  that  it
    was accepted that the Appellant was detained and bailed in  some  other
    way but that the Appellant was  not  detained  and/or  bailed  at  all.
    However, at paragraph 43 the Secretary of State said:

         "Taking all of the above into account, it has  been  accepted  that
         you assisted LTTE members between  2008  and  2009.   It  has  been
         accepted that you were arrested and detained in 2009.  ..."

11. What exactly the Secretary of State was  conceding  therefore  was  not
    clear but given the  lower  standard  and  given  the  concession  that
    appeared at paragraph 43, at the  very  least  the  judge  should  have
    sought clarification of that concession because although it  is  always
    open to the Secretary  of  State  to  withdraw  a  concession,  if  the
    concession is not withdrawn then the  judge  ought  not  to  have  gone
    behind it and certainly ought not to have gone behind it without giving
    the opportunity to the parties to be heard: NR (Jamaica) v SSHD  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 856

12. The concession goes to the core of the Appellant's case.  It  was  part
    of his case that he was detained and that he  then  breached  his  bail
    conditions.  The judge on the other hand in her  Decision  and  Reasons
    appears to have gone behind the  concession  notwithstanding  the  fact
    that she recognised this had been made. At paragraph 26 of her Decision
    and Reasons she says:

         "In this case it is accepted by the Respondent that  the  Appellant
         assisted LTTE members in Sri Lanka for twenty  months  during  2008
         and 2009."

    Indeed she goes on  to  deal  with  the  circumstances  in  which  that
    assistance was given but then at paragraph 38 in  her  conclusions  she
    says:

         "I have given careful consideration to all  the  evidence  and  the
         matters raised above.  I have also taken account of the need to  be
         cautious before reaching  an  adverse  credibility  finding  in  an
         asylum case.  However, I have concluded  that  even  to  the  lower
         standard of proof applicable in an asylum case, I am not  satisfied
         that the Appellant has shown that he came to the adverse  attention
         on the Sri Lankan authorities before he left in 2009 or that he was
         arrested or detained and ill-treated.  ..."

    Not only is that inconsistent  with  what  appears  to  have  been  the
    concession of the Secretary of State.  It appears to have  led  to  the
    decision that there were no outstanding warrants for the arrest.

13. The second point raised by Ms Olley relates to  the  treatment  of  the
    psychiatric evidence and I refer to paragraph 30 of  the  Decision  and
    Reasons, which reads:

         "It is to be noted that the Appellant who arrived in the UK in 2002
         does not appear to have made any complaint about his  mental  state
         to a doctor until after he registered with a  medical  practice  in
         November 2013.  This is confirmed  in  the  psychiatric  report  at
         paragraph 10.1 which states that  the  Appellant  said  his  mental
         health deteriorated after the disappearance of  his  brother-in-law
         in June 2013 when he started to feel panic and that this  condition
         worsened further after the arrest warrant against him in July  2014
         when he also dropped out of his studies.  He said he visited his GP
         in 2014 when he was put on antidepressant medication.  And,  again,
         at paragraph 10.4, the report states that  the  Appellant  reported
         that his mental health deteriorated after  the  asylum  refusal  in
         April 2015.  There is no explanation for this significant delay  of
         some five years before the Appellant either makes  a  complaint  or
         seeks some assistance.  This, in my opinion, is  an  omission  that
         necessarily undermines the diagnosis of PTSD being directly related
         to the alleged ill-treatment."

14. If the explanation for the significant delay being referred to  by  the
    judge is in respect of seeking help for  his  mental  health  then  the
    judge  has  referred  herself  to  the  explanation   which   was   the
    disappearance of the brother-in-law in June 2013.  To  say  that  there
    was no explanation appears irrational and perverse. This amounts to  an
    error of law in itself, but taken together with the first point  in  my
    view means that the decision simply cannot stand.

15. A very clear finding needs to be made in this case as to whether or not
    the Appellant was arrested and if  he  were  arrested  whether  he  was
    detained.  A finding should be made as to how long  the  detention  was
    and whether he was subjected to ill-treatment  during  that  period  of
    detention.  Findings need also to be made on the basis  upon  which  he
    was arrested, in other words, what was being alleged against him?  Were
    bail conditions set?  If so, what were they?  Did the Appellant  breach
    them?  Are there grounds for believing that the Appellant continues  to
    be of interest to the authorities such that there are  now  outstanding
    warrants?

16. The First-tier Tribunal will be assisted in my view by a medical report
    dealing with any physical injuries upon the Appellant's person.  If  he
    has, for example, cigarette burns or other scars  which  can  be  dated
    back to the material  time  such  might  support  his  claim.   If  the
    Appellant chooses not to produce such a report then  that  would  be  a
    matter which the judge in the First-tier Tribunal might be entitled  to
    take into account especially now  that  it  has  been  flagged  up:  TK
    (Burundi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA  Civ
    40

17. I also take the view that the  Tribunal  may  well  be  assisted  by  a
    witness statement from the Appellant's  wife.   It  is  said  that  she
    cannot give any evidence relating to any  of  the  substantive  events.
    That may be true but she  can  in  my  judgment  be  expected  to  give
    evidence about whether or not the Appellant was detained and she  might
    also speak to the state that the Appellant was in  when  he  came  back
    from that detention if she is able to say that he was detained.

    Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of  law
and is set aside to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal by  a  judge  other
than Judge Colvin.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker























