
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07807/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16 February 2017                   |On 19 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MR W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home
Office
     Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Mr W): Mr A Bandegani, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
     Solicitors LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Colvin, who in a decision promulgated on 12 October
    2016, following a hearing at Taylor House on  16  September  2016,  had
    allowed Mr  W's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    refusing to grant him  asylum/humanitarian  protection.   For  ease  of
    convenience, I shall throughout this decision refer to Mr  W,  who  was
    the original appellant, as "the  claimant"  and  to  the  Secretary  of
    State, who was the original respondent, as "the Secretary of State".

 2. This appeal was before me on  16  February  2017,  when,  having  heard
    submissions on behalf of both  parties,  I  reserved  my  decision.   I
    considered the arguments to be finely balanced, and wished to  consider
    them further before reaching a definitive decision.

 3. Having considered the submissions carefully, I  reached  a  provisional
    view which I recorded in note form.  However, I wished to give  further
    consideration to the decision I had to make, and so put the file to one
    side in order that I could reflect further on the issue which had  been
    raised.

 4. Regrettably, the file was then  mislaid,  but  neither  the  claimant's
    representatives nor the Secretary of State has made any enquiry  as  to
    when my decision could  be  expected,  and  my  obligation  to  give  a
    Decision with regards to this appeal was overlooked as the pressure  of
    other work intervened.

 5. Fortunately, the Administration at Field House has  alerted  me  to  my
    need to give a Decision in this case and following a search I was  able
    to locate the file. I am accordingly giving my Decision without further
    delay.  This Decision remains as I had provisionally  decided  after  I
    had originally considered the arguments, and in substance is taken from
    the notes I made shortly after the hearing.  However,  I  apologise  to
    both parties for the delay.

 6. The claimant is a national of Sri Lanka, who  was  born  in  1987.   He
    applied for a student visa in January 2010  which  was  refused  but  a
    further application made in December 2010 was  successful  and  he  was
    issued with entry clearance.  He travelled to  the  UK  using  his  own
    passport in January 2011 with a visa which was valid  until  May  2013.
    He made a brief visit to Sri Lanka from January to  February  2012  but
    then applied for asylum on 27  February  2013.   This  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 27  April  2015,  but  as  already
    noted, his appeal  against  that  refusal  was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Colvin.  The Secretary of State now appeals against that
    decision, leave having been given by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  M
    Holmes on 8 November 2016.

 7. The judge dealt very fully with  the  credibility  issues  which  arose
    during the hearing.  She noted that it was accepted on  behalf  of  the
    claimant that he had "lied about his  claimed  detention  in  2012  and
    submitted  false  documents"  (at  paragraph  21).    However,   having
    considered the evidence before her, she  concluded  (at  paragraph  34)
    that she was "satisfied on the standard of proof in asylum  cases  that
    the [claimant's] account of what happened to him in  2008  is  credible
    and plausible" and that:

         "It is consistent with the background information as  described  in
         the Expert Country Opinion and, on the basis  of  the  verification
         report prepared ..., the documents submitted by the [claimant]  are
         genuine or authentic.  These documents show that he was detained in
         2008 for exactly the reasons he claims and his serious mistreatment
         in detention is supported by the medical evidence".

 8. The judge took into consideration, before reaching these findings, that
    the claimant had previously made a false claim that he had been further
    detained and ill-treated when he returned to Sri Lanka for a  visit  in
    2012, but considered that this was possibly because "he did  not  think
    [his claim] could succeed after he had had a problem-free visit to  Sri
    Lanka in 2012", and had for this reason embellished his  account.   The
    judge found, still at paragraph 34, that "Whilst I do not  in  any  way
    condone the [claimant's] false account, I do not find  that  it  is  of
    probative value in undermining his account relating to  2008  when  all
    the other evidence is taken into consideration".

 9. It was in the context of her positive  credibility  findings  that  the
    judge then went on to consider the risk on  return,  and  her  starting
    point (see paragraph 36) was the country guidance case of GJ and Others
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG   [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC),
    which, as the judge rightly  stated,  "considered  a  large  amount  of
    evidence concerning the situation in 2012-2013 and gave guidance as  to
    the approach of the authorities in who was likely to be of interest  to
    them on return".  At the conclusion of paragraph 36, the judge made the
    following important finding:

         "I find on the facts of this  case  the  [claimant]  does  not  fit
         within any of the stated categories in  GJ  and  this  was  perhaps
         shown when he  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  in  2012  without  further
         problems from the authorities".

10. However, the claimant's case had been argued before the  judge  on  the
    basis that the  situation  in  Sri  Lanka  "has  significantly  changed
    including the risk to returnees since 2012-2013"  (see  paragraph  37).
    The judge notes that:

         "These changes are identified in  the  Expert  Country  Report  and
         illustrated by reference  to  several  authoritative  international
         actors such as the International Crisis Group stated in its  report
         published in May 2016 that: 'There continue to be credible  reports
         of torture and sexual  abuse  by  'counter  terrorist'  police  and
         military intelligence units against Tamils returning to the country
         who are suspected of past LTTE involvement'."

11. Reliance was  also  placed  on  "the  recent  Country  Information  and
    Guidance Sri Lanka: Tamil separatism Version 3.0 August 2016", and  the
    judge set out extracts from  that  Country  Information  and  Guidance,
    which had been highlighted in the skeleton argument prepared on  behalf
    of the claimant.

12. Having considered the submissions which had  been  made  to  her  (and,
    which is important  in  this  case,  the  absence  of  any  substantive
    challenge to this evidence on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State)  the
    judge concluded as follows, at paragraphs 40 and 41:

         "40. The question before  me  is  whether  this  recent  background
             information signifies such changes to the risk to returnees as
             to justify a departure from the CG case of GJ.   It  has  been
             observed  in  other  cases,  that  country  guidance  is   not
             inflexible and it must be applied by reference to new evidence
             as it emerges.  In KS (Burma) [2013] EWCA Civ 67 it  was  held
             that in order to depart from a  CG  case  there  needs  to  be
             cogent and reliable evidence that the appellant would  face  a
             risk.

         41.  Again, after careful consideration of all the evidence  before
             me including the recent CIG published in August 2016,  I  have
             reached the conclusion that there  is  sufficient  cogent  and
             reliable  evidence  that  failed  asylum   seekers   currently
             returning to Sri Lanka may be at real  risk  on  suspicion  of
             having actual perceived LTTE connection or involvement in  the
             past.  This is different from the evidence that was before the
             Upper Tribunal in 2012-2013 in the CG  case  of  GJ.   And  in
             applying this to the circumstances  of  the  [claimant]  I  am
             satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood that  he  will
             be treated with suspicion because of the event in 2008 when he
             came to the adverse attention of the authorities and that this
             suspicion is reasonably likely to result in his detention  and
             ill-treatment as before so  as  to  come  within  the  Refugee
             Convention and the ECHR".

13. It is not in issue that if the claimant was at risk of being  detained,
    he would be entitled to protection under the Refugee Convention.

14. The argument now advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State  is  that
    the evidence which had been placed before the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    not sufficient as to entitle her to depart from  the  country  guidance
    which had been given in  GJ,  which  had  considered  an  abundance  of
    evidence.  It is said on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  in
    effect the judge "cherry-picked" from the evidence which had been given
    (or, probably more accurately, that  the  claimant's  Counsel  "cherry-
    picked" from that evidence) and she did  not  adequately  analyse  this
    evidence herself before making her decision.

15. I do not propose myself to  embark  on  a  detailed  analysis  of  this
    evidence, because unless and until an error of law is  established,  it
    is not a function of the Upper Tribunal to entertain submissions  which
    both  could  and  should  have  been  advanced  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The issue for this Tribunal now is to consider  not  whether
    the judge's decision was in fact correct, but whether it  was  open  to
    her on the basis of the evidence which had been put before her and  the
    submissions which had been made.

16. The real difficulty with the case as now  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, is that the challenges to the "expert evidence" and
    other documents which had been submitted before the First-tier Tribunal
    had not been challenged during that hearing.  I refer to  the  note  of
    hearing which I made immediately following the previous hearing  before
    me on 12 December 2016 when I stated as follows:

         "...

         3.   The basis of the Secretary of  State's  appeal  was  that  the
             First-tier Tribunal Judge should not have  departed  from  the
             extant country guidance given in the Tribunal decision  of  GJ
             and Others.  It is right to say that within  the  grounds  the
             [Secretary of State] did not seek to argue that  the  decision
             to the effect that the Tribunal was entitled  to  depart  from
             that guidance was inadequately reasoned, but this was an issue
             which was identified by this Tribunal.

         4.   Mr Bandegani, who has represented this claimant  today  as  he
             has  throughout  sought  an  adjournment  in  order  to   deal
             specifically with this point and to enable him to give further
             assistance to the Tribunal in the form of a skeleton  argument
             and also in order to enable him to put before the Tribunal  in
             an intelligible form that evidence which he  says  was  before
             the First-tier Tribunal and which justified the decision which
             that Tribunal made".

17. I also noted my concern to the bearing that my decision  in  this  case
    might have on other appeals which might be brought by other applicants.



18.  Having  given  further   consideration   to   the   submissions,   and
    notwithstanding my concern as to the possible impact of  this  decision
    on other cases (which on reflection I now consider should  be  minimal,
    for reasons which I will give below) I have  concluded  that  while  it
    might have been open to  Judge  Colvin  to  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion,  her  reasoning  for  making  the  findings  she  did  were
    adequately expressed and are sustainable.

19. I have already set out the judge's self-direction (at paragraph  40  of
    her Decision) with regard to the circumstances  in  which  a  departure
    from a country guidance  decision  is  permissible  (see  paragraph  12
    above) and the Judge directed herself appropriately.  The difficulty in
    the Secretary of State's case is that it is not apparent  (and  it  has
    not been argued before this Tribunal) that there was any challenge made
    to the cogency or reliability  of  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    claimant in order to justify departing from GJ; the Secretary of  State
    did not even submit within the original grounds to this  Tribunal  that
    Judge Colvin's finding  that  she  was  entitled  to  depart  from  the
    guidance given in GJ had been inadequately reasoned.  It  appears  that
    the  submissions  before  her  were  focused  rather  on  whether   the
    applicant's claim was credible (see paragraph 20 of the Decision  where
    the Secretary of State's submissions were summarised).

20. Accordingly, I am unable to find that the decision of Judge Colvin  was
    not one which was open  to  her  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  and
    submissions  which  had  been  advanced  before  her;  this  appeal  is
    essentially an attempt to advance arguments for the first  time  before
    this Tribunal which both could and should  have  been  advanced  before
    Judge Colvin.  Without the judge being invited to consider argument  as
    to the cogency and reliability of  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant, it is not now open to the Secretary of  State  to  challenge
    the findings she made, which were open to her.

21. Although, as I have  already  noted,  this  decision  might  be  finely
    balanced, because country guidance  decisions  should  not  lightly  be
    departed from, my initial concerns that this decision might  be  viewed
    as giving a "green light" to judges in the future departing from GJ are
    probably unfounded.  The reason  that  I  have  upheld  Judge  Colvin's
    decision is not because I have carefully analysed all the evidence  and
    myself concluded that the situation in Sri Lanka is now different  from
    what it was at the time GJ was decided; rather, I have simply concluded
    that on the basis of the evidence which was before her, which  was  not
    subject to the detailed challenge it might have been  at  the  time,  I
    cannot say that Judge Colvin's findings were not open to her.



Notice of Decision

There being no material error  of  law  in  Judge  Colvin's  decision,  this
appeal by the Secretary of State against her  decision  is  dismissed.   The
decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal,  is
affirmed.



Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
       Dated 15 September 2017

