
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07709/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2015                            |On 22 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Kirk, Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent is a citizen of Afghanistan and his date of birth  is  1
    January 1995.  I shall refer to him as the appellant as he  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant arrived in the UK on 11 February 2009 and claimed  asylum
    that day.  The application was refused by the Secretary of State  on  4
    June  2009.  His  application  was  refused,   but   he   was   granted
    discretionary  leave  until  4  June  2012   under   the   policy   for
    unaccompanied minors.   The  appellant  did  not  appeal  against  that
    decision but he made an application on 11 May 2012 to  vary  his  leave
    (pursuant to Rule 335 of the Immigration Rules). This  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of 2 September 2014. It
    is this decision and the removal decision against which  the  appellant
    appealed.

3.   The appellant's appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Lal in a decision that was promulgated on 12 November 2014 following  a
    hearing on 3 November 2014.  The appellant was an adult  (aged  19)  at
    the date of the hearing before Judge  Lal.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kelly in a  decision  of  2
    December 2014 and thus the matter came before me.

The Appellant's case and the Decision of the Secretary of State

4.   The appellant was born in Laghman province.  He lived with his  parents
    and his sister and he did not attend school in Afghanistan.  His father
    farmed land there  in  order  to  support  the  family.   In  2006  the
    appellant's father joined the Taliban and became involved in  fighting.
    In 2007 the appellant's father  was  arrested  and  taken  to  Kandahar
    prison where he had escaped having been incarcerated for a year  and  a
    half.  He returned home and continued to fight  with  the  Taliban.  He
    became a commander.  The appellant was scared of his  father's  enemies
    within the local community and he  took  to  staying  indoors.  He  was
    protected by his cousin who was armed.

5.   In 2008 the appellant's father was arrested again.  The  appellant  was
    not present at the time but he was told about this by his cousin.   His
    enemies had reported him to the authorities.   The  appellant's  cousin
    told the appellant that it would be dangerous  for  him  to  remain  in
    Afghanistan.  The appellant remained at home for four  or  five  nights
    thereafter and then fled.  He fled Afghanistan because he feared  being
    perceived as a Taliban sympathiser.  In support of his application  the
    appellant submitted a number of documents.

6.   The Secretary of State accepted the appellant's account of his age  but
    noted  that  he  had  not  raised  new  issues  in  his  second  asylum
    application, he was  not  able  to  provide  details  of  his  father's
    involvement with the  Taliban  and  he  had  produced  no  evidence  to
    substantiate his claim.  It was not accepted by the Secretary of  State
    that the appellant had established that his father was a member of  the
    Taliban. The Secretary of State conceded that  she  did  not  initially
    conduct tracing obligations but concluded that it had not been possible
    to locate the appellant's family on the  information  provided  by  the
    appellant.  A family tracing referral was made on 22 February 2014.

The Hearing Before the FtT

7.   The appellant relied on his two witness statements and in  addition  he
    gave evidence in  Pashto  through  an  interpreter.   The  Judge  heard
    evidence from the appellant, his foster mother, Mrs Elaine  Miller.  He
    heard evidence from Rosemary Demin, the appellant's  teacher  and  Maya
    Pritchard from Asylum Welfare.  The Judge  also  relied  on  an  expert
    report produced by the appellant from  Claudio  Franco  of  23  October
    2014.

8.   The Judge accepted that the appellant was  credible  and  accepted  his
    account. He found that it was consistent with the expert evidence.   He
    found that the appellant would be returning to Kabul without family  or
    tribal protection and that he would  be  returning  as  the  son  of  a
    Taliban commander from an insurgency area.  He found that the appellant
    had adopted western mores and that he was in need of a  high  level  of
    support (see [24] of the determination).

 9.  The Judge made  material  findings  at  paragraphs  23  to  36  of  the
    determination.

         "23. Having considered the matter with some care  the  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that the account given is a credible one.   This  is
             because the account  has  remained  consistent  throughout  in
             terms of the two witness statements (given in 2009  and  2014)
             as well  as  the  Appellant's  oral  evidence.   Under  cross-
             examination the Appellant  was  consistent  with  his  earlier
             evidence and he did not  seek  to  add  to  or  embellish  the
             earlier account.  The Appellant's recollection was  consistent
             and credible and the Tribunal is prepared to accept  that  the
             matters happened in the way described; namely his father was a
             Taleban commander, which eventually culminated in a  visit  to
             the family home for arrest by armed men and the need to  leave
             quickly.  The Appellant cannot be criticised for his  lack  of
             detail because the Tribunal accepts that he  would  have  been
             privy to only limited information in any event because of  his
             age.  The expert report and country evidence support the  home
             area as  being  'socially  fractured  and  riven  with  bitter
             antagonisms.'  This is supported by the Appellants own account
             that an armed family member home normally guarded  his  family
             home and that 'enemies' were  present  in  the  village.   The
             Tribunal found the Appellant's  account  to  be  credible  and
             consistent with the existence of rival village factions.


         24.  The Tribunal has applied the case of AA (Unattended  children)
             Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC)  and  it  is  satisfied
             that the Appellant's home area is a  site  of  insurgency  and
             that the Appellant has provided a vivid account of events with
             compelling detail and consistency and is  highly  unlikely  to
             have invented the detail especially when first given as he was
             a minor.  It has not been suggested that the Appellant has any
             other family in Afghanistan.  The Tribunal is  satisfied  that
             were the Appellant to be returned in Kabul he would be without
             family or tribal protection and it would be unduly  harsh  for
             him to be so returned.  He would be returning as the son of  a
             Taleban commander from an insurgency area and in  the  absence
             of any familial or tribal protection he would be at real  risk
             of  persecution  because  of  this.   There   is   the   added
             complication, which the Tribunal accepts, that  the  Appellant
             has adopted Westernised mores as described by Mrs  Demin,  and
             therefore would arguably be at risk  even  from  his  family's
             previous associates as he would now be regarded as  supportive
             of 'infidel' powers.   The  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant's personal circumstances are such that he  continues
             to face such a risk as he is still deemed by social  services,
             his caseworker and his foster parent  as  still  needing  high
             levels of support.


         25.  Taking all matters into account, the Tribunal finds  that  the
             Appellant is at real risk of  persecution  under  the  Refugee
             Convention because  of  his  perceived  political  association
             (that is being pro the Taleban) and or being seen as now being
             pro-Western by his father or his father's ex associates on his
             return to Afghanistan.


         26.  For very much the same  reasons  as  those  given  above,  the
             Tribunal  allows  the  humanitarian  protection  appeal.   The
             Appellant faces an individual threat of serious harm,  on  his
             return to Afghanistan.


         Article 8 of the ECHR


         27.  The Tribunal has had regard to the provisions of Section  117A
             of the 2002 Act as amended.   Public  interest  considerations
             apply in all cases and these are set out in Section 117B.


         28.  The Tribunal has therefore considered Article 8 in  the  light
             of the above and notes that it is a qualified  right.   It  is
             normally for an appellant to establish  that  he  or  she  has
             family and or/private life that will  be  interfered  with  on
             return to his or her own country, and the burden  then  shifts
             to the Respondent to establish that any such  interference  is
             not only legitimate but is also necessary and proportionate.


         29.  The correct test for assessing Article 8  was  articulated  by
             Lord Bingham of Cornhill in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004]  UKHL  27
             at [17] in the now well-known 5-stage test.


                  '(1) Will the proposed removal be  an  interference  by  a
                      public authority with the exercise of the  11/12/2014
                      applicant's right to respect for his private  or  (as
                      the case may be) family life?


                  (2)  If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of
                      such gravity as potentially to engage  the  operation
                      of article 8?


                  (3)  If so, is such interference in  accordance  with  the
                      law?


                  (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic
                      society in the interests of national security, public
                      safety or the economic well-being of the country, for
                      the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,   for   the
                      protection of health or morals, or for the protection
                      of the rights and freedoms of others?


                  (v)  If so, is  such  interference  proportionate  to  the
                      legitimate public end sought to be achieved?'


         30.  The Tribunal is satisfied that the Appellant has both a family
             and a private life with Mrs Miller and her family other in the
             UK.  The impression given was of a close knit  and  supportive
             family unit providing a high degree of care  and  support  for
             each other.  The Tribunal is in no doubt that the operation of
             Article  8  considerations  is  engaged  and  that  any   such
             potential interference is lawful.   The  real  issue  for  the
             Tribunal is whether it is proportionate.


         31.  In this regard the Tribunal is mindful of the principle in the
             case of Kugathas V SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 that with regard to
             those over the age of 18 the existence  of  more  than  normal
             emotional ties is an essential one although this must not be a
             quest for something that would amount to 'exceptional.'   This
             is fully reflected in the well-known principles in  the  Huang
             and Beoku-Betts decisions.


         32.  Having considered the oral and documentary evidence with  some
             care, the Tribunal is satisfied that much of this  is  related
             to the circumstances of this particular Appellant  namely  the
             circumstances of his arrival, his age on arrival and his level
             of integration into  UK  society  and  the  current  level  of
             emotional support provided by Mrs Miller and her family.   The
             Tribunal is satisfied that this cannot be  replicated  in  any
             meaningful way by email and phone contact.


         33.  The Tribunal is satisfied that the current  relationships  are
             of some considerable emotional dependency and the family  unit
             has a high degree of dependency on each other as evidenced  in
             the witness statements.


         34.  The Tribunal notes the observations of the Upper  Tribunal  in
             Ghising and others [2013]  UKUT  00567  (IAC)  that  at  first
             instance (and accepted as a proper factual basis) it was found
             that the 'Appellant and his parents genuinely enjoyed a  close
             knit family life, in which they value and depend on each other
             for mutual support.'   Ultimately,  the  question  whether  an
             individual enjoys family life is one of fact and depends on  a
             careful  consideration  of  all  the  relevant  facts  of  the
             particular case.  'It was noted that this might  well  include
             an adult child who does not have a family of its own.'


         35.  In the present case the Tribunal finds that the Appellant does
             qualify on the particular  facts  as  outlined  above  as  his
             foster  family  has  replaced  his  birth  family   and   such
             replacement was done at an early age in the  Appellant's  life
             and  has  been  one  of  some  considerable  dependency.   The
             Appellant is a well-integrated member of his  local  community
             as attested to  in  the  testimonial  evidence  and  there  is
             nothing to suggest that it would be  contrary  to  the  public
             interest to allow this appeal on  this  additional  ground  as
             well.


         36.  Again for very much the same reasons as those given above when
             dealing with the asylum appeal, the Tribunal  finds  that  the
             Appellant's fears under Article 2 ECHR and/or  of  inhuman  or
             degrading treatment breaching the Article 3 ECHR threshold  on
             return to Afghanistan for any  reason  are  both  current  and
             objectively well-founded.  The Tribunal therefore  allows  the
             Articles 2 and 3 ECHR appeal."

The Grounds Seeking Permission to Appeal

10.  The grounds seeking permission to appeal argue that  the  Judge  failed
    to give adequate reasons for conclusions on material matters, the Judge
    did  not  give  reasons  why  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  from
    authorities in Kabul and it was not open to the Judge  to  rely  on  AA
    (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 0016 because this case
    relates to the risk of exploitation  faced  by  children  returning  to
    Kabul without family support.  The appellant was almost 20 at the  date
    of the hearing before the Judge.  If it is  to  be  inferred  from  the
    decision that the Judge was of the view that the  appellant  should  be
    treated as if he was a child because of some  particular  vulnerability
    the Judge gave wholly inadequate reasons for this.  Reference  is  made
    to him needing high levels of support but the specifics of these  needs
    are not set out.  There is no evidence that the appellant  has  adopted
    western mores as found by the Judge and this would not make a  material
    difference to risk on return to Kabul in any event (AK (Article  15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC)).  The thrust  of  ground  1  is
    that the appellant failed to explain with adequate and rational reasons
    why the appellant would be at risk on return to Kabul.

11.  Ground 2 argues that the Judge erred in allowing the appeal on  grounds
    of humanitarian protection.  Ground 3 argues that the  Judge  erred  in
    relation to Article 8 and the  balancing  exercise,  and  the  case  of
    Ghising & Ors [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) is referred to in the grounds.

12.   I  heard  oral  submissions  from  both  representatives.   Mr  Walker
    submitted that the Judge erred in relying on and applying the  case  of
    AA (unattended children) because the appellant was not a child  at  the
    date of the hearing.  The Judge  erred  because  he  does  not  clearly
    identify the agents of persecution that would  make  relocation  unduly
    harsh.  The Judge did not take into account  that  the  appellant  gave
    evidence in Pashto and had lived in Afghanistan for thirteen years when
    he found that the appellant had adopted western  mores.   There  is  no
    reason why the appellant would be at risk of persecution in  Kabul  and
    there are no reasons that make out the high level of support  that  the
    appellant is said to require.  The Judge's findings are inadequate.

13.  Mr Kirk made submissions in the context of his Rule 24  response.   The
    grounds seeking permission do not in my view understand the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The Judge found that the appellant  would  be
    at risk of persecution on return to his home area as a  result  of  his
    imputed political opinion and  then  the  Judge  went  on  to  consider
    relocation to Kabul.  The Judge found that relocation would  be  unduly
    harsh  which  is  the  correct  test  in  accordance  with  established
    jurisprudence including Secretary of State for the Home Department v AH
    & Ors [2007] UKHL 49.

Conclusions

14.  The Judge found that the appellant would not be at risk  on  return  to
    Kabul. However, it is my view that  this  is  not  a  material  finding
    because he found that relocation would be unduly  harsh  (after  having
    found that he would be at risk on  return  to  his  home  area).   This
    finding that the appellant would be at risk on return to his home  area
    is not challenged. There is no specific challenge in the grounds to the
    decision that relocation would be unduly harsh.  The  Judge's  findings
    which led him to this conclusion are challenged.   It  is  argued  that
    certain findings are inadequately reasoned.

15.  The Judge found that the appellant would be returning as the son  of  a
    Taliban commander and there is no challenge to this finding.  The Judge
    found that the appellant had adopted a westernised lifestyle.  This may
    not be a material factor in relation to risk on  return  but  it  is  a
    factor  that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account   when
    considering whether or not relocation would be unduly harsh.  There  is
    a considerable amount of evidence in the appellant's bundle which would
    entitle the Judge to reach a proper conclusion that the  appellant  has
    adopted a western lifestyle. In any event his decision in my  view  did
    not turn on this.

16.  There is no challenge in the grounds to the finding that the  appellant
    would not have family or tribal protection in Kabul. This is a material
    consideration when deciding whether or not relocation would  be  unduly
    harsh.  The  Judge  accepted  the  appellant's  evidence  that  he  had
    attempted to trace his  family  but  had  failed.   This  evidence  was
    corroborated by Stephanie McGreevy in her letter of 2 May 2012 at  page
    149 of the appellant's bundle.  It was not an issue  raised  by  either
    party that the Secretary of  State  had  failed  in  carrying  out  her
    tracing duty which was not in any event material to the outcome of this
    case because the Judge accepted the appellant's evidence.

17.  It is clear in my view that the Judge  considered  that  the  appellant
    was vulnerable and I refer specifically to [24] of  the  determination.
    The evidence is that the appellant is part of his foster family.  There
    is a letter in the appellant's bundle from Croydon Unaccompanied Minors
    team of 30 April 2012 which indicates that the appellant would continue
    to receive support from the Unaccompanied Minors team  until  his  18th
    birthday when he will transfer to the Leaving Care team.

18.  The documentary evidence does not in itself establish  that  there  are
    any significant problems in relation to  the  appellant  and  from  the
    evidence it is clear that he is intelligent and a  good  student.   His
    foster mother's evidence is that he passed his driving test in 2014 and
    she describes him as a confident, ambitious and hardworking  person  in
    her letter of 30 September 2014.  There is evidence from Rosemary Demin
    of 30 September 2014.  Ms Demin has taught the appellant  and  she  has
    witnessed his vulnerability when he has turned to her for support.

19.  I accept that there was very little in the  documentary  evidence  that
    would suggest that the appellant is vulnerable (save  the  letter  from
    Rosemary Demin referred to above).  However, the Judge  heard  evidence
    from  Ms  Demin  and  he  recorded  the  following  at  [17]   of   the
    determination;

         "The next witness to give evidence was Rosemary Demin  who  adopted
         the contents of her letter dated 30 September 2014.  Mrs Demin  was
         a teacher of 40 years standing  and  taught  the  appellant  for  a
         period of two years.  She stated that in her opinion the  appellant
         had adopted westernised values and was liberal in his  outlook  and
         would find it very difficult to  adjust  to  a  traditional  Afghan
         life.  She described the relationship that the appellant  had  with
         Mrs Miller to the extent that he addressed her as mother."


20.  The Judge also heard evidence from the appellant's foster  mother,  Mrs
    Miller, and her evidence is recorded at paragraph 16 as follows:

         "The second witness to give evidence  was  Mrs  Elaine  Miller  who
         adopted  her  witness  statement/letter  from  the   bundle.    She
         confirmed that he was the foster  mother  of  the  appellant  since
         arrival and that exceptionally she had  allowed  the  appellant  to
         stay on after the age of 18 because she thought he was not able  to
         support himself independently in the community and still  needed  a
         high level of emotional support.  She described the nightmares that
         the appellant had experienced in the earlier period of time that he
         was with her  and  how  these  had  lessened.   She  described  the
         relationship that  she  enjoyed  with  the  appellant  and  how  he
         considered her his mother as well as the relationship enjoyed  with
         her natural children."


21.  The Judge also heard evidence from Maya Pritchard from  Asylum  Welfare
    and recorded her evidence at paragraph 18 as follows:

         "The last witness to give evidence was Maya Pritchard  from  Asylum
         Welfare and she described the contact that the  appellant  has  had
         with her organisation.  She adopted her  letter  dated  21  October
         2014.  She described the  appellant's  education  achievements  and
         also the efforts that were jointly made in order to try  and  trace
         his family with the Red Cross but to no avail in 2012."


22.  The Judge in my view was entitled to consider that  the  appellant  was
    vulnerable having accepted the evidence of the  witnesses  and  it  was
    open to him to conclude that he needs a high level of support  as  this
    was  the  evidence  before  him.   In  my  view  this  is  a   material
    consideration in deciding whether relocation  would  be  unduly  harsh.
    The Judge found a high level of emotional dependency (see [33]), having
    taken into account both the appellant's evidence and that of his foster
    mother and her family.  In my view it was not necessary for  the  Judge
    to make specific and detailed findings in relation  to  the  nature  of
    this dependency.

23.  The Judge referred to the case of AA (unattended children) in  relation
    to the appellant's credibility in the light of his age,  when  material
    events occurred. The grounds argue that the Judge treated the appellant
    as a child but I am not persuaded of this.  The Judge was aware that he
    was dealing with an adult appellant and this is  clear  throughout  the
    determination.  However, it was open to him  to  find  that  he  was  a
    vulnerable young adult and to take into account that the appellant  was
    a child at the time of the key events.

24.  The Judge accepted the unchallenged  evidence  of  Claudio  Franco  and
    although the Judge did not set out the evidence in his determination it
    was clear that he took it into account in reaching the conclusion  that
    relocation would be unduly harsh.  The evidence of Claudio  Franco  (in
    relation to relocation to Kabul) is as follows:

         "27. The option of relocating to Kabul  is  mentioned,  potentially
             with AS's mother and sister.  As AS points out in  his  Appeal
             Statement, decisions like  this  are  not  made  by  women  in
             Pashtun culture, and traditional Afghan village women  do  not
             work outside of the house.  AS's mother would be very unlikely
             to possess the initiative,  the  skills,  or  the  independent
             finances necessary to relocate to Kabul with him.   Indeed,  a
             short walk anywhere in Kabul will demonstrate that a  majority
             of the beggars on the streets are destitute  mothers  with  no
             men to support them, whether their husbands have been  killed,
             arrested, vanished or simply run away.


         28.  The option  of  AS  making  his  own  way  in  Kabul  must  be
             considered.  AS is a young man whose life experience  consists
             firstly of life  in  a  remote  rural  mountain  village,  and
             secondly, of a life in the UK  which  has  been  directed  and
             structured by  social  services,  school,  etc.   Neither  has
             prepared him for life in a chaotic, teeming,  predatory  large
             city full of desperate people, such as Kabul.  Lacking a home,
             employment and any friends or family  members  -  indeed,  any
             contacts at all - his situation would be extremely precarious.
              It must be remembered that in Afghan culture and society, the
             importance of family and kinship networks and the support they
             provide are absolutely central, and constitute defining traits
             of a person to an extent which it is difficult  to  understand
             when accustomed to the highly individualistic  perspective  of
             British culture.  This means that relocating  and  'vanishing'
             into the anonymity of a large city is not possible in the same
             way that it would be in the UK or Europe; as family, local and
             ethnic/tribal connections  are  so  paramount  in  importance,
             people will always be asked for, and defined by, their origins
             in these terms.  These  factors  are  important  when  seeking
             employment,  particularly  employment  in  'professional'   or
             'educated' posts, and his opportunities in this  regard  would
             be  much  reduced  by  these  circumstances,  whether  he  has
             marketable skills learned in the UK or not.


         29.  Unemployment is  high  in  Afghanistan,  and  as  the  western
             nations withdraw both their  military  forces  and  draw  down
             their humanitarian aid and re-construction and  infrastructure
             investment, the economic situation will only  get  worse;  the
             government of Afghanistan estimates it needs to create 500,000
             new jobs (in a country of  30-35m  population,  largely  still
             dependent on subsistence agriculture) to balance the  economic
             vacuum which will be created by the western withdrawal.


         30.  Due to the massive return  of  refugees  from  Pakistan  after
             2001, which led to the population of Kabul  increasing  beyond
             the capacity of its infrastructure, and due to the destruction
             of 65,000-70,000 houses caused during the war, many  of  which
             have still, 13 years later, not been  rebuilt,  housing  is  a
             major problem in Kabul.   A  four  bedroom  house  in  a  more
             affluent neighbourhood can cost $10,000 a month to rent. As of
             early 2011, even in the most remote and inaccessible parts  of
             Kabul (up the mountain sides), the average  family  house  was
             rented  for  $220-330/month,  with   no   running   water   or
             electricity provided.  According to  the  Afghan  Ministry  of
             Housing, the number of houses urgently needed is 180 per  cent
             more than  those  currently  existing.   On  average,  Kabul's
             houses and flats accommodate more than  three  times  as  many
             police as they were built to, according  to  the  Ministry  of
             Housing.  The typical low income Afghan household  would  cope
             by sharing one or two rooms among 7-12 individuals.


         31.  Earning a livelihood on his own would be  a  major  challenge.
             As mentioned above in this report, and as pointed  out  by  AS
             himself, access to skilled  and  educated  jobs  -  one  which
             might, for example, make  use  of  AS's  English  or  computer
             skills - is still widely dictated by connections and nepotism.
              Employment with a foreign NGO or other organisation may  have
             been an option several years ago, but as noted,  most  foreign
             organisations are drawing down their presences in Afghanistan,
             leaving large numbers of drivers,  interpreters,  translators,
             logistics assistants and other workers unemployed.


         32.  Unskilled work as a daily labourer in the building industry is
             the  most  widely  available  option,  but  due   to   massive
             unemployment (35-50% depending on the estimates) most  workers
             only get a few days of work each week; his chances of  getting
             even this type of employment  would  depend  on  his  physical
             strength.  Daily labour rates in Kabul are about  200  afs/day
             (US$4), but of course work is  not  always  available.   EUPOL
             estimates that a man with a  family  needs  $600  to  live  in
             Kabul; a single man would need a fraction  of  that,  probably
             $200 at least.  Other chances  of  employment  are  paid  even
             less: as a baker earning 40 Afs. (US$0.80) a day, for example.


         33.  Were he to be forced to relocate to  Kabul  on  his  own,  the
             probability of his ending up on the  street  without  home  or
             employment therefore is very high, in  a  city  already  awash
             with desperate people, having an infrastructure  stretched  to
             breaking point, and lacking any form of social  services.   He
             might have recourse to various options in this case, involving
             charitable organisations such as  ASCHIANA  who  provide  free
             meals, or  the  Revolutionary  Association  of  the  Women  of
             Afghanistan (RAWA), who run an orphanage in  Kabul.   Even  at
             best, these options would provide a  subsistence  or  survival
             level existence.  Added to this must then be the  considerable
             risks of becoming a victim of crime  on  the  streets,  or  of
             sexual predation of street children, which  is  a  significant
             problem.


         34.  The RFRL mentions the availability of return and reintegration
             packages to support returnees  to  Afghanistan,  but  cautions
             that it would be 'unwise to exaggerate the importance of  such
             packages'.  While I do not have access  to  information  which
             would allow me to evaluate what form of such support, if  any,
             might be available to AS  -  my  understanding  is  that  such
             packages are normally only available to voluntary returnees  -
             I would  point  to  a  study  commissioned  by  the  Norwegian
             Directorate of Immigration, which also discusses in  depth  UK
             Home   Office   return   policies   and   IOM   (International
             Organisation for Migration) and other such packages available.
              To quote from the study,


                  'in discussion with this study team  some  [UK]  officials
                  expressed little confidence in the effectiveness [of  such
                  packages]...  Rather, the wider contextual issues such  as
                  personal circumstances and conditions in the home  country
                  were seen as determining factors.'


         35.  Hostile attention from either ANSF  or  Taleban  within  Kabul
             must be considered.  Living on the street, eventual encounters
             with the police would be inevitable.  Aside from the  standard
             police abuses which are a risk to  anyone  in  this  position,
             people in Afghanistan are identified,  rather  than  by  name,
             surname and address, by their name, their  father's  name  (or
             husband's name, in the case of women), and their  village  and
             district of origin.  This being so, it is possible, albeit not
             highly likely, that he might be identified as the  son  of  an
             active Taleban member, which could lead to  an  escalation  of
             the abuse.  As for  the  Taleban,  they  operate  country-wide
             information  and  intelligence  networks.   Again,  while  not
             highly likely that Taleban would identify him in  Kabul,  were
             this to happen,  they  would  almost  certainly  leverage  his
             vulnerable position to attempt to recruit him or return him to
             his father.


         36.  As mentioned, western military involvement in  Afghanistan  is
             being drawn down, with a view to a complete pull-out by  2014,
             leaving a minimal number of troops  for  vital  stability  and
             infrastructure protection operations.  While reliable  figures
             are difficult to come by, after a peak in 2009,  contributions
             of humanitarian, aid and development funds are now  decreasing
             and will continue to  do  so;  this  will  further  negatively
             impact the ability of charitable  organisations  and  NGOs  to
             mitigate the effects of destitution and displacement caused by
             war in Afghanistan.  With the departure of foreign troops, the
             risk that Afghanistan will return to a state of all-out  civil
             war  and  fragmentation  similar  to  that  seen  between  the
             withdrawal of Soviet forces  in  1989  and  the  rise  of  the
             Taliban in 1994-1996 is very real, as even  the  Parliamentary
             Defence  Select  Committee  appears  to  tacitly  acknowledge.
             Sadly, all of my experience and knowledge regarding the Afghan
             situation leads me to consider a negotiated political solution
             leading to the end of all hostilities highly unlikely.


         37.  In conclusion, having spent a significant amount of time  over
             the  past  15  years  travelling,  living   and   working   in
             Afghanistan and Pakistan as a journalist, author,  researcher,
             investigator and analyst, it is consistent with  my  knowledge
             and experience that:


             a)   AS's account of his life before he left Afghanistan,  and
                  his account of his father's activities with  the  Taleban,
                  though lacking in confirmation from  independent  sources,
                  is on its own terms believable, considering the prevailing
                  cultural, social,  political  and  military  context,  and
                  contains  some  details  that  match   known   events   of
                  historical record and that match wider events  and  trends
                  in the country at the time.


             b)   Were AS to return to his village and district of  origin,
                  considering his circumstances, he would be at real risk of
                  intimidation,  injury,  forced  recruitment,   or   death,
                  whether from the Taleban, ALP, or local militias.


             c)   Were AS to relocate or attempt to live in  Kabul  on  his
                  own, he would be highly likely to end  up  living  on  the
                  street, and would be at  real  risk  of  threats  such  as
                  malnutrition, disease,  victimisation  by  criminals,  and
                  sexual predation."

25.  All the factors  referred  to  by  Claudio  Franco  are  relevant  when
    assessing whether relocation would be unduly harsh and it is clear that
    the Judge took these factors into account in doing so.  In my view  the
    Judge did not make an error of law in allowing  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

26.  In relation to ground 2 the Judge  erred  in  allowing  the  appeal  on
    grounds of humanitarian protection for the reasons  identified  in  the
    grounds.

27.  In relation to ground 3 this must be considered in  the  light  of  the
    fact that the Judge made a lawfully sustainable finding in relation  to
    asylum.  In any event, the application was made before  the  new  Rules
    276ADE and Appendix FM and I am not persuaded that the Judge materially
    erred for the reasons given in the grounds of appeal. In any  event  it
    is unlikely that it could be proportionate to remove the  appellant  in
    light of the legally sustainable finding that it would be unduly  harsh
    to expect him to relocate to  Kabul.   The  Judge  concluded  that  the
    determinative issue in relation to Article 8 was  proportionality.   It
    was open to him  to  find  that  there  was  family  life  between  the
    appellant and his foster mother in the Ghising  sense,  Ghising  &  Ors
    [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC), and the grounds in my  view  do  not  identify
    that the balancing exercise was in any way flawed.

Notice of Decision

28.  There was no error of law in the decision of the  Judge  to  allow  the
    appeal on asylum grounds and under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention  on
    Human Rights and both of these decisions are maintained.

29.   I  set  aside  the  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  grounds   of
    humanitarian protection.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 21.01.15

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
