

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07900/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 5 February 2015                            |on 9 February 2015           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              HABIB AHMED RIAZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Agnew, dismissing  his  appeal  against  refusal  of  asylum,  on
    grounds directed against the Judge's  adverse  credibility  assessment.
    The criticisms include failure to notice that the appellant said he had
    undergone group therapy and was being  referred  for  counselling,  and
    that he was taking sertraline (an  anti-depressant),  ibuprofen  and  a
    cream for back pain; not making a  finding  on  whether  the  appellant
    suffered from PTSD; wrongly  finding  inconsistencies  between  medical
    reports  from  Pakistan  and  the  appellant's  evidence;  and  wrongly
    treating it as adverse that the appellant did not say to his GP that he
    had suffered torture.

 2. At the end of the grounds  the  appellant  accepts  that  new  evidence
    cannot be adduced to show error of  law,  but  says  that  evidence  is
    attached which at  any  rehearing  would  corroborate  the  appellant's
    explanation that the religious name Mohammed was also assigned  to  him
    in some of the documents he produced. (Discrepancies in  the  names  on
    the documents were among the reasons for finding against him).

 3. The respondent in a Rule 24 response submits that the  grounds  are  no
    more than re-argument and disagreement.

 4. (Although the case was also decided upon the  alternative  of  internal
    relocation, representatives agreed that the issue was too closely  tied
    to general credibility for the decision to stand on that  basis  alone,
    and that if the credibility conclusions did not stand, the  case  would
    have to be reheard.)

Submissions for appellant.

 5. Mr Byrne advanced his points under reference to 4 cases.

 6. On the authority of Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367, [2005]  INLR  377,  in
    particular at paragraphs 16 and 25, a Judge  could  not  make  her  own
    alternative medical diagnosis.  At paragraph 19  of  the  determination
    the Judge implied that she  found  other  causes  for  the  appellant's
    symptoms, without any good reason for doubting the conclusions  in  the
    report by Dr Moultrie of the Medical Foundation.  There was also  error
    in taking such a point without giving the appellant the chance to  meet
    it.  The appellant had since obtained a "rebuttal  report".   Mr  Byrne
    did not apply to introduce that in  evidence,  but  he  said  that  its
    existence showed that something might have been done to meet the point.



 7. English v Emery Reimbold & Strick Ltd [2002] 1 WLR and  cases  referred
    to therein at paragraph 20 established that a coherent reasoned opinion
    expressed by a suitably qualified expert should be  the  subject  of  a
    coherent reasoned rebuttal.   The Medical Foundation  report  had  that
    status and there had been nothing to rebut it.  The  Judge  had  failed
    either to accept or reject its conclusions.

 8. HA v SSHD [2007] CSIH 65 at paragraphs 16  -  17  is  authoritative  on
    assessment of credibility and resulting errors of law.   At  paragraphs
    43, 45 and 54 the Judge found naming discrepancies  quite  significant.
    She rejected the appellant's explanation that this arose from customary
    practice regarding use of religious names along with other names.   The
    new evidence attached to the grounds is headed, "March 2006, A Guide to
    Names and Naming Practices".  It states, "This guide has been  produced
    by the United Kingdom" and seems to be a document provided by Interpol.
     In a section dealing with Pakistan it  explains  difficulties  arising
    from naming conventions.   A  man  has  at  least  one  personal  name,
    including often but not always  a  religious  name.   Names  appear  in
    different orders.  The religious name should not  be  used  alone.   Mr
    Byrne said this evidence disclosed  a  classic  error  of  plausibility
    findings related to a  society  whose  culture  and  customs  are  very
    different from those in the UK.

 9. Mr Byrne next founded on Leisure Inns v  Perth  and  Kinross  Licensing
    Board 1991 SC 224 at page 233, "... behind  every  ground  for  refusal
    there must be adequate reasons, and .. for those reasons there must  be
    a proper basis in fact".  He said that this supplemented  his  previous
    point, and illustrated that the judge had  no  factual  basis  for  her
    finding.

10. Those principles showed that the Judge also went wrong at paragraph  40
    - 41 where she found it adverse that the appellant  had  not  disclosed
    his alleged history of torture to  his  GP.   The  Judge  verged  on  a
    clinical judgment that a person suffering from PTSD would make  such  a
    disclosure at a certain time, which was not hers  to  make.   This  was
    also dealt with in the rebuttal report.

Submissions for respondent.

11. Mr Matthews said that none of the submissions arose from the grounds of
    appeal, no application had been  made  to  amend,  and  none  of  those
    arguments should even be considered.  Alternatively, he said that  none
    of them  showed  any  reason  to  set  aside  the  determination.   The
    "Mibanga" point appeared to arise only from new evidence in a  rebuttal
    report which the appellant did not  seek  to  place  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The asylum and immigration jurisdiction might be flexible at
    times, but it was not a free-for-all without any rules  about  how  and
    when a case had to  be  made.   In  any  event  the  point  was  of  no
    substance.  It  was  an  elementary  duty  of  an  expert  to  consider
    alternative explanations, and a judge was entitled to note an  omission
    to do so.  This was an experienced judge in an  expert  tribunal.   Her
    passing observation that the doctor "did not comment on other  possible
    causes ... such as desk/computer work etc" was well within  her  scope.
    It did not imply that she thought she could make a  clinical  judgment.
    The medical report found only that symptoms were  "in  keeping"  or  in
    other  words  consistent  with  the  appellant's  claims  and  so   was
    essentially neutral.  The Judge did not have to make any more  findings
    about it than she did.  The naming point  was  not  the  subject  of  a
    ground of appeal although it was mentioned as an add-on.   The  Judge's
    analysis was perfectly logical on the evidence before her.  The further
    evidence did not strengthen the appellant's case, because according  to
    it the name "Ahmed" which he regularly  uses  would  be  his  religious
    name.  It  did  nothing  to  explain  the  inconsistent  appearance  of
    "Mohamed".

12. I did not need to hear from Mr Matthews on those points in the original
    grounds upon which Mr Byrne had not sought to expand.

Reply for appellant.

13. Mr Byrne said that there was a sufficient basis in the grounds for  the
    arguments he had advanced, and  that  the  submission  by  Mr  Matthews
    showed that in  any  event  there  had  been  no  disadvantage  to  the
    respondent.

Discussion and conclusions.

14. The Judge notes that a medical report does not  consider  other  causes
    for symptoms. It was not suggested that her observation  was  mistaken.
    The Judge did not go beyond her proper scope.  It reads too  much  into
    the remark to treat it as an alternative diagnosis.

15. There is no rule that a Judge may never find anything adverse  in  late
    emergence of a torture allegation, and Judges are generally well  aware
    that there may be good reasons for late disclosure.  The  determination
    at paragraphs 40-41 is a sensible explanation of why the  Judge  thinks
    that the appellant as an educated and  qualified  man  seeking  medical
    assistance for specific problems would give his GP the  information  to
    get to their source.

16. It  was  not  suggested  that  the  Judge's  identification  of  naming
    discrepancies (paragraphs 43-47, in particular)  was  inaccurate.   She
    carefully considered the appellant's explanation and gave  reasons  for
    rejecting it.  No lack of cultural awareness is there to be found.  The
    evidence which was not before her, as Mr Matthews  pointed  out,  falls
    well short of a convincing explanation.

17. The determination is a thorough and careful one.  Read as a  whole,  it
    gives numerous good reasons for rejecting the  appellant's  case.   The
    original grounds are  no  more  than  selective  disagreement,  factual
    quibbles on relatively minor points, and  afterthoughts.   Rightly,  Mr
    Bryce did not choose to pursue most of the matters  specifically  there
    mentioned.  Some of the points he sought to make might be squeezed into
    those grounds, others not.  I  do  not  think  it  would  be  a  useful
    exercise to draw the dividing line.  Taking all  the  submissions  into
    account, I do not think the appellant has shown that the  determination
    is anything less than a sound explanation to him of why  his  case  has
    fallen short of probation.

18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            5 February 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




