
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07324/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 1 April 2015                      |On 12 May 2015                       |
|Prepared 1 April 2015                |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                ZAFER NERGIZ
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Clarke, Counsel, instructed by Ahmad Rahman
Khan
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of  Turkey,  date  of  birth  1  April  1984,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 8 September  2014,  to
    make removal directions following the service of a  form  IS15A  on  14
    April 2014.  The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davidson
    (the judge) on 21 November 2014 and by a decision dated 15 January 2015
    he dismissed appeals under the Refugee Convention, Articles 2 and 3  of
    the ECHR and in respect of Humanitarian Protection.

2.   Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  given  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cox on 9 February 2015.

3.   The grounds settled by the solicitors raise a number of points but  the
    most significant point is  that  the  judge  made  full  and  extensive
    criticism of the Appellant's claim, his evidence, his reliability as  a
    witness,  significant  criticisms  of   inconsistency,   contradiction,
    evasion and vagueness. Then for the first time the judge turned to  the
    medical report of Dr Arnold, dated 30 October 2014, concerning  support
    for the Appellant's account and a diagnosis of PTSD and depression. The
    report was made at a time after the Appellant had  had  a  full  asylum
    interview. The Judge rejected the evidence of the doctor on  the  basis
    that the doctor has been receiving information from the  Appellant  who
    is "so patently an unreliable witness that I have decided not to accept
    Dr Arnold's conclusion in this case".

4.   I am fully satisfied from reading the balance of  the  decision,  after
    the quotation at paragraphs 61-64, that the rejection  of  Dr  Arnold's
    conclusions is solely driven by the assessment that the judge had  made
    of the Appellant and his evidence.

5.   In the Appellant's bundle before the judge, Dr Arnold (pages 16 to  22)
    set out his  methodology  and  identified  the  history  given  by  the
    Appellant. He made plain that the views he had formed were  not  simply
    those derived from the Appellant's claims of ill-treatment and  injury,
    it was also from his  examination  of  the  Appellant,  the  diagnostic
    conclusions reached and his assessment of the other potential causes of
    the identified PTSD.  It was, he said,

         "... unusual for a man to whom the extent and types of pathology in
         this case if he had not  survived  torture.  The  medical  evidence
         makes it more likely than not that he has indeed been harmed in the
         ways he described and has physical and psychological  damage  as  a
         result."

6.   In the circumstances, to dismiss the medical  evidence  principally  on
    the basis of the Appellant's lack of credibility and  the  presentation
    of his evidence, does not show a proper  assessment,  of  the  doctor's
    evidence, as part of the whole evidence.

7.   Accordingly I am satisfied that this was a  fundamental  error  of  law
    that means the decision will have to be remade.

8.   Mr Clarke further criticised the over-reliance by the  judge  upon  the
    contents of the screening interview on the  basis  that  the  screening
    interview's questions are limited and not to be taken, in the light  of
    the case law, to be of material weight.  It seemed to me that was  true
    other than where manifest discrepancies and differences  are  otherwise
    inexplicable.  Further, Mr Clarke criticised the failure to  take  into
    account the issue of PTSD, as recited in the material. It did not  seem
    to me that this is more than an iteration of the same point that I have
    already addressed.

9.   Finally, Mr Clarke criticised the conclusion the judge reached  on  the
    delay in leaving Turkey to come to the United Kingdom.  In  this  sense
    it  does  not  appear  that  there  was  a  significant  delay  if  the
    Appellant's claim was as he made out.  However, the delay in  making  a
    claim once he was within the safety and protection afforded to  him  in
    the United Kingdom was a matter that the judge was entitled to  take  a
    view upon, but plainly that had to be in the context of the evidence as
    a whole and the evidence received addressing those matters.  I  express
    no view whatsoever upon those issues.

10.  I am satisfied that the  Original  Tribunal's  decision  cannot  stand.
    The appeal is allowed to the extent that the matter  will  have  to  be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

(1)  Remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

(2)  Time estimate 3 hours.

(3)  Turkish interpreter required

(4)  Any additional evidence or documents court information relied  upon  to
    be provided in bundles to be served in the Tribunal and the parties  no
    later than 10 working days before the further hearing in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

(5)  Not to be listed before First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson  nor  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge R A Cox.

(6)  To be heard at Taylor House.



Signed        Date 7 May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
