
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07870/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st October 2015                 |On 29th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                          MASTER SAIFULDIN ABDULLah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Hindson
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 11th May 2015.

Background

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of the  Sudan,  born  on  22nd  October  1997,
    arrived in the UK clandestinely on 6th June 2014.   He  claimed  asylum
    ten days later and was refused on 22nd September 2014  on  the  grounds
    that the account which  he  gave  of  the  events  leading  up  to  his
    departure from Sudan, including an arrest and  subsequent  escape,  was
    not credible.  Additionally it was not accepted that he was a child.

 3. The Judge also disbelieved his story. He referred to Mr Verney's report
    in respect of his adverse credibility findings. He also stated that  he
    could rely on the report in relation to ethnicity, and said  that  even
    to his untrained eye the Appellant was clearly of black African  rather
    than Arabic origin. He accepted that he was from the Funj tribe

 4. He wrote as follows:

         "Mr Verney  opines  that  the  Appellant,  having  previously  been
         arrested, interrogated and escaped would be at risk on  return.   I
         am not satisfied that he has been arrested, interrogated or escaped
         and do not find that he would be at risk  on  return  merely  as  a
         consequence of his ethnicity.   Mr Verney does not go so far as  to
         say that.  On the Appellant's own evidence he has lived all of  his
         life in Sudan with no such problems."

 5. He referred to the case of AA (Non-Arab Darfuris relocation)  Sudan  CG
    UKAIT 00056 but found  that  this  case  dealt  specifically  with  the
    position of Darfuris, which the Appellant is not.

 6. The Appellant challenged that decision on the grounds  that  the  Judge
    had provided inadequate reasoning so far as  the  Appellant's  age  was
    concerned and had not properly had regard to the expert  report  of  Dr
    Peter Verney, which was before him when he made the decision.

 7. Permission to appeal was initially refused but subsequently granted  by
    Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  who  said  that  he  was  particularly
    concerned that the First-tier Tribunal had not given proper reasons for
    rejecting the expert evidence.

Submissions

 8. Miss Johnstone told me that the position of the Presenting  Officer  at
    the hearing was that the Appellant's ethnicity would  quickly  come  to
    light, which is correct.  At paragraph  97  of  the  report  Dr  Verney
    states that  the  authorities  in  Sudan  make  it  their  business  to
    establish a person's  ethnic  identity  and  origin  and  the  security
    apparatus collects this kind of information routinely.

 9.  She  acknowledged  that,  although  the  Appellant's  nationality  was
    accepted in the reasons for refusal letter,  there  was  no  engagement
    with his claim to be at risk on account  of  his  ethnicity  which  was
    mistakenly referred to as the  Fong  tribe.   She  said  that  she  had
    nothing to rebut Dr  Verney's  conclusions  at  paragraph  159  of  his
    report. She had no objection to the decision being remade on the  basis
    of the report.

Findings and conclusions

10. Paragraph 159 states:

         "The regime's treatment of him will be the same as their  treatment
         of a non-Arab Darfuri.  It is carrying out the  same  military  and
         security forces campaigns against the people of  his  tribe  as  it
         does against non-Arab Darfuris.  He will be treated as a member  of
         the 'rebel' opposition by reason of his ethnic identity alone,  and
         will be at high risk of severe maltreatment in detention."

11. The Judge erred in law in stating that Dr Verney did not  believe  that
    the Appellant would be at risk  on  return  as  a  consequence  of  his
    ethnicity.  It is clear  from  his  report  that  that  is  exactly  Dr
    Verney's view.

Decision

12. The original Judge erred in law. His decision  is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
