

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
AA/07241/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham|            Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 6th February 2018                  |            On 5th March 2018         |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     W S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Semega-Janneh, Counsel instructed by Bankfield
                    Heath Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Malawi born on 13th December 1968.
     The Appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom on 4th May 2003 when
    she was given  temporary  admission  for  further  investigation.   The
    Appellant  absconded  until  she  was  arrested  on  12th  July   2009.
    Eventually and on 30th April 2012 the  Appellant  applied  for  asylum.
    That application was refused for the reasons given in a Refusal  Letter
    dated 10th September 2014.  The Appellant appealed, and her appeal  was
    eventually heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parker  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Stoke-on-Trent on 1st September 2017.  He decided to dismiss
    the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds
    for the reasons given in his Decision dated 19th September  2017.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision and on 13th October 2017
    such permission was granted.

Error Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. At the hearing before the Judge, the Appellant requested an adjournment
    as the Tribunal had not supplied the Appellant with an  interpreter  in
    the Nkende dialect of  her  first  language.   The  Judge  refused  the
    application for the reasons given in paragraph 12 of the Decision.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Semega-Jannah argued that there had been a
    procedural irregularity by the Judge amounting to an error of law.  The
    Judge had erred in refusing the application for  an  adjournment.   The
    Appellant had  been  denied  a  fair  hearing  by  the  absence  of  an
    appropriate interpreter.  The duty was on the Tribunal to  provide  the
    right interpreter.  It was known that there were at least two  Tribunal
    interpreters who spoke the Nkende dialect.   If  the  appeal  had  been
    listed at a hearing centre  where  those  interpreters  operated  there
    would have been no problem.  The absence of an appropriate  interpreter
    was not the fault of  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant  had  given  her
    evidence in English at the hearing, but she had not been  happy  to  do
    so.

 5. In response, Mr Mills argued that there had been no material  error  of
    law in the decision of the Judge  to  refuse  the  application  for  an
    adjournment.  Mr Mills  referred  to  the  Rule  24  response  and  the
    decision in Nwaigwe (adjournment fairness)  [2014]  UKIAT  000412.   He
    pointed out that there had  already  been  considerable  delay  in  the
    disposal of this appeal prior to the hearing  before  the  Judge.   The
    appeal had been lodged in October 2014 and there had been no less  than
    seven adjournments of the hearing owing to interpreter  problems.   The
    Appellant had grown up in  Malawi,  a  country  where  English  was  an
    official language.  The Appellant had lived in the UK  for  many  years
    and  had  studied  in  English.   The  Appellant's  representative  had
    indicated at the hearing before the Judge that he  was  happy  for  the
    appeal to be decided on written evidence and  submissions.   The  Judge
    had been satisfied at paragraph 13 of the Decision that  the  Appellant
    was fluent in English.

 6. I am loathe to find an error of law in the decision of the Judge not to
    adjourn the hearing of the appeal  yet  again  in  circumstances  where
    there had been considerable delay in disposing of the appeal  including
    no less than seven previous adjournments.  I  am  aware  that  avoiding
    delay is a  factor  to  be  considered  when  deciding  the  overriding
    interest in any particular case as stated in paragraph 2(2)(e)  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  However, ensuring so far as practicable that  the
    parties are able to participate fully in proceedings is also  a  factor
    as given in Rule 2(2)(c) of those Rules.  It is  apparent  to  me  that
    through   liaison   between   the   Tribunal   and   the    Appellant's
    representatives it would not be too difficult  for  one  of  the  known
    Tribunal Nkende interpreters to attend a fixed hearing date in order to
    interpret.  As stated at the hearing before me it is the  duty  of  the
    Tribunal to ensure that an appropriate interpreter  is  available,  and
    the unfortunate history of this appeal has not been the  fault  of  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant can only participate fully in the proceedings
    by giving evidence in her first language and in which  she  is  fluent.
    It was suggested by Mr Mills that the Appellant is fluent  in  English,
    but the Judge noted at paragraph 13 of the Decision that at  times  the
    Appellant "did not know the precise word".  As  recorded  in  the  last
    sentence of paragraph 12 of the decision, the Judge decided  to  refuse
    the application for an adjournment on the understanding  that  no  such
    interpreter in the Nkende language could be found.  As mentioned above,
    this is not correct.

 7. My decision  is  that  the  failure  by  the  Tribunal  to  provide  an
    appropriate interpreter for the hearing prevented  the  Appellant  from
    fully participating in the proceedings  and  amounts  to  a  procedural
    error being a material error of law.

 8. I did not proceed to remake the decision in the  appeal  because  there
    was no interpreter to facilitate the Appellant in giving her  evidence,
    although on this occasion this was  not  the  fault  of  the  Tribunal.
    However the decision in the appeal will be  remade  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  in  accordance  with  paragraph  7.2(b)   of   the   Practice
    Statements.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date 28th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

