

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07626/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|On 27 January 2015                            |On 28 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                          GOOTIAR ABDULLAH MAHMOODI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms N Weir, of Latta & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge David C Clapham SSC, promulgated on 27  August  2014,  dismissing
    his appeal against refusal of asylum.

 2. The appellant's first firm of solicitors withdrew from acting by letter
    dated 23 March 2014.  They had  earlier  lodged  a  neuropsychologist's
    report which recommended a psychiatric evaluation.   A second  firm  of
    solicitors was instructed.  They wrote to the First-tier Tribunal on 10
    July 2014 saying that the appellant had been admitted to hospital after
    being attacked and stabbed, but they hoped to obtain instructions prior
    to the hearing.  On 21 July 2014 the second firm withdrew from  acting.
      The hearing took place on 14 August 2014.  The appellant was  neither
    present nor represented.  The Judge decided to proceed, observing  that
    if he postponed the case another Judge was likely to be faced  with  an
    identical position.

 3. On 19 August 2014 the appellant's present solicitors wrote to the First-
    tier Tribunal saying that he had not attended, that  he  did  not  know
    whether his previous agents did, and asking what happened.  The  letter
    does not say why the appellant did not attend.

 4. In his grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal the  appellant  contends
    that the Judge ought to have adjourned  because  "...  there  was  good
    reason for the absence of the appellant and this had been  communicated
    to the Tribunal".

 5.  On  19  September  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Garratt  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted.   He  observed
    from the file that the notice of hearing sent to the appellant  at  his
    last recorded address had been returned in the  post  and  thought  the
    Judge was arguably wrong not to adjourn for re-service with  notice  of
    the consequences of non-attendance.  I cannot now  see  the  return  of
    that notice on file, but the point seems rather misleading.  The letter
    of 19 August 2014 shows that the appellant knew of the hearing.   There
    was a history of prior adjournments.  Various notices issued to him all
    stated in the usual way that the case might be decided in  his  absence
    if he did not attend.

 6. In a rule 24  response  to  the  grant  of  permission  the  respondent
    maintains that given the lack of evidence  of  the  clamed  attack  and
    hospitalisation, the lack of instructed representatives, and failure to
    attend or communicate with the Tribunal it was open  to  the  Judge  to
    find that there would be no useful purpose in an adjournment.

 7. Ms Weir submitted thus.  She accepted that there was before  the  Judge
    very little information about any hospitalisation of the appellant  due
    to any incident before 10 July 2014, and that her firm's letter  of  19
    August 2014 contained no explanation of non-attendance.  She said  that
    the appellant had instructed her firm only shortly before then.  He had
    difficulties in providing even basic information.  He did not appear to
    know the date of the incident leading to hospitalisation in July or how
    long he spent in hospital.  However, he was present on 27 January 2015.
     He now seemed to understand the importance of co-operating to have his
    case heard.  Efforts had been made to obtain the  medical  history  but
    were complicated by the appellant no longer being registered  with  his
    previous GP.  His new GP had confirmed that from 10 - 17 December  2015
    the appellant  was  in  hospital  over  mental  health  issues.   These
    problems appear to have got worse since July 2014.   A  medical  report
    has been obtained which  confirms  he  is  fit  to  give  evidence.   A
    statement has been obtained from him, although  with  some  difficulty.
    If his case were to be reheard, an application was likely to be made to
    include mental health issues among his grounds, not under Article 3 but
    under Article 8.   The  case  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.

 8. Mrs Saddiq said that it was not surprising that the First-tier Tribunal
    elected to proceed under all the circumstances then known, but she  put
    up no strong opposition to the appellant having one further opportunity
    to run his case, in the interests of fairness.

 9. I indicated that there would be a rehearing.

10. Error of law by not adjourning arises in two main ways.   A  Judge  may
    fail to recognise  that  fairness  calls  for  an  adjournment  on  the
    information before the Tribunal.  On other  occasions,  procedure  goes
    astray for some reason unknown to the Judge e.g. a last  minute  mishap
    which prevents  both  attendance  and  prompt  communication  with  the
    Tribunal.

11. I do not think there was any error of the first  type.   There  was  no
    reason for the Judge to think the appellant deserved an adjournment  or
    that his case might be significantly better even if one were granted.

12. It is a marginal issue whether this case  discloses  an  error  of  the
    second  type,  which  can  be  categorised  as  inadvertent  procedural
    unfairness.  It remains unexplained why the appellant did not  turn  up
    at the hearing.  He has not done much to help his case.  There  may  be
    underlying reasons, but there is a limit beyond which procedure  cannot
    be stretched.  On the other hand, there is some indication that matters
    may have gone wrong (through no fault of the First-tier  Tribunal)  and
    that the case may be better if he is given the opportunity to put  that
    right.  There is just enough to justify giving him a further chance.

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. No  findings
    are to stand.   Under  s.12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007  Act  and  Practice
    Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of judicial fact finding  necessary
    for the decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate  to  remit
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  member  or  members  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are  not  to  include
    Judge D C Clapham.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            27 January 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




