
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07944/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 May 2016                                |On 29 July 2016               |
|Prepared 10 May 2016                          |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                               mr Akbar Rafiee
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Iran, appealed against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision, dated 23 September 2014, to make removal  directions.
    A Reasons for Refusal Letter of 11  September  2014  having  previously
    been served.  The appeal against the Secretary of State's decision came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Devlin (the judge). His  decision  [D]
    on 7 March 2015 be dismissed the  appeal  on  the  Refugee  Convention,
    Humanitarian Protection and Articles 2 and 3 ECHR grounds  as  well  as
    with reference to Article 8  ECHR.

2.   The grounds of appeal make no challenge to the  decision  made  by  the
    judge in relation to the Article 8 ECHR claim nor in  relation  to  the
    claim to be in need of Humanitarian Protection.

3.   The substance of the claim before the  judge  particularly  related  to
    whether or not the Appellant had converted to a branch of the Christian
    faith known as the Dorodians, an evangelical and  proselytising  faith,
    and if so what were the risks he faced on return to Iran.   A  somewhat
    confused element of the claim was whether or not this was a refugee sur
    place claim or the consequence, if the Appellant had converted, or  the
    risks he was likely to face on return: Repeated in numerous  paragraphs
    in the decision was that the judge had a range of documentary and  oral
    evidence, the former coming from a Pastor Harding, and from a Mr Salem.
     The position was that Mr Salem was not an  ordained  minister  of  the
    Dorodian Church: although he plainly had experience and could  speak  a
    variety of matters.  The judge did not regard Mr Salem position in  the
    church as equivalent to an ordained minister in terms of giving  weight
    to the assessment of whether  the  Appellant  had  genuinely  converted
    and/or his  assessment  of  the  extent  to  which  the  Appellant  had
    progressed towards a point where he could be baptised  as  a  Christian
    convert.  The matter therefore was, amongst others, referred to at  the
    following paragraphs: [d] 242, 243-247, 266, 270-279  and  287  of  the
    decision.

4.   There were other references that are essentially in the same vein.   Of
    itself that would have been an assessment the  judge  was  entitled  to
    make. The particular problem was, and  I  accept  what  Mr  Brown,  who
    appeared before the judge, says of  the  matter.  Whilst  there  was  a
    discussion early in the hearing, before the hearing had really started,
    as to the standing of Mr Salem; whether or not he could be regarded  as
    of equivalent authority to an ordained minister.  It was said that  the
    judge indicated that he did not see that  the  evidence  of  conversion
    strictly needed to come from a church minister.  Accordingly  Mr  Brown
    he had no reason to seek an adjournment to call an ordained minister of
    the church. The significance of the status of Mr Salem simply  was  not
    at that stage disclosed as a basis on which the judge was  subsequently
    to dismiss or diminish the evidence given by Mr Salem.

5.   Miss Johnstone argued that  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  judge  being
    entitled to reach the view he did, had a range of evidence  not  simply
    that from Mr  Salem  which  would  have  entitled  the  judge  to  have
    similarly taken the view that the  evidence  had  not  established  the
    Appellant was a genuine convert to Christianity.

6.   Whilst that may in fact be a fair point, the repetitive nature  of  the
    judge's decision makes quite plain that it is the standing of Mr  Salem
    which wholly diminished the weight that was given to  what  would  have
    been preferred evidence from an ordained minister.   It  was  not  said
    that Mr Salem's evidence or its weight  had  been   diminished  by  its
    presentaition  or  cross-examination.  Thus  it  was  said  there   was
    procedural  unfairness  at  the  hearing  which  tainted  the   judge's
    assessment of the issue of risk on return.

7.   It is clear from the decision [D 281 and 282 through to  288]  that  it
    is the rejection of the nature of the Appellant's  conversion  and  its
    genuineness that forms the sole consideration of risk on return on that
    issue.  I was satisfied that the judge did not raise with the  parties,
    before the conclusion of the case, the significance he  did  attach  to
    the  status of Mr Salem and weight that could be given to his evidence.
     If it had been raised at the hearing then no-one has noted it  and  it
    seemed to me unlikely the judge did so.  Accordingly I do not  need  to
    resolve the issue of whether the judge made sufficient and  appropriate
    findings in connection with whether  or  not  there  was  authorisation
    leave to leave Iran or the risks now posed on return  to  Iran  by  the
    means of departure.  There was procedural unfairness, an error of  law,
    in the judge not raising the issue or giving the parties any notice  of
    his approach to the assessment of evidence.

8.   I find the Original Tribunal's decision cannot  stand  and  the  matter
    will have to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.  No findings of fact
    to stand.

Directions
     (1) Relist in Manchester.
     (2) Time estimate: three hours.
     (3) Not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Devlin.
    (4)  Further documents relating to the issues, including any update  on
         the case law relevant to the issues of return or return as a failed
         asylum seeker from the United Kingdom, to be provided.
    (5)  A skeleton argument addressing the issues of risk on return to  be
         provided by both parties.
     (6) Any updated country information to be provided.
    (7)  Such additional documentation as required to  be  provided  to  be
         served not later than ten working days before the matter is remade.



9.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 27 July2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
 P.S.  I  regret  the  delay  in  promulgation  caused  by  the  file  being
    misplaced.


