
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07155/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 October 2016                       |On 17 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                     AH
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER IN PLACE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr. A. Eaton of counsel, instructed by South West
                   Law Centres
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 History of Appeal


   1. The Appellant, who was born on  1  January  2000,  is  a  national  of
      Afghanistan. He left Afghanistan in 2014  and  his  fingerprints  were
      recorded in Hungary on 19 March 2014. He applied  for  asylum  in  the
      United Kingdom on 7 May 2014,


   2. His date of birth was initially found to be that of 1 January 1997  on
      20 May 2014 and he had his screening interview on  30  May  2014.   He
      said that he feared persecution by the Taliban,  who  had  killed  his
      father and believed that he and his father had  been  spying  for  the
      Americans.  A substantive asylum interview took place on 17  September
      2014 and a second age assessment was conducted  on  3  November  2014,
      which found him to be 17 years of age. He  was  refused  asylum  on  4
      November 2014 and his date of birth was deemed to be 1  January  1996.




   3. The Appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lewis  on
      18 February 2015. By this time, the London  Borough  of  Lewisham  had
      revised its age assessment and concluded that the Appellant  was  only
      15 years of age.  As a consequence, counsel acting for the  Respondent
      invited the Judge to remit the  case  to  the  Respondent  for  a  re-
      consideration. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lewis allowed the  appeal  to
      the extent that the fact that the decision had been reached whilst  it
      was believed that the Appellant was older than he was meant  that  the
      decision not to grant him asylum was not in accordance with the law.


   4. The Respondent made a further decision on the Appellant's  application
      on 10 April 2015 but maintained the decision to refuse him asylum  and
      discretionary leave to remain.  The Appellant  appealed  against  this
      second decision on 23 April 2015.


   5. The Appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Andonian
      on 22 July 2016 and he dismissed the appeal in a decision  promulgated
      on 15 August 2016.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal  to
      the Upper Tribunal on 30 August 2016  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Fisher granted him permission to appeal on 9 September 2016.

Error of Law Hearing

   6. The parties had had the opportunity to discuss the appeal  before  the
      case was  called  on.   Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  informed  me  that  she
      accepted that there were fundamental flaws in the decision  by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Andonian and that the appeal should be remitted to
      the First-tier Tribunal for a re-hearing.


   7. Mr. Eaton did not oppose this course of action.

Decision
   8. In paragraph 5 of his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian
      accepted that the Appellant had been born on 1 January 2000 and at
      paragraph 18 he said that he had been mindful of the Appellant's age
      when reaching his decision. But there was no indication from his
      findings of fact and credibility that this was the case. He had failed
      to take into account guidance relating to cases involving
      unaccompanied children claiming asylum. For example, the UNHCR
      Handbook and Guidelines on Procedures and Criteria for Determining
      Refugee Status[1] reminds us that there is no special provision in the
      1951 Convention regarding the refugee status of persons under age. The
      same definition of a refugee applies to all individuals, regardless of
      their age.  But at the same time the UNHCR Handbook reminds us that
      the question of whether a child qualifies for refugee status must be
      determined taking into account his or her stage of mental development
      and maturity. The UNHCR Handbook also states that where a child has
      not reached a sufficient degree of maturity to make it possible to
      establish a well-founded fear in the same way as for an adult, it may
      be necessary to have greater regard to certain objective factors.

9.   In addition, in cases involving children the UNHCR's Guidelines on
    Child Asylum Claims recommends that "although the burden of proof is
    usually shared between the examiner and the applicant in adult claims,
    it may be necessary for an examiner to assume a greater burden of proof
    in children's claim, especially if the child concerned is
    unaccompanied". It also notes that "a child, by reason of his lack of
    knowledge, experience and maturity, cannot be expected to comply with
    procedures in the same way as an adult. Of course, a child may lie as
    well as tell the truth, but he may also find it more difficult to
    answer questions with the necessary understanding and insight[2]".
10.  When considering the credibility of the Appellant's account First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andonian also failed to consider it in the context of
    any objective evidence or relevant case law. Instead, he relied on
    assertions of plausibility which were not rooted in the facts or
    country information.
11.  As noted by Ms Brocklesby-Weller, he also noted in paragraph12 of his
    decision that in his first age assessment, he had told social workers
    that both his parents were dead. I could not find such an assertion in
    the papers in the file.
12.  In paragraph 19 he also relied on an assertion that the Appellant had
    been encountered by the Metropolitan Police working as a pizza delivery
    driver. However, the Appellant had denied that this was the case and
    there was no further evidence to confirm the encounter.
13.  For all of these reasons I find that the decision contained material
    errors of law.

Decision

  14. The Appellant's appeal is allowed.


  15. The Appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de  novo
      before a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Andonian.


Date:  10 October 2016

Nadine Finch
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
-----------------------
[1] December 2011
[2] R (on the application of Blerim Mlloja) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2005] EWHC 2833 (Admin)

