
[pic]
IAC-CH- CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07991/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 29th April 2015                   |    On 18th May 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

                                     LD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITAL WITH REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal.  Neither party invited me to rescind the order and I continue
    it pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008.

 2. The appellant is a female citizen of Albanian, born 19  February  1988.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom in  July  2013  with  her  son.   She
    claimed asylum upon arrival.  Her claim was rejected by the  respondent
    and she appealed.  Her appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal  Walker  sitting  at  Newport  in  September   2014.    In   a
    determination dated 19  September  2014,  Judge  Walker  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. The appellant then sought leave to appeal.  Ground 1 alleged perversity
    and irrationality, which included an  allegation  that  the  judge  had
    cross-examined the appellant and had thereby entered  into  the  arena.
    Ground 2 alleged a failure to take account of evidence  and  a  further
    ground alleged "other errors".

 4. In granting leave to appeal another judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    gave as her reasons the following:

         "1.   The  Appellant  seeks  permission  to  appeal   against   the
         determination of First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Walker  promulgated  on
         19th September 2014 whereby her appeal against the  decision  of  a
         representative of the Secretary of State to refuse her  application
         for asylum was dismissed.

         2.   It is submitted on behalf of the Appellant that the judge made
         an arguable error of law particularly with regard to the assessment
         of the Appellant's credibility.  The judge gad accepted that if the
         Appellant proved to be credible then her appeal would succeed based
         upon  background  information  about  insufficient  protection  for
         victims of domestic violence in Albania.

         3.   I find that the judge may have given insufficient reasons  for
         finding that the Appellant's claim lacked credibility  and  further
         may have assessed the evidence by reference to a higher standard of
         proof than is required.

         4.   The grounds of application set out  verbatim  details  of  the
         judge's own questioning of the  Appellant.   This  is  referred  to
         throughout as the judge's "cross-examination"  and  it  is  further
         arguable that the judge may have erred in law by "entering into the
         fray".

         5.   In all the circumstances  I  find  it  is  arguable  that  the
         determination discloses arguable  errors  of  law  and  accordingly
         permission to appeal is granted".

 5. Hence the matter came before me in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   An  initial
    hearing was adjourned to  enable  the  appellant's  representatives  to
    comply with  practice  directions  with  regard  to  evidence  from  an
    advocate.

 6. The matter was relisted before  me  on  29  April  2015.   Mr  Hodgetts
    represented the appellant and Mr McGarvey, who had  been  the  advocate
    before Judge Walker, attended as a witness having produced a  statement
    of truth.

 7. The statement of Mr McGarvey  set  out  in  great  detail  over  twenty
    questions and answers that he had noted in  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Walker.  Reference was also made to a psychiatric report prepared after
    the hearing, which proffered an  opinion  as  to  the  effect  of  such
    questioning upon the appellant's ability to put forward her  case.   Mr
    Hodgetts relied upon this information.

 8. Mr Mills indicated that having considered the documentation he was of a
    view that he supported  the  appellant's  position  on  appeal  and  he
    conceded that  a  material  error  of  law  was  contained  within  the
    determination.  He accepted that the judge had entered into  the  arena
    and the decision of the judge could not stand.

 9. I indicated that I had formed the same view and that  unfortunately  by
    the line of questioning adopted by the judge,  it  was  that  questions
    were put other than by way of simple clarification.  It was clear  that
    Mr McGarvey had taken a very careful note of all questions and answers,
    and he had reproduced them not only in his grounds seeking  leave,  but
    also in his statement  of  truth.   I  accept  the  contents  of  those
    documents and in doing so find that the judge erred in law  in  failing
    to provide a fair  hearing  to  this  appellant.   Such  an  error  was
    material to the outcome and Judge Walker's  decision  fell  to  be  set
    aside.

10. By reason of these findings  it  is  clear  that  the  matter  must  be
    remitted back to the First-Tier Tribunal to be heard by a  judge  other
    than Judge Walker.  No findings can be preserved and the  hearing  must
    be de novo.

11. The matter is to be relisted at Newport  Hearing  Centre.   Through  Mr
    Hodgetts, Mr McGarvey indicated that whilst an all female court was not
    required, it would be appropriate for there to  be  a  female  Albanian
    interpreter.



Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole
