
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07960/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th January 2016                 |On 11th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     a b
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Masih (Counsel instructed by Wick & Co
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  brought  with
    permission granted on 1st July 2015, against a decision of a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  (hereinafter
    "the judge" unless otherwise stated) promulgated on 8th June  2015,  by
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 24th September 2014 refusing to grant  him  asylum  or  any
    other form of international protection and deciding to remove him  from
    the UK.

 2. The Appellant, who was born on 6th April 1996, is a national  of  Iran.
    He had sought asylum on the basis that he would  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution upon return to Iran as a Christian convert.  His appeal was
    heard by the judge along with an appeal relating to his brother FB  who
    had separate  representation.   The  judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal, in large measure, because he found the account of events he had
    offered not to be a  credible  one.   The  brother's  appeal  was  also
    dismissed on the same basis.

 3. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  made
    on behalf of this Appellant.  It does not appear  that  an  application
    was filed by those representing his brother but, in any event,  it  was
    only the application of  this  Appellant  which  was  before  me.   The
    Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal contended that  the  judge  had
    erred in law by applying an incorrect standard of proof (the balance of
    probabilities  rather  than  real  risk)  and  had  also  erred  in   a
    considerable number of other ways with respect to his treatment of  the
    evidence before him.

 4. Permission having been granted, there was a hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal (in fact before me) and representation was as stated above.  I
    am grateful to both representatives for their assistance.  I  indicated
    to the parties that I would hear argument first of all, concerning  the
    standard of proof issue and, only then, if it were necessary,  would  I
    hear argument concerning the other grounds.

 5. As to the standard of proof point, it is to be noted  that  the  judge,
    when summarising the Respondent's position, had observed at  paragraphs
    16 and 21 of the determination, that the Respondent had taken the  view
    that the two Appellants before him (the Appellant  before  me  and  the
    brother) had failed to show to a "reasonable degree of likelihood" that
    they would be at risk of persecution upon return.  At paragraph  26  of
    the determination, though, the judge said this;

         "This is an appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002.  The Appellant bears the burden of  proof  and
         the standard is the balance of probability.  Although I am  looking
         at the Rules as at the date  of  decision,  I  am  considering  the
         Appellant's circumstances as at the date of the appeal hearing  and
         have taken into account all of the  evidence before me."

 6. At a later point in the determination, in fact  at  paragraph  94,  the
    judge said;

         "I  do  not  accept  that  the  Appellants  face  a  real  risk  of
         persecution if they are returned to Iran ..."

 7.  Clearly,  when  considering  arguments  pertaining  to   international
    protection, the applicable standard of proof is  that  which  is  often
    referred to as "the real risk test".  That has always been accepted  as
    amounting to something less demanding than a balance of  probabilities.
    Therefore, perhaps absent wholly unusual or exceptional  circumstances,
    there will be a material error of law if a judge  genuinely  applies  a
    balance of probabilities test when considering issues regarding asylum,
    humanitarian protection or Article 3  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

 8. Ms Masih  acknowledged  the  references  to  a  "reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood" at paragraphs 16 and 21 of the determination but said  that
    the determination was not saved by those references because  they  were
    merely part of the judge's summary of what had  been  the  Respondent's
    position.  Mrs Pettersen relied upon the opening words of paragraph  94
    of  the  determination  but  acknowledged  that  she   was   "in   some
    difficulty", given the content of paragraph 26.

 9. It seems to me that, in general terms, the fact that a real  risk  test
    is to be applied where international protection issues are concerned is
    a cardinal principle of  which,  ordinarily,  all  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judges in the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  would  be  aware.   That
    might afford support for the  proposition  that  the  judge  would,  in
    reality, have been applying a real risk test notwithstanding  what  was
    said at paragraph 26 and that the insertion of  those  words  into  the
    determination amounted to no  more  than  a  drafting  oversight.   The
    reality is that that might well have been the position.  However  I  do
    accept that significant uncertainty is created in the mind of a  reader
    of the determination by the different indications given  at  paragraphs
    26 and 94.  I would accept that what is said at paragraphs  16  and  21
    does not necessarily point to the judge applying the  correct  standard
    of  proof  because,  there,  he  was  simply   summarising   what   the
    Respondent's position had been.  That  leaves  us  with  two  different
    indications as to the standard of proof being applied, those  appearing
    at paragraphs 26 and 94.  Other than what is said at paragraph 94 I can
    find nothing in the judge's  analysis  which  clearly  indicates  that,
    notwithstanding  the  misdirection  at  paragraph  26,  he  was,   when
    considering the evidence and making his findings, in practice, applying
    a real risk test.  The uncertainty therefore is such, in  my  judgment,
    as to render the decision unsafe so that, I am afraid to say, it has to
    be set aside.  Although I did not hear argument as to the other grounds
    of challenge, it not having been necessary, I might well have concluded
    that what was stated therein amounted to no more  than  a  disagreement
    with the findings and conclusions.   Nevertheless,  set  aside  is  the
    appropriate course.

10. Having indicated my view to the parties I invited submissions as to the
    mode of the remaking of the decision.  Ms Masih urged me  to  remit  to
    the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that such is appropriate, as here,
    where the whole of a credibility  assessment  must  be  revisited.  Mrs
    Pettersen agreed that remittal to the First-tier would be  the  correct
    course.  I have decided to accede to the parties' wishes on that  issue
    bearing in mind that nothing  is  to  be  preserved  from  the  judge's
    determination, bearing in mind that there will have to  be  significant
    new fact-finding which is the First-tier Tribunal's particular area  of
    expertise and bearing in mind that that would preserve the  Appellant's
    appeal rights with respect to the prospect of any ongoing  appeals.   I
    have given directions for the new First-tier Tribunal hearing below.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal for the Rehearing of this Appeal

     11. A.   The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  nothing
         preserved from the original decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         which was promulgated on 8th June 2015.

    B.   The appeal shall  be  listed  at  the  Birmingham  Hearing  Centre
         (Sheldon Court) with a time estimate of three hours.  The Appellant
         is to be provided with a Farsi speaking interpreter.

    C.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  will  have  to  reach   findings   and
         conclusions on all issues raised by this appeal  and  will  not  be
         bound in any way by any of the findings and conclusions  previously
         made.

    D.    If  the  parties  wish  to  rely  upon  any  witness  statements,
         background material or other documentation  not  previously  filed,
         then this should be sent to the First-tier Tribunal in the form  of
         an indexed and paginated bundle, in sufficient time for  it  to  be
         received at least five working days prior to the date which will be
         fixed for  the  rehearing  of  the  appeal.  A  copy  bundle  must,
         simultaneously, be sent to the other party.

    E.   The appeal shall not be listed before Judge James.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  I set  aside  the  decision.   The  case  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with the above directions.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make any anonymity order.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is paid or payable I make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

