
IAC-HX-MH/11-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07962/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 March 2015                              |On 1 May 2015                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr mohamud Abdi isse
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell
For the Respondent:    Ms Mascord


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Isse is a citizen of Somalia born in 1989.  He  appealed  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 23 September  2014  to  give
    directions for removal.  He was refused asylum.

 2. Although in proceedings  before  me  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
    Appellant, for convenience I keep the terms as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Thus, Mr Isse is the Appellant and the  Secretary
    of State is the Respondent.

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim can be stated in  brief.   He  is  a
    member of the Ashraf minority clan.  His brother  was  killed  in  clan
    warfare.  His home was raided regularly  and  his  family  beaten.   He
    suffered various other problems as a result  of  his  clan  membership.
    Another of his brothers was killed in a dispute at the market.

 4. In 2005 he was abducted by the Juba Valley Group and forced to work  on
    a farm.  He escaped after a year and returned home.

 5. He began to run a stall in his home town, Kismayo.  In May 2010 he  was
    detained and tortured by Al Shabaab for two weeks. In October  2011  he
    was again detained and tortured by Al Shabaab this  time  for  a  month
    after disputing the tax he was being forced to pay them.

 6. During  his  second  detention  a  member  of  Al  Shabaab  forced  the
    Appellant's sister to marry him.  The Appellant  approached  the  man's
    family to complain about this and  became  a  target.   His  uncle  was
    killed when the sister's husband went to the Appellant's stall  looking
    for him and an argument ensued between the husband and the uncle.

 7. The Respondent accepted the Appellant's nationality, that he was from a
    minority clan, that his two  brothers  were  killed,  that  his  father
    disappeared and that his family  had  suffered  at  the  hands  of  the
    majority clan over the period of time specified by the  Appellant.   It
    was also accepted that he was detained by Al Shabaab after refusing  to
    pay  tax.   Despite  these  acceptances  the  Respondent  refused   the
    application on the ground  that  it  was  safe  for  the  Appellant  to
    relocate to Mogadishu.

 8. He appealed.

 9. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 18 December 2014  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Meah allowed the asylum claim.

10. His findings  are  at  paragraphs  [9ff]  of  his  determination.   The
    Respondent's position at the hearing before the First tier  as  to  the
    historical account was unchanged.  The sole issue was whether return to
    Mogadishu was a viable option for the Appellant.

11. The judge quoted from the headnote of MOJ & Ors (Return  to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).

12. Moving on to consider the Appellant's circumstances the judge found (at
    [13]) that he left Mogadishu at age two  years  and  that  he  'has  no
    social network available to him there.  His mother, a  sister  and  two
    children are living in Ethiopia  as  refugees.   He  therefore  has  no
    living relatives anywhere in Somalia'.

13. At [14] he rejected an argument that the Appellant  would  be  able  to
    resettle in Mogadishu as he could set up in business there  given  that
    he had previously sold sweets in his home town of Kismayo. He  accepted
    the Appellant's response that he had merely  had  a  small  table  from
    which he sold sweets and samosas and that 'he  would  not  be  able  to
    establish himself and resettle in Mogadishu as he did not  know  anyone
    there'.

14. At [15] he found that 'he is not in contact with  anyone  in  Somalia',
    that his UK sister and family are entirely reliant on public funds  and
    would not be able to send him  remittances  if  he  was  sent  back  to
    Somalia. Also, he is living with his  sister,  and  surviving  on  NASS
    payments and food from her.

15. At [16] the judge found that the Appellant's sister in  the  UK  'could
    not send funds to (him) and there was no one else  anywhere  who  could
    assist him financially either.  He has lost  touch  with  the  paternal
    uncle who helped him leave  Somalia  and  the  mother  and  sister  are
    refugees in Ethiopia themselves'.

16. The judge concluded (at [17]) by finding that  internal  relocation  to
    Mogadishu was 'not an option' for the Appellant.  He is 'a person  with
    no former links to the city and he is also a person who will  not  have
    access to any funds there.  He has no family or social ties to the city
    and it will therefore be practically impossible for him to establish  a
    home there'.

17. He went on: 'I find  in  these  circumstances,  and  the  lack  of  any
    financial support there, (such) will pose a real risk of him having  no
    alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within an  IDP  camp
    where there is a real possibility of having to live in conditions  that
    will fall well below acceptable humanitarian standards.  ...  I  should
    say that I do not find that the Appellant is a person who will be  able
    to take advantage of any economic boom that is currently  taking  place
    in Mogadishu given his particular circumstances'.

18. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by a judge
    on 20 January 2015.

19. At the error of law hearing before me, Mr  Whitwell  made  two  points.
    First, noting the headnote of MOJ at (xi) he submitted that  the  judge
    failed to give adequate reasons as to why the Appellant  would  not  be
    able to secure a livelihood in Mogadishu.  While it was  accepted  that
    he was from a minority clan and  without  access  to  remittances  from
    abroad these were not the only issues that required consideration.   He
    is young and healthy.  It was not clear why the judge concluded that he
    would (per (xi)) 'have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
    livelihood on return'.

20. Secondly, if not with the Respondent on the first ground,  the  judge's
    decision should not have been to allow the appeal  on  asylum  grounds.
    Rather, it should have been allowed on Article 3 human rights grounds.

21. In reply Ms Mascord submitted that the judge in a careful  analysis  of
    the Appellant's particular circumstances, which included that he has no
    family support there, left Mogadishu at a young age, would  receive  no
    remittances, and was no longer in contact with his uncle who had funded
    his trip, had properly applied the test set out in (ix)ff and found  it
    satisfied.  The Respondent's challenge  amounted  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement.

22. In considering this matter, as indicated, none of the judge's  findings
    are challenged.  The issue is what conclusion from these  facts  as  to
    risk was the judge entitled to reach and whether adequate  reasons  had
    been given.

23. The judge correctly paid heed to the up-to-date Country  Guidance  case
    of MOJ.  He noted the headnote (which is an accurate reflection of what
    is stated at paragraph 407 of MOJ).

24. He properly directed himself in  light  of  the  undisputed  facts,  to
    headnote (ix) and (x) which is an accurate reflection of paragraph  407
    (h).

25. Headnote (ix) states 'If it is accepted that a person facing  a  return
    to Mogadishu after  a  period  of  absence  has  no  nuclear  or  close
    relatives in the city to  assist  him  in  re-establishing  himself  on
    return, there  will  need  to  be  a  careful  assessment  of  all  the
    circumstances'.

26. It is accepted that the Appellant has not been in Mogadishu  since  the
    age of two and has no nuclear family or close relatives in the city.

27. Headnote (ix) continues: 'These considerations will  include,  but  are
    not limited to...'  It goes on to list eight factors.  The first  three
    are: circumstances in Mogadishu before  departure;  length  of  absence
    from Mogadishu; family or clan associations to call upon in  Mogadishu.
    It seems to me that  the  judge  addressed  these.   As  indicated  the
    Appellant has not been in Mogadishu since the age of two.  As the judge
    found (at [13]) he has no social networks available to him  there.   He
    has no relatives there.  Indeed, he has no living relatives anywhere in
    Somalia.  He is also from a minority clan.

28. Other factors to be considered  are  'access  to  financial  resources;
    availability of remittances from abroad; means of  support  during  the
    time spent in the UK; why his ability to fund the journey to  the  West
    no longer enables an Appellant to secure financial support on return'.

29. In my judgment the First-tier judge considered these matters.  He found
    that the Appellant would not have  access  to  financial  resources  or
    remittances from abroad.  Relatives in the UK are 'reliant entirely  on
    public funds'.  He is not in contact with anyone in Somalia  [15].   As
    for support received in the UK, he is 'surviving on NASS  payments  and
    (his sister) sometimes provides him with food' [16].  As for ability to
    fund the journey to the UK, he has  'lost  touch  with  the  uncle  who
    helped him leave Somalia and the mother  and  sister  are  refugees  in
    Ethiopia themselves'.

30. The remaining factor is 'prospects of  securing  a  livelihood  whether
    that be employment or self-employment'.   It  is  this  aspect  of  the
    judge's  decision  that  concerned  Mr  Whitwell  who  noted  that  the
    Appellant was young and apparently healthy and had  earned  an,  albeit
    modest, living previously. It was unclear why he 'would not be able  to
    access the economic  opportunities  that  have  been  produced  by  the
    "economic boom"' (x).

31. It is clear that the judge was aware of the 'economic boom' referred to
    in MOJ (at paragraphs 344 ff) and at headnote (x).  He referred  to  it
    at [17].  However, he found the Appellant's previous economic  activity
    (selling sweets and samosas from a small table in  Kismayo)  to  be  so
    modest as to be insignificant.  He found that he has no clan or  family
    or social support and would not  be  in  receipt  of  remittances  from
    abroad (xi).  He is not in contact with anyone  there.  Such,  'in  his
    particular circumstances' which also included 'no former links  to  the
    city' (Mogadishu) and 'no access to any  funds  there'  would  mean  it
    would be 'practically impossible for him to establish a home there' and
    as a result secure access to a livelihood on return (xi).   These  were
    conclusions he was entitled to reach on the evidence  before  him.   He
    has addressed the requirements of paragraph 407f (accurately  reflected
    in the head note (ix), (x) and (xi)), and given  adequate  reasons  for
    reaching his conclusion.

32. He then went on (at [17]) having found that the  Appellant  is  from  a
    minority clan, has no former links to the city, no access to funds,  no
    other form of clan, family or social support and an absence of means to
    establish a home and some form of ongoing support,  to  conclude  there
    would be a real risk of his  having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in
    makeshift accommodation within an  IDP  camp  where  there  is  a  real
    possibility of having to live in conditions that fall below  acceptable
    humanitarian standards (xii).

33. In my view this was again a conclusion he was entitled to reach on  the
    evidence found. He has given adequate reasons.

34. That in such a situation 'there is a real possibility of having to live
    in conditions that will fall below acceptable  humanitarian  standards'
    (xii) is an accurate reflection of paragraph 420 of MOJ which reads:

         'While it is likely that those who do  find  themselves  living  in
         inadequate  makeshift  accommodation  in  an  IDP  camp   will   be
         experiencing adverse  living  conditions  such  as  to  engage  the
         protection of Article 3 of the ECHR, we do not see  that  it  gives
         rise  to  an  enhanced  Article  15(c)  risk  since  there  is   an
         insufficient nexus with the indiscriminate violence which,  in  any
         event, we have found to be not  at  such  a  high  level  that  all
         civilians face a real risk of suffering serious harm.  Nor does the
         evidence support the claim that there is an enhanced risk of forced
         recruitment to Al Shabaab for those in the IDP camps or that such a
         person is more likely to be caught up in an Al  Shabaab  attack  of
         which he or she was not the intended target.'

35. I conclude that the judge's error  was  not  that  he  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for reaching the conclusion on the undisputed evidence
    before him as to risk, but rather the legal consequence.  He should not
    have allowed the appeal on asylum grounds. Humanitarian  protection  is
    not appropriate. The appeal should have been allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 3).  I accordingly substitute that decision.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier judge's decision shows an error of law.  His decision is  set
aside and remade as follows:

    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3).

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 4 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
