
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07232/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |             Decision & Reasons      |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 November 2015                    |             On 8 December 2015      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                            ZOLEBA MATHIAS GBOIZO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Clarke of Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a national of the Ivory Coast, born  on  17  September
    1960.  On 15 November 2012 he entered with leave as  a  visitor.   Some
    three weeks later  he  claimed  asylum  on  account  of  his  political
    opinion.  He supported the FPI, the party of President Gbagbo.

The Respondent's Decisions

 2. The Respondent has made three decisions on 10 January 2013, 17 June and
    16  September  2014  each  one  refusing  the  Appellant's  claim   for
    international surrogate protection.  The reasons letters are in similar
    form.  This appeal is against the last of these three decisions.

 3. The Respondent rejected as not credible the Appellant's account in  all
    or nearly all respects other than his identity and nationality.

 4. On 23 September 2014  the  Appellant  lodged  Notice  of  Appeal  under
    Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended  (the  2002  Act).   The  grounds  disputed  the   Respondent's
    conclusion  that  the  Appellant's  account  was   not   credible   and
    additionally referred  to  professional  political  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom in support of a "sur place" claim.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 5. By a decision promulgated on 19 November 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Pears made the following decision:-

         There is no decision which could be the subject of this appeal.  If
         there is an appeal, the appeal  is  dismissed  on  asylum  grounds,
         humanitarian protection grounds and human rights grounds.

    In fact there was a decision that of 16 September 2014 already referred
    to, in the file at the time of the hearing before Judge Pears.  It  was
    at the back of the correspondence tag in the Tribunal file.

 6. At paragraphs 2-4 of his decision the Judge referred to the history  of
    the Appellant's application and appeals.  In particular he referred  to
    the  determination  of  Judge  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal   Oxlade
    promulgated on 21 August 2014 in which she  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal on all grounds against the Respondent's decision of 17 June 2014
    to refuse him international surrogate protection.  Judge Pears referred
    at some length to the determination in Devaseelan* [2002]  UKIAT  00702
    and considered Judge Oxlade's conclusions in relation to  the  evidence
    before him and wrote:-

         ...the Appellant relies on facts that are not different from  those
         put to the first Judge, and proposes to support the claim  by  what
         is the same evidence as that available to  the  Appellant  at  that
         time and put before that first Judge.

    He dismissed the appeal on all grounds in the terms already mentioned.

 7. On 22 December 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin  in  her  capacity  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  granted  extended  time  for  the
    Appellant to lodge an application for permission to appeal and  granted
    permission on the grounds  that  Judge  Pears  had  arguably  erred  in
    failing to make any findings in relation to the Appellant's claimed sur
    place activities.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. At the start of the hearing Ms Clarke who had been Counsel before Judge
    Oxlade as well as Judge Pears stated that she did not have  a  copy  of
    Judge Oxlade's determination.  Both advocates stated that they had  not
    seen  the  Appellant's  grounds  in  support  of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal nor the grant of permission.  Copies were made and
    an opportunity given to both advocates to consider them.

 9. I explained to the advocates that there was in the file a copy  of  the
    decision of 16 September 2014 which had been the trigger for the appeal
    heard by Judge Pears.

Submissions for the Appellant

10. Ms Clarke addressed the first of the  Appellant's  grounds  that  Judge
    Pears  had  erred  in  not  granting  the   Appellant   his   requested
    adjournment.  The Appellant should have been given  an  opportunity  to
    produce a statement or a DVD as evidence in support of his claim.

11. Turning to the second ground she submitted that  paragraph  17  of  the
    decision simply set out the findings made by Judge Oxlade and  did  not
    refer to the evidence in support of the Appellant's "sur  place"  claim
    whether documentary or given at the hearing before Judge Pears.  He had
    erred in his conclusion at paragraph 21 by failing to take  account  of
    the Appellant's "sur place" claim.

12. The last ground for appeal was that the Judge had  not  considered  the
    appeal in a fair and balanced  manner  which  Ms  Clarke  amplified  by
    stating was alleged on the basis the Judge  had  not  referred  to  any
    objective material. Had he granted an adjournment then all the evidence
    would  have  been  available  at  the  adjourned  hearing  as  well  as
    additional objective evidence.  The only objective material  the  Judge
    mentioned was a BBC country file report referred to in the Respondent's
    reasons for the original decision.

Submissions for the Respondent

13. Ms Sreeraman submitted the Judge had dealt fairly with the  Appellant's
    application for an adjournment.  He had  served  a  statement  dated  7
    November 2014 to which the Judge had referred in  paragraph  7  of  his
    decision.  Turning to the Appellant's claim that he had been denied the
    opportunity to produce the DVD evidence she referred to paragraph 59 of
    the Respondent's reasons for  refusing  the  Appellant's  claim.   This
    referred to a DVD which had been submitted and the Respondent's request
    that the evidence be re-submitted made by way of a  letter  of  21  May
    2014 to which the Appellant had failed to respond.

14. Judge Pears had not confined his assessment of the Appellant's claim to
    relying on the adverse credibility findings made by Judge  Oxlade.   At
    paragraphs 18 and 19 he had referred to the oral testimony given by the
    Appellant and a photograph of the Appellant at a demonstration  outside
    Parliament in August 2013.  At paragraph 21 the Judge had concluded the
    Appellant had supplied no new facts to support his claim and the  Judge
    was entitled to follow the learning in Devaseelan and  to  conclude  in
    the absence of any new  evidence  that  considerable  weight  could  be
    placed on the findings made by Judge Oxlade.

The Appellant's Response

15. Ms Clarke started by referring to paragraph 20 of the Judge's  decision
    that there was no immigration decision before him.  In that event there
    was no valid appeal.

16. If there was a  valid  appeal  the  Judge  had  not  given  it  anxious
    scrutiny.  The evidence before him  supported  the  Appellant's  claim.
    The Judge had not considered it because he had made no reference to the
    activities of the Ivorian authorities and he had not taken into account
    the information before him about the risks to journalists in the  Ivory
    Coast.

Findings and Considerations

17. The Appellant's statement was before the Judge.  There was  no  further
    statement by him although he had not made another one,  notwithstanding
    the Upper Tribunal's standard direction 3 issued on 4 November 2015.

18. The Respondent had adequately dealt with the matter of the DVD evidence
    at paragraph 59 of the reasons letter.  Again notwithstanding the Upper
    Tribunal's directions there was  no  DVD  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    There was no explanation for the absence of any further statement or  a
    duplicate DVD.

19. There was a bundle of  background  evidence  before  Judge  Pears.   It
    comprised documents dating from November 2013 and January and May 2014.
      There  was  no  up-to-date  background  evidence.   Given  that   the
    Appellant's claim to have been politically involved  or  professionally
    to have been involved in the preparation of political material  in  his
    profession, there was little if anything in the background evidence for
    the Judge to consider.

20. It was of note that on 26 September 2014 the Appellant's solicitors had
    confirmed to the Tribunal that they were ready to  proceed  to  a  full
    hearing.

21. Addressing the grounds for appeal, I find the  Judge  gave  sustainable
    reasons for refusing the requested adjournment.   In  relation  to  the
    Appellant's "sur place" claim, the Judge's Record of Proceedings  shows
    there was no oral evidence addressed to this aspect of  his  claim,  no
    statement made by the Appellant in support of this aspect of his  claim
    and no submissions on this were made to the Judge.  Before Judge  Pears
    there was a statement of 4 February 2013 by Patrick  Beuseize  who  has
    been recognised as a refugee and who in the Ivory Coast was  Secretary-
    General of the Youth  Wing  of  President  Gbagbo's  party,  the  Front
    Populaire Ivorien (FPI).  He describes meeting the  Appellant  in  July
    2012 in the United Kingdom for the first time but gives no  details  of
    the Appellant's "sur place" activities in his statement.  A letter of 3
    February 2013 from Mr Bayeto refers  to  the  Appellant  as  an  active
    member of the party and being "part of the audio-visual team during the
    meetings... (and) ...responsible for a  documentary  film".   But  this
    relates to his activities in the Ivory Coast  and  not  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The letter from Rachelle Djah in the Appellant's bundle again
    relates to the Appellant's activities in the Ivory  Coast  save  for  a
    reference to his membership of the UK branch of  the  FPI  and  to  his
    participation "in all our activities".  None of  these  activities  are
    detailed.

22. All this supports the conclusion of Judge Pears that there was  no  new
    evidence of any substance before him which had not  been  before  Judge
    Oxlade.

23. For these reasons, I find that there is no material error of law in the
    decision of Judge Pears which shall therefore stand.

Anonymity

24. Judge Pears made an anonymity direction although he did  not  give  any
    reasons for it.  The issue of anonymity was not raised at  the  hearing
    before me.  No application for anonymity was filed with the  Notice  of
    Appeal or subsequently requested although I note that on his own motion
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pedro made the  direction  at  a  Case
    Management Review of the appeal on 10 October 2014.   However,  in  all
    the circumstances I see  no  reason  for  continuing  or  renewing  the
    anonymity direction.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and shall stand.  The consequence is that  the  appeal  of
    the Appellant is dismissed on all grounds.

Signed/Official                                                        Crest
Date 30. xi. 2015




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

