
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07909/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 September 2015                 |On 24 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     VM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. R. Spurling of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Disclosure or publication of documents or
    information likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  VM  is
    prohibited.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Scott dated 7 April 2015 who  allowed  VM's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to grant asylum.

 3. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to VM as the  Appellant  and
    to the Secretary of State as the Respondent, reflecting their positions
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. Permission was granted as it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  did  not
    adequately explain why the Appellant was perceived by  the  authorities
    as having a significant role in the cause of  Tamil  separatism  within
    the diaspora, and therefore fell within the risk category set out in GJ
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

Submissions

 5. Mr. Avery submitted that paragraph [30] of the decision  contained  all
    of the judge's  reasoning  for  finding  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    criteria in GJ.  This was a bald statement with no real reasoning.   He
    submitted that the Appellant had attended a number of demonstrations in
    the United Kingdom but these were not specifically linked to  the  LTTE
    or Tamil separatism.  He submitted that the judge should have  assessed
    whether someone with the Appellant's history would have  been  assessed
    as a threat to the Sri Lankan state.  The  Appellant  had  had  minimal
    involvement in the diaspora, and it was hard to see how he fitted  into
    the "template" of GJ.  He submitted that the judge had  not  understood
    the headnote to GJ.  Following paragraph (9) of  the  headnote  it  was
    possible that the Appellant would potentially be at risk of  monitoring
    by the security services after his return but how  this  had  become  a
    real risk of persecution was not clear from the judge's reasoning.

 6. Mr. Spurling submitted that the grounds of appeal were no more  than  a
    disagreement with the  judge's  findings.   The  judge  had  found  the
    Appellant credible which was relevant to his  finding  that  he  fitted
    into the risk category set out in GJ.  When the decision was read as  a
    whole and in a common sense way, the judge's conclusions were rational.
     The judge had summed up his conclusion in paragraph [30], but  it  was
    not enough to look only at paragraph [30] and ignore the  rest  of  the
    decision.  The judge had not just taken into  account  the  Appellant's
    low  level  involvement  in  the  LTTE   and   his   participation   at
    demonstrations, but had taken into account much more than that.

 7. I was referred to paragraph [23] where the judge  finds  the  Appellant
    credible.  He finds his evidence consistent with that  of  his  mother.
    In paragraph [26] he relies on the evidence of the  Appellant's  mother
    who  has  been   shown   photographs   of   the   Appellant   attending
    demonstrations in the United Kingdom by the CID in Sri Lanka.   It  was
    submitted that the judge was entitled to take this significant level of
    CID interest in the Appellant into account.

 8. I was referred to paragraph [18] which refers to the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's mother  and  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  escaped  from
    detention.  It was submitted that the authorities had  an  undischarged
    interest in the Appellant.  When the CID visited,  not  only  did  they
    make enquiries of the Appellant's mother but they also threatened  her.
    This is referred  to  in  paragraph  11  of  the  Appellant's  mother's
    statement, paragraph 3 of the Appellant's statement and paragraph 7  of
    the witness SR's statement.  It was submitted that  although  this  had
    not specifically been mentioned by the judge, he had found the evidence
    of these witnesses credible, and he did not have to repeat all  of  the
    evidence in the decision.

 9. It was submitted that what the authorities thought  the  Appellant  was
    doing in the UK was relevant.  I was referred to paragraph  12  of  the
    Appellant's witness statement, and  paragraph  12  of  the  Appellant's
    mother's witness statement, where it is said that the CID  accused  the
    Appellant of being an LTTE activist.  I was referred to  questions  339
    and 274 of the asylum interview where the Appellant said  that  he  was
    suspected of LTTE involvement.  This evidence had been  found  credible
    by the judge.  I was referred to paragraph 7(a) of the headnote  to  GJ
    in relation to the perception of an individual by the  authorities.   I
    was referred to paragraph 325 of GJ for the extent to which past  links
    to  the  LTTE  predicted  future  adverse  interest.   In  relation  to
    paragraph 336 of GJ, it was submitted that the judge had not found that
    attendance at UK demonstrations alone had caused the Appellant to be at
    risk.

10. I was referred to paragraph 50 of MP and NT (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ
    829 (paragraph 17  of  the  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  It was submitted that if the CID showed that  for  whatever
    reason they had a strong adverse interest in  an  individual  this  was
    capable of supporting the inference that the  government  might  regard
    him as a threat.   I  was  referred  to  question  228  of  the  asylum
    interview regarding how the CID became aware of the  Appellant  in  the
    first place.  It was submitted  that  the  judge  was  aware  that  the
    Appellant had been specifically identified and detained as a result.  I
    was referred to paragraphs 390 to 397 of GJ.   While it  was  submitted
    that the situation of GJ himself  was  not  exactly  the  same  as  the
    Appellant, applying them risk factors in GJ came to the same result.

11. It was submitted that the judge was entitled to find that the Appellant
    was at real risk and that  he  fitted  within  paragraph  7(a)  of  the
    headnote to GJ.  The judge had reached this conclusion giving  adequate
    reasons, and his findings were rational.

12. In relation to the specific grounds it  was  submitted  that  paragraph
    6(i) was wrong and that the Appellant having escaped was not  the  only
    evidence in the case.  In relation to paragraph  6(ii),  the  Appellant
    had said not only than that he had attended demonstrations, but that he
    was seen as a supporter of the LTTE.  It was submitted that  there  was
    plenty of  evidence  to  support  the  fact  that  demonstrations  were
    monitored  and  it  was  uncontroversial  that  the  authorities   were
    concerned with the diaspora in London.  I was referred to paragraph 303
    of GJ.  It was submitted that it was absurd to play with  the  language
    as had been done in paragraph 6(iv) of the grounds  and  it  was  clear
    that the authorities took demonstrations  seriously.   In  relation  to
    paragraph 6(vi), it was submitted that the judge had not found that  he
    was at risk purely because of his diaspora activities but this was part
    of a basket of evidence which had been accepted by the judge.

13. In conclusion it was submitted that read as a whole  the  decision  was
    reasoned and rational.  The judge had  found  the  Appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness and the challenge from the Respondent was no more than
    a disagreement with his findings.

14. In response Mr. Avery submitted that with reference to paragraph 325 of
    GJ the Appellant's activities in the LTTE were minimal.  With reference
    to paragraph 336 of GJ there was nothing in the Appellant's evidence to
    suggest that he was working for Tamil separatism.  It was hard  to  see
    how someone with the Appellant's profile could be  equated  with  Tamil
    separatism.  He submitted it was not just a challenge on the grounds of
    perversity but also that there was a flaw in the judge's  reasoning  as
    he had failed to identify in paragraph [30] what elevated the Appellant
    to somebody at risk of persecution.

15. Mr. Spurling submitted that there was it was clear from paragraph  [30]
    that the judge found that  there  were  factors  which  "elevated"  the
    Appellant and referred to the fact that the evidence  showed  that  the
    Appellant was perceived  as  being  involved  in  the  cause  of  Tamil
    separatism.

Error of law decision

16. Paragraph (7)(a) of the headnote to GJ provides:

         "7. The current categories of persons at real risk  of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora  and/or  a  renewal  of  hostilities  within  Sri
                  Lanka."

    (The full headnote is set out at paragraph [29] of the decision.)

17. Paragraph [30] of the decision states:

         "In the present case there is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
         Appellant is on a "stop" list which would  place  him  at  risk  on
         return to the airport in Sri Lanka.  Given the continuing  interest
         of the Sri  Lankan  authorities  in  the  Appellant,  it  is  quite
         possible that his name appears on a "watch list", but  again  there
         is no evidence to that effect.   However  as  GJ  makes  clear,  on
         return to Sri Lanka the Appellant would be  required  to  go  to  a
         named address and his arrival in his home area would be verified by
         the CID or police within a few days thereafter.   In  view  of  the
         continued adverse interest in him, not only  for  having  "escaped"
         from detention in 2010, but also for his activities in support of a
         Tamil organisation in the United  Kingdom,  I  accept  that  he  is
         perceived by the authorities as having a significant  role  in  the
         cause  of  Tamil  separatism  within  the   diaspora.    In   these
         circumstances, I find that there is a real risk that the  Appellant
         would be detained  and  subjected  to  ill-treatment  amounting  to
         persecution, as happened in 2010."

18. I find that this paragraph makes clear that the judge  finds  that  the
    Appellant is "perceived by the authorities as having a significant role
    in the cause of Tamil separatism within the diaspora" not only  because
    of his activities in support of a  Tamil  organisation  in  the  United
    Kingdom but also, and significantly, in view of the  continued  adverse
    interest in him.  The judge refers  twice  in  this  paragraph  to  the
    continuing interest of the Sri Lankan authorities in the Appellant.

19. It is not  enough  to  read  this  paragraph  in  isolation,  but  this
    paragraph must be read in the context of the judge's  earlier  findings
    set out in paragraphs [23] to [27].

20. The judge found the evidence of the Appellant, his witness SR, and  the
    Appellant's mother to be reliable [23].  The Respondent  accepted  that
    the Appellant was a member of the LTTE  between  2002  and  2004.   The
    judge found that the Appellant continued to assist the LTTE after that.
     The judge found that he was arrested and detained for  two  months  in
    2010 and tortured during that period [24].  The judge  found  that  the
    Appellant was released from detention on payment of a bribe [25].

21. The judge found that the Appellant had attended demonstrations  in  the
    United Kingdom in support of the Tamil cause [26].  He found  that  the
    CID visited the Appellant's family home to look  for  him  and  that  a
    photograph of the Appellant was shown to his  mother  [26].   He  finds
    that the authorities in Sri Lanka have maintained an  interest  in  the
    Appellant to the extent of photographing him at demonstrations  in  the
    United Kingdom and showing these photographs to the Appellant's  mother
    on  visits  to  the  family  home.   They  have  also  threatened   the
    Appellant's mother  as  set  out  in  the  witness  statements  of  the
    Appellant, SR and the Appellant's  mother,  which  evidence  the  judge
    found credible, and he refers to these witness statements in  paragraph
    [26].

22. When reading the decision as a whole, it is clear that when  the  judge
    refers in [30] to the continuing interest of  the  authorities  in  the
    Appellant, he has in mind his earlier findings [23] to [26].  Paragraph
    [30] should  not  be  read  in  isolation,  especially  given  that  it
    specifically refers to  the  continuing  interest  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities in the Appellant, the findings in respect of which are  set
    out earlier in the decision.

23. In relation to the specific grounds, it is not only  the  finding  that
    the Appellant escaped from detention which is the  reason  for  finding
    that he fits into the risk factors identified in GJ (6(i)).  This is to
    misread the judge's conclusions, which as stated  above,  significantly
    include the finding that the authorities are still  interested  in  the
    Appellant.  In relation to attendance at demonstrations in  the  United
    Kingdom, it is uncontroversial to state that the  authorities  have  an
    interest in those who attend such demonstrations.  In  the  Appellant's
    case the judge found that photographs of him attending such events have
    been shown by the authorities to his mother in Sri Lanka  (6(ii)).   In
    relation to paragraph 6(iii), I have found that by reading the decision
    as a whole adequate reasons have been given.

24. I do not find that paragraph 6(iv)  has  any  merit.   In  relation  to
    paragraphs 6(v) and 6(vi), the judge found  that  the  authorities  had
    attended the Appellant's home so it is not right to describe the visits
    as "alleged", and as confirmed at the hearing there was no challenge to
    the findings of fact in the  decision.   It  is  not  the  presence  or
    otherwise of the Appellant's name on a "watch  list"  which  leads  the
    judge to conclude that the Appellant would be at risk on return, nor is
    it only the Appellant's diaspora activities which the judge  has  taken
    into account.

25. I find that taken as a whole, the decision  contains  adequate  reasons
    for the judge's finding that the Appellant fits into the risk  category
    identified at paragraph 7(a) of the headnote to GJ and  therefore  will
    be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.  Paragraph [30] is not to be read in
    isolation.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the  making  of  an
error of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 24 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
