
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07231/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     K J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Jegarasah, Counsel instructed by Ravi Solicitors


Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the respondent.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka
    born on 20 March 1983. This appeal arises  from  the  decision  of  the
    appellant  (hereinafter  "the  Secretary  of  State")  to  refuse   his
    application for  asylum  or  humanitarian  protection.  The  claimant's
    ensuing appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal ("FtT") was allowed and it is
    that decision of the FtT, made by FtT Judge Saunders and promulgated on
    27 October 2015, which is now being appealed by the Secretary of State.



 2. The core of the claimant's claim is that (a) he has been involved  with
    the LTTE in Sri Lanka; (b) because of his involvement he was imprisoned
    during which time he was subjected to severe torture and rape;  (c)  he
    only escaped because of payment of  a  bribe;  (d)  he  has  been,  and
    remains on, a watch list; and (e) there is a real and immediate risk of
    his being detained and subjected to torture if he is  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka.

 3. The Secretary of State did not accept the claimant's account and, inter
    alia, rejected that he was a member of the LTTE or that he has been, or
    is, of interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka.

 4. The claimant appealed and his appeal was heard by FtT Judge Gibb on  14
    April 2015. Unfortunately, because of ill health, Judge Gibb was unable
    to promulgate his decision although it  was  noted  by  the  claimant's
    Counsel (and it is not  subject  to  dispute)  that  he  gave  an  oral
    decision stating that he would allow the appeal with a written decision
    to follow.

 5. The appeal was transferred to  FtT  Judge  Saunders  (hereinafter  "the
    Judge") and reheard on 20 October 2015. The Judge, in a  decision  that
    was promulgated on 27 October 2015, allowed the appeal. She  found  the
    appellant had been truthful and accepted the core of his claim to  have
    been subject to torture and to be at continuing risk. At paragraph [33]
    she stated that she accepted his account in full and at paragraph  [34]
    she concluded that the appellant  was  at  risk  from  the  authorities
    throughout Sri Lanka as a consequence of the political opinion  imputed
    to him.

    Grounds of appeal and submissions

 6. There are two grounds of appeal. The first is that the Judge  committed
    a procedural error by determining the appeal  in  line  with  the  oral
    findings of Judge Gibb rather  than  hearing  the  appeal  afresh.  The
    grounds state that the Judge has "been clearly influenced  by  the  un-
    promulgated findings of Immigration Judge Gibb".

 7. The second ground is that the FtT  failed  to  take  into  account  and
    resolve submissions by the Secretary of State relating to  the  absence
    of medical evidence concerning physical harm  the  claimant  claims  to
    have suffered.

 8. An additional issue was raised at the hearing, which concerned  whether
    the Judge had prejudged the  appeal  and  acted  improperly  toward  Ms
    Godber, the Home Office Presenting Officer. Ms Fijiwala sought to  rely
    on an unsigned file note drafted by Ms Godber dated 20 October 2015. In
    this note, Ms Godber states, inter alia, that the Judge  subjected  her
    to undue pressure at the hearing to agree  that  the  previous  judge's
    findings in respect of the claimant  being  credible  and  having  been
    detained should stand. The note states that  the  Judge  asked  her  to
    "show some humanity" and that the Judge had "clearly  already  made  up
    her mind having read the previous judge's Record  of  Proceedings."  Ms
    Godber also  states  in  her  note  that  her  "cross  examination  was
    interrupted by the Judge on a few occasions" and that the  Judge  asked
    her: "are you really saying he has lied?"

 9. Ms Fijiwala maintained that the note shows that the  Judge  was  biased
    and that improper pressure was placed  on  the  Presenting  Officer.  I
    asked Ms Fijiwala what status should be given to the note given  it  is
    unsigned. Her response was that it should be treated as the  equivalent
    of a statement.

10. In respect of the first ground of appeal,  Ms  Fijiwala  submitted  the
    Judge had approached the appeal, and  considered  the  evidence  before
    her, on the basis that  the  claimant's  oral  evidence  given  at  the
    earlier hearing was accepted and that his credibility was not in issue.
    That was an error because the Judge should have considered  the  appeal
    de novo. The second ground of  appeal,  although  relied  on,  was  not
    developed at the hearing.

11. Ms Jegarasah addressed the allegation of bias by, firstly, relying on a
    witness statement from Mr Paramjorthy, who was Counsel for the claimant
    at the hearing before the Judge. His signed statement states  that  the
    Judge discussed the ambit of the appeal with the advocates and  invited
    Ms Godber to consider if she wished to challenge credibility. He states
    that the only time Ms Godber was interrupted was when  she  started  to
    make submissions about the side effect of citalapram and he  asked  her
    to explain the document she was reading  from.  The  Judge  then  asked
    about this and allowed an article relating  to  the  medication  to  be
    admitted. Mr Paramjorthy states that he is troubled by  the  allegation
    of procedural unfairness which cannot be made out.

12. Mr Paramjorthy attended the hearing. I invited Ms  Fijiwala  to  cross-
    examine him but she declined to do so.

13. Ms Jegarasah argued that reliance should not be placed on  an  unsigned
    note without a statement of truth, and contrasted this to the  evidence
    of Mr Paramjorthy, who  not  only  prepared  a  witness  statement  but
    attended the hearing.

14. With regard to the first ground of appeal, Ms Jegarasah argued that the
    Judge had carefully considered how the unpromulgated decision of  Judge
    Gibb should be dealt with and her approach was  entirely  proper.   She
    submitted that the Judge's decision was cogent and  well  reasoned  and
    based on the evidence. In respect of the second ground of  appeal,  she
    argued that the Judge had dealt carefully with the psychiatric evidence
    concerning torture and the ground had no merit.

    Consideration

15. Ms Godber, in her note, asserts that the Judge had  made  up  her  mind
    before the hearing and put undue pressure on her. The wording  used  in
    the note is "Undue pressure was exerted against the PO at the Hearing".
     These are serious allegations that amount to a claim that the  Judge's
    decision was tainted by bias.

16. Where an allegation of this nature is made the question I need to  ask,
    as set out in CD (DRC) [2011] EWCA Civ 1425 at [29], is whether all the
    circumstances of  the  case  would  lead  a  fair-minded  and  informed
    observer to conclude  that  there  was  a  real  possibility  that  the
    tribunal was biased.

17. I have not discounted Ms Godber's evidence because it is  unsigned  and
    not verified by a Statement of Truth. The note  appears  to  have  been
    drafted immediately after the hearing and I accept it is  a  reflection
    of Ms Godber's impression of what occurred at the hearing.  However,  I
    have before me an alternative account of the proceedings  in  the  FtT,
    that of Mr Paramjorthy, counsel for the claimant in those  proceedings.
    He has not only submitted a signed statement, but he also attended  the
    hearing before me. I asked Ms Fijiwala if she wished to  challenge  his
    evidence by cross examining him but she declined to  do  so.  In  these
    circumstances,  I  consider  the  evidence  of  Mr  Paramjorthy,  which
    strongly refutes there being any bias, more persuasive.

18. However, even if I only had before me Ms Godber's case  note,  I  would
    still not find that there had been impropriety or bias on the  part  of
    the Judge. Ms Godber's note  recounts  that  the  Judge  asked  her  if
    credibility was really still in question and that she commented on  the
    claimant's distress and mental issues. She also states that  the  Judge
    interrupted her on a few occasions and put to her the question  whether
    she was saying the claimant lied.

19. These comments from the Judge, as  described  by  Ms  Godber,  must  be
    understood in the context of the appeal. The evidence before the Judge,
    as set in two medical reports from a psychiatrist and  letters  from  a
    treating therapist, was that the claimant suffered from Post  Traumatic
    Stress. Before the hearing, the claimant's solicitors  had  written  to
    the Tribunal stating that giving evidence at the previous hearing about
    the ill treatment he faced was "highly distressing" for the claimant.

20. In these circumstances I consider  it  entirely  appropriate  that  the
    Judge, as a preliminary matter, raised the  matter  of  the  claimant's
    mental health and ascertained whether credibility would be at issue.  I
    cannot see how engaging in this  discussion  with  the  representatives
    could amount to bias or be perceived as such by a fair minded observer.
    Nor do I accept that there was any impropriety on the part of the Judge
    by posing a direct question to Ms Godber to clarify if she is  alleging
    the claimant is lying.

21. Ms Godber has made a serious allegations about the conduct of the Judge
    but her account of the hearing, even if  accepted  in  full,  does  not
    support them. I am satisfied that even  if  Ms  Godber  has  accurately
    described the hearing, a fair-minded and informed  observer  would  not
    consider that the Judge had unduly  pressured  her  or  pre-judged  the
    appeal.

22. I turn now to the first ground of appeal and the  submission  that  the
    Judge improperly relied on the findings of Judge Gibbs. In  support  of
    this submission Ms Fijiwala refers to paragraph [23] of  the  decision,
    where the Judge stated that "the appellant has already given  evidence,
    has been cross examined in full and that evidence accepted".   The  use
    of the word "accepted" is said to show the  Judge  has  relied  on  the
    findings of Judge Gibbs.

23. I do not accept this interpretation. At  paragraphs  [18]  -  [22]  the
    Judge analysed the medical evidence. Having  done  this,  at  Paragraph
    [23],  the  Judge  stated  that  she  accepted  the  medical   evidence
    established that the claimant suffers from PTSD and depression and that
    he finds it particularly  hard  to  confront  traumatic  memories.  She
    concluded that taking into account both the medical evidence  and  that
    the claimant  has  already  given  evidence  that  was  accepted,  "his
    decision not to give evidence does not adversely affect his credibility
    per se".  Placed in its proper context, it is clear that  at  paragraph
    [23] the Judge is not accepting the findings  that  were  before  Judge
    Gibb but rather is explain why she found the claimant's credibility was
    not adversely affected by his decision to not give evidence.

24.  At  paragraphs  [25]  -[33]  the  Judge  considered   the   claimant's
    credibility. The analysis is detailed and comprehensive. It is followed
    by a finding, at paragraph [33], that the claimant has  been  truthful.
    The Judge found that he had given a  detailed  and  consistent  account
    which was internally coherent and plausible  and  consistent  with  the
    medical evidence  and  further  documents.  It  is  apparent  from  the
    decision  that  this  is  the  Judge's  finding  based   on   her   own
    consideration and examination of the evidence.

25. At paragraph [5] the Judge stated that the hearing before  her  was  de
    novo. Taking the decision as a whole, it is clear that  the  Judge  has
    not preserved any  of  Judge  Gibb's  findings  and  has  independently
    reached her own  view  on  the  claimant's  credibility  based  on  the
    evidence before her.  I am satisfied, therefore, that the Secretary  of
    State's first ground of appeal lacks any merit.

26. The Secretary of State's second ground of appeal concerns  the  absence
    of medical evidence relating to the claimant's physical  injuries.  The
    Judge considered in detail the psychiatric evidence and  was  satisfied
    that this established, to the relevant  standard  of  proof,  that  the
    claimant has PTSD and depression in consequence of the torture and rape
    he claimed to have suffered. Although I accept that the Judge erred  by
    failing to specifically address the issue raised by  the  Secretary  of
    State as to there being no medical report in relation to  the  physical
    injuries, this error was not material. The  Judge  carefully  explained
    why she accepted the psychiatric evidence and found it to be consistent
    with  the  claimant's  claim.  Having  considered  this   evidence   in
    combination with the documentary evidence and witness evidence that was
    before her, the Judge was entitled to  accept  the  claimant's  account
    notwithstanding the absence  of  a  report  relating  to  his  physical
    injuries.

    Decision

      a. The appeal is dismissed.

      b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of a material error of law and shall stand.

      c. An anonymity direction is made.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 7 February 2015               |

