

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/07861/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Reasons Promulgated|
|On April 11, 2016                    |On April 14, 2016           |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR M K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Butterworth, Counsel, instructed by Loshana & Co
      Limited

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent in these proceedings was  the  appellant  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal. From hereon I have referred to the  parties  as
       they were in the First-tier Tribunal so that for  example  reference
       to the respondent is a reference to the Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department.

    2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. The appellant  entered  the
       United Kingdom on November 3, 2011 and claimed asylum the  following
       day. After a delay he attended a screening interview on February 19,
       2015 was granted at which time he was served with Form IS151A as  an
       illegal entrant.

    3. On April 20, 2015 he was detained and his claim was entered into the
       Detained Fast Tack system. He underwent a substantive  interview  on
       May 5, 2016 but the respondent refused his  claim  on  May  8,  2015
       under paragraph 336 HC 395 and took a decision to remove him by  way
       of directions under section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
       1999.

    4. The appellant appealed that decision  under  section  82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on May 12, 2015.

    5. The appeal came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Symes
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on February 4, 2016 and in  a
       decision promulgated on February 16, 2016 he allowed the appellant's
       appeal on asylum grounds.

    6. The respondent  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  February  19,  2016
       submitting the Judge had erred both in his approach to GJ and others
       (Post Civil War: Returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and
       that he failed to make findings and/or give adequate reasons for his
       findings.

    7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Brunnen on March 2, 2016 on the basis the grounds were arguable.

    8. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both representatives. I reserved my decision.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction.  No  report  of
       these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any
       member  of  their  family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the
       Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
       direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

SUBMISSIONS

   10. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted the Judge failed to consider  Section
       8(4) of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc)  Act
       2004  (hereinafter  called  the  2004  Act)  when  considering   the
       appellant's credibility. The Judge failed to have regard to the fact
       the appellant could have claimed asylum in Spain and in doing so his
       assessment of the appellant's  credibility  was  flawed.  The  Judge
       further erred by failing to make clear findings on  the  appellant's
       account. He had claimed he had been persecuted in both 2009 and 2013
       and whilst the Judge considered  the  2009  incident  he  failed  to
       address the circumstances of 2013 and  this  was  pertinent  to  his
       claim  because  the  war  was  over  in  2009  and   therefore   the
       circumstances of 2013 needed to  be  addressed.  She  submitted  the
       findings in paragraphs [24] to [26] did not address  the  issues  in
       the refusal letter especially as the Judge found the  appellant  had
       not carried out any significant activities or had any involvement in
       the diaspora and would therefore would not be a threat  to  the  Sri
       Lankan state. The Judge's finding in paragraph [29] was wrong in law
       and the decision should be set aside.

   11. Mr Butterworth relied on his skeleton  argument  and  submitted  the
       respondent's ground were  unmeritorious  and  the  Judge  had  given
       reasons  for  his  decision.  He  referred  to  the  cases  of   VHR
       (unmeritorious grounds) Jamaica [2014]  UKUT  00367  and  Budhathoki
       (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC)  and  submitted  the
       Judge correctly applied GJ and others (Post  Civil  War:  Returnees)
       Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and  made  findings  that  were
       open to him. His finding in paragraph [29] complied with GJ  because
       the Judge concluded the appellant's profile would bring him  to  the
       attention of the authorities and it was unnecessary to have  carried
       out actions in the diaspora  where  the  judge  concluded  that  the
       evidence presented demonstrated he was of interest and therefore  he
       would be  at  risk  based  on  the  guidance  contained  in  GJ.  Mr
       Butterworth further submitted that in  this  appeal  the  Judge  was
       entitled to ignore the section 8  issue  raised  by  the  respondent
       based on the  answers  he  gave  in  interview.  The  Judge  clearly
       attached no weight to the fact he was in a  container  and  he  only
       entered Spain whilst on transit between countries and all  times  he
       was confined in a container. The Judge made findings on  the  issues
       raised by the respondent in her refusal letter  and  these  findings
       were contained in paragraphs [24] to [30] of his decision. There was
       no material error and the respondent's appeal should be dismissed.

   12.  Having  heard  the  representatives'  submissions,  I  reserved  my
       decision.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   13. The appellant was from Sri Lanka and having arrived here he  claimed
       asylum. The respondent refused  his  claim  in  a  detailed  refusal
       letter and in appealing that decision the appellant provided medical
       and country evidence to support his claim. He argued  that  he  fell
       into a risk category set out in the decision of GJ.

   14. Although the Judge set out the  relevant  parts  of  GJ  I  feel  in
       considering the respondent's application today it would assist if  I
       set out  the  relevant  parts  of  GJ.  The  Tribunal's  conclusions
       included:

    i) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed  since
       the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri Lanka itself  is  a
       spent force and there have been no terrorist incidents since the  end
       of the civil war.


   ii) The government's present objective is to identify Tamil activists  in
       the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism and to  destabilise
       the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in Amendment 6(1) to  the  Sri
       Lankan Constitution  in  1983,  which  prohibits  the  'violation  of
       territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus is on preventing both
       (a) the resurgence of  the  LTTE  or  any  similar  Tamil  separatist
       organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.


  iii) If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services  there
       remains a real risk of ill-treatment or harm requiring  international
       protection.


   iv) Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka for a person at
       real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the  government  now
       controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils are required to return  to
       a named address after passing through the airport.


    v) There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those  whose
       names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from the airport.  Any
       risk for those in whom the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  are  or  become
       interested exists not at the airport, but after arrival in their home
       area, where their arrival will be  verified  by  the  CID  or  police
       within a few days.


   vi) The current categories of persons at  real  risk  of  persecution  or
       serious harm  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
       otherwise, include:

        a. Individuals who are, or are perceived to be,  a  threat  to  the
           integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they  are,  or
           are perceived to have a significant role in  relation  to  post-
           conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or  a  renewal
           of hostilities within Sri Lanka.


        b. A person whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
           accessible at the airport, comprising a list  of  those  against
           whom  there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest   warrant.
           Individuals whose name appears on a "stop" list will be  stopped
           at the airport and handed over to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan
           authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.


  vii) The Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is  based  on  sophisticated
       intelligence, both as to activities  within  Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
       diaspora.  The Sri Lankan  authorities  know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
       Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also  that  everyone
       in the Northern Province had some level of involvement with the  LTTE
       during the civil war.  In post-conflict Sri  Lanka,  an  individual's
       past history will be relevant only to the extent that it is perceived
       by the Sri Lankan authorities as indicating a  present  risk  to  the
       unitary Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.


 viii) The authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led  "watch"
       list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is not reasonably
       likely to be detained at the airport but will  be  monitored  by  the
       security services after his or her return. If  that  monitoring  does
       not indicate that such a  person  is  a  Tamil  activist  working  to
       destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or revive the internal armed
       conflict, the individual in question is not, in  general,  reasonably
       likely to be detained  by  the  security  forces.   That  will  be  a
       question of fact in each case, dependent on any  diaspora  activities
       carried out by such an individual."

   15. The respondent's grounds of appeal  challenge  firstly  the  Judge's
       finding in paragraph [29] that the appellant falls within one of the
       risk categories identified above and secondly on the basis the Judge
       failed to make material findings and/or failed to give  reasons  for
       his findings.

   16. At paragraph [7] of his decision the Judge set out the  respondent's
       objections and Ms Brocklesby-Weller has  submitted  that  the  Judge
       failed to make findings on some or all of them. Mr  Butterworth  has
       argued to the contrary.

   17. The Judge noted in his record of evidence that the appellant had not
       exaggerated his involvement with the LTTE. He referred in  paragraph
       [10] to his involvement as being "digging bunkers and cleaning"  and
       later on he noted the  appellant  claimed  to  have  worked  in  the
       suppliers group. The appellant was seen by a doctor and  a  Rule  35
       report referred to his  claim  of  having  been  beaten  with  blunt
       instruments, punched, kicked and sexually tortured. He was diagnosed
       with suffering  from  PTSD.  The  Judge  referred  to  this  medical
       evidence in paragraphs [12] and [13] of  his  decision  and  between
       paragraphs [15] and [17] of his decision the Judge set out  evidence
       that arose in cross and re-examination. Between paragraphs [20]  and
       [21]  he  set  out  the  representatives'  submissions  and  between
       paragraphs [22] and [29] he set out his findings with  reference  to
       case law, medical and country evidence.

   18. The respondent's challenge is that in undertaking his assessment  of
       the evidence he failed to follow GJ and failed to make  findings  or
       give reasons for his findings.

   19. It is clear from the Judge's consideration of the evidence  that  he
       had regard  to  all  of  the  evidence  before  reaching  his  final
       conclusions. He  found  the  appellant  to  be  a  reliable  witness
       (paragraph [24]) in respect of his his own history and  in  reaching
       that conclusion he had  regard  to  the  medical  evidence  and  the
       approach that experts should take when providing  such  reports.  In
       making his  finding  about  the  appellant  he  had  regard  to  the
       psychiatrist's  report   which   he   concluded   corroborated   the
       appellant's account to a degree. As Mr Butterworth submitted  to  me
       he then also considered the appellant's claims against  the  country
       evidence that had been submitted and found there was no  significant
       "implausibility" in his account. The Judge acknowledged  there  were
       inconsistencies but applying the lower standard of  proof  he  found
       that the medical evidence could  explain  such  inconsistencies.  In
       paragraph [26] of the decision the Judge made it clear that although
       he had had regard to the respondent's concerns (set out in paragraph
       [7]  of  the  Judge's  decision)  he   nevertheless   accepted   the
       appellant's account  having  regard  to  both  the  appellant's  own
       evidence, medical and country evidence.

   20. Ms Brocklesby-Weller raised section 8 issues but I find no merit  in
       ground of appeal due to the answers given by the  appellant  in  his
       interview. Having accepted his account as credible  he  was  clearly
       unable to claim asylum in Spain as argued by Ms Brocklesby-Weller.

   21. Grounds two and three of the respondent's grounds of appeal question
       the  Judge's  approach  but  put  simply  the  Judge  accepted   the
       appellant's  explanation  in  light  of  the  medical  and   country
       evidence. He was not required to go through  each  and  every  point
       because he explained in his decision the approach he had  taken  and
       what weight he attached to evidence.

   22. Having made his findings, the Judge was then  required  to  consider
       the appellant's position against the country guidance  of  GJ.  Just
       because an account is credible does not mean his claim to be at risk
       would be made out.  The  assessment  of  the  appellant's  claim  is
       different to assessment  of  risk.  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  submitted
       (ground one of the grounds of appeal) the Judge  erred  in  applying
       the guidance in GJ.

   23. To assess this ground of appeal it is necessary to not  only  remind
       ourselves what  GJ  says  but  to  read  the  Judge's  reasoning  at
       paragraphs [27] to [29] of his decision.

   24. The Judge accepted his activities had never been at any  significant
       level in Sri Lanka to automatically bring him with a  risk  category
       of GJ. He  also  noted  he  had  not  taken  part  in  any  diaspora
       activities and would therefore not  automatically  be  considered  a
       threat to the stability of Sri Lanka.

   25. However, he accepted the appellant's account that he  had  been  the
       subject of interest from the authorities and he had been  mistreated
       long after the ceasefire and that the only reasonable inference  was
       that he would be considered of  interest  to  the  authorities.  His
       assessment in paragraph [28] of his  decision  is  critical  to  his
       finding in paragraph [29] that he would face a real serious risk  of
       harm, if returned.

   26. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted the Judge had not followed GJ  but  I
       am satisfied that having had the benefit of hearing the  appellant's
       oral evidence the Judge was well placed to  consider  the  risk  the
       appellant would face. Having accepted his  post  2009  account,  the
       Judge was entitled to concluded that the appellant would face a real
       risk of persecution, if returned. He reached that conclusion  having
       analysed all of the evidence as demonstrated in paragraphs  [24]  to
       [29] of his decision.

   27. On the circumstances I find no error in law in the Judge's  approach
       and I dismiss the respondent's appeal.

DECISION

   28. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  uphold  the
       original decision and dismiss the appeal.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD

No fee was payable.

Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
