
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07323/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 14 December 2015                   |                   On 4 January 2016  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                   MR L T
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  He  was  born  on  4  October
    1991.  He appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 10 September
    2014 to refuse him asylum, humanitarian protection and on human  rights
    grounds.

 2. His appeal was dismissed by Designated Judge Manuell (the judge)  in  a
    decision promulgated on 7 October 2015.  The judge found the  appellant
    was not a credible witness with regard to events in his own country and
    that he was not at risk on return.

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds claimed:

      1) Unfairness in refusing to grant an adjournment.

      2) Failure to give appropriate weight to the psychiatric report of  Dr
         Persaud and failure to take account  of  further  medical  evidence
         submitted.

      3) Erroneous assessment of the appellant's credibility.

      4) Failure to take account of the country guidance in  GJ  (post-civil
         war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

      5) Failure to consider Article 3.

 4. Designated Judge Zucker gave permission to appeal in a decision dated 5
    November 2015. He took the view that  given  what  counsel  Ms  Antonia
    Benfield had to say in the grounds, it was arguable that the judge fell
    into error  in  failing  to  grant  the  adjournment  of  a  vulnerable
    appellant. As the adjournment sought was for the purpose of  clarifying
    evidence, it was arguable that the judge erred in respect  of  each  of
    the grounds.

 5. The Rule 24 response submitted  inter  alia  that  the  judge  directed
    himself appropriately and that the grounds were  fundamentally  without
    foundation. The  judge  had  considered  at  [8]-[15]  the  adjournment
    request.  He  considered  that  there  had  been  previous  adjournment
    requests at [10]. He took into account  advice  to  the  solicitors  to
    inform the Tribunal if there were continuing  difficulties.  The  judge
    gave  extensive  reasons  for  rejecting  the  application  to  adjourn
    including that further delay was not in the interests of the appellant.
    The grounds did not disclose any error.

Submissions on Error of Law

 6. Notwithstanding the Rule 24 response, Ms Pal conceded  that  the  judge
    had erred in refusing the adjournment request.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 7. An application was  made  at  the  beginning  of  the  hearing  for  an
    adjournment to obtain an addendum psychiatric report.  It was submitted
    at the time that the judge's refusal to grant an adjournment was unfair
    to the appellant.  The Tribunal  had  been  informed  at  the  previous
    hearing on 22 April  2005  that  the  appellant's  representatives  had
    sought to prepare the case in advance of the hearing and had  attempted
    to take a witness statement.  In light of what was considered to be the
    appellant's significant difficulties  in  providing  instructions,  his
    solicitors arranged for a psychiatric assessment  by  Dr  Raj  Persaud,
    consultant  psychiatrist.   Dr  Persaud's  conclusions  were  that  the
    appellant was suffering from a serious psychiatric condition,  that  he
    was not fit to attend court hearings, to give evidence or instruct  his
    legal representatives.  As a result, an application was  made  for  the
    adjournment of the hearing on 22 April 2015 which was granted.  At that
    time, counsel informed the Tribunal that the proposed course of  action
    was for the  appellant  to  take  Dr Persaud's  report,  register  the
    appellant with a GP and request a referral to secondary  mental  health
    services.

 8. In advance of the adjourned hearing before the judge,  the  appellant's
    representatives sought to obtain  an  addendum  psychiatric  report  to
    establish whether the position on fitness had changed.  The  judge  was
    informed at the hearing on 22 September 2015 that  owing  to  the  non-
    availability of Dr Persaud and also  because  of  a  funding  issue  in
    relation to the cost of  the  addendum  report,  such  report  was  not
    available.  The judge  was  advised  that  the  appellant's  solicitors
    continued  to  consider  that  they  were  not  able  to  obtain  clear
    instructions and on that basis, counsel said  she  could  not  consider
    herself appropriately instructed.  Nevertheless, the judge was informed
    by counsel that funds were finally in place and that the appellant  had
    an appointment with Dr Persaud in the week commencing 28 September with
    a view to obtaining the addendum report.  The judge was urged to  allow
    the appellant an opportunity to obtain that report.

 9. Prior to the first report of Dr Persaud, his representatives  were  not
    aware of the severity of his mental health condition.  I find  that  in
    refusing the adjournment the  judge  failed  to  take  account  of  the
    circumstances under which the appellant's statement had been  prepared.
    On that basis, the accuracy of the appellant's account was in  question
    and in my view the judge could not be satisfied that  the  account  was
    based on reliable instructions.  Counsel had made  it  expressly  clear
    before the judge that there were concerns about the reliability of  the
    statement but the judge took no account of that when  at  [12]  of  his
    decision, he noted that the bundles were  in  order  and  there  was  a
    statement prepared; clearly, that was not the complete picture.

10. At [10] of his decision the judge considered the history of the  appeal
    with regard to the application  to  adjourn.  Directions  made  at  the
    adjourned hearing on 22 April 2015 were  that  the  subsequent  hearing
    would proceed on submissions in the event that the appellant was unable
    or unwilling to give evidence.  I find that fitness  to  give  evidence
    and fitness to instruct were different issues and the judge's  comments
    at [10] related to evidence, not instructions.

11. At [12] of his decision the judge considered that the delay between the
    adjourned Tribunal hearings was relevant to his decision not to adjourn
    the case.  The guiding consideration as  established  by  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules and SH (Afghanistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 1284  and  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418   (IAC)   confirmed   the
    centrality of fairness when considering whether  an  appeal  should  be
    adjourned.  Constraints on the Tribunal in terms of listing  a  further
    hearing in the light of  public  funding  cuts  should  not  have  been
    relevant to the judge's decision.

12. In the circumstances I find that the judge's refusal of the adjournment
    was unfair, as the appellant was unable to engage with the  process  or
    have a representative act on his behalf.  Ms Benfield withdrew when the
    judge refused the adjournment. He was essentially a litigant in  person
    at the hearing where he was arguably not fit to give evidence and could
    not effectively participate or respond to the respondent's  refusal  of
    his claim.  See Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010.

13. The judge placed no weight on the report of Dr  Persaud.   He  said  at
    [30] of his decision that the report of Dr  Persaud  was  of  "no  real
    assistance to the Tribunal" on the basis that the appellant refused  to
    co-operate with  the  assessment.   Lord  Justice  Rix  in  R  (on  the
    application of AM) [2012] EWCA Civ 521 confirmed  that  medical  expert
    reports should be viewed as independent views  of  independent  experts
    arising out of expert examination and assessment.  The  fact  that  the
    appellant was unable to fully engage with  the  psychiatric  assessment
    did not mean that Dr Persaud was unable to come  to  a  clinical  view
    about a diagnosis.  In any event, the judge appeared to have overlooked
    the evidence from the appellant's GP that had been served in advance of
    the adjourned hearing. That evidence confirmed that the  appellant  had
    registered with the  GP,  he  had  been  diagnosed  as  suffering  from
    depression and anxiety and had  been  prescribed  Setraline  (an  anti-
    depressant) at a dose of 50mg.  That evidence was material.  The  judge
    failed to address whether such evidence had any bearing on  the  weight
    placed on the report of Dr Persaud.  That was  also  relevant  in  line
    with GJ at [453]-[456]. As regards  the  GP  and  psychiatric  evidence
    generally, there was  evidence  to  the  requisite  standard  that  the
    appellant was suffering from a mental health condition that should have
    had a bearing on the judge's assessment of  credibility.   See  Mibanga
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

14. The judge failed to take into account the country  guidance  in  GJ  in
    assessing the appellant's account.  See in particular  what  the  judge
    said  at  [24]  and  [27]  of  his  decision  that   it   was   "almost
    inconceivable" and "inherently improbable" that the appellant would  be
    released from detention if he was of any interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  That directly contradicted  the  findings  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in GJ where it was  found  that  the  seriousness  of  charges
    against an individual were not determinative of whether a  bribe  could
    be paid and a detainee released.  See [276].

15. The judge failed to take adequate cognisance of the country guidance in
    GJ such that he failed properly to consider Article 3  in  relation  to
    risk on return.  The appellant had never held a national passport  such
    that he would require an emergency travel document.  See GJ  at  [307].
    During the process of re-documentation the Sri Lankan authorities would
    be forewarned that the appellant might return.  See  GJ  at  [345]  and
    [308].

16. The appellant has shown material errors of law in the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I set aside that decision.  It  will  be  re-made
    following a de novo hearing.



Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law, is  set
    aside and shall be remade.

    Anonymity direction continued.




    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Date 14 December 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart








