
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07404/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard in North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 February 2016                          |On 13 April 2016               |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                    [Y H]
                     (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE/NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Pickering, Counsel, instructed by Latif
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Kingham, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S P J Buchanan, promulgated on 6 July 2015  whereby
    he dismissed the appeal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 22 April 2015 to refuse to vary leave to remain and  to  remove
    the appellant from the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on [ ] 1984. He  has  lived
    in the United Kingdom since 2008 with leave initially as a student.  He
    claimed asylum on 6 April 2010 which was refused on 1 April 2011 and an
    appeal against this decision was dismissed. He  was,  however,  granted
    Discretionary Leave to remain until 21  September  2012  owing  to  the
    illness of one of his children.  That arose  out  of  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Duff on 16 May 2011 that in the interests  of
    the child's welfare he would need to remain in the United Kingdom for a
    period of twelve months following an operation  and  that  consequently
    the appellant and his wife should be given leave to remain with him  to
    care for  the  chid.   It  is  against  the  decision  to  extend  that
    Discretionary Leave to remain that this current appeal was brought.

 3. The judge dismissed the appellant's asylum claim. He then  went  on  to
    consider the position with regard to the earlier grant of discretionary
    leave to remain and Article 8.  The judge concluded that:-

      i) the transitional  arrangements  relating  to  those  who  had  been
         granted Discretionary Leave under the  Discretionary  Leave  policy
         prior to 9 July 2012 [7.4] did not apply to this appellant  as  the
         guidance said that there would normally be a grant of further leave
         to remain "if the circumstances remained the same" and that he  was
         not satisfied that this was so [7.8] to [7.10];

     ii) the medical evidence indicated that the child had gone through  his
         surgery, had been supervised post-operatively and that  there  were
         no immediate concerns from the doctor as  to  the  child's  welfare
         [7.12]; that there was no evidence  presented  that  the  follow-up
         care proposed for the child by his team would not be  available  in
         Pakistan  and  that  there  was  no  evidence  from  any  medically
         qualified person that the child would be  best  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom now that he had  undergone  his  operation  and  had
         twelve months' post-operative follow-up [7.13];

    iii) the appellant and family had made a life for themselves in  the  UK
         in the knowledge that their period of  leave  was  limited  by  the
         medical needs of their child [12.2] and,  there  being  no  medical
         reasons for concluding the child's removal from the United Kingdom,
         these were  facts  which  weighed  against  the  appellant  in  the
         balancing exercise in considering proportionality;

     iv) the scathing conclusions drawn in earlier appeals about the conduct
         of the appellant and his wife and their immigration  history  which
         was poor were factors  to  be  weighed  against  the  appellant  in
         balancing the issue of proportionality [12.3]; the family were  not
         likely to be separated on return to Pakistan as they  would  return
         as a family unit; again a factor weighing against the appellant  in
         the balancing exercise [12.4];

      v) removal would not amount to a disruption of family life and  whilst
         there may be private life associations disruption with those  would
         not be disproportionate  in  the  circumstances;  and,  having  had
         regard to Sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act the private life had been
         promoted at a time when the  appellant  knew  that  his  leave  was
         limited, the family  were  not  self-sufficient  and  had  been  in
         receipt of benefits.  Accordingly, removal would be proportionate.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred; -

      i) In failing to have regard to the factors under Section 117B of  the
         2002 Act, having apparently directed himself only to Section  117C,
         and failing to demonstrate that  he  had  had  regard  to  all  the
         factors set out in Section 117B, appearing not to take into account
         the fact the appellant speaks English and was thus less a burden on
         the tax payers;

     ii) in failing to take into account  the  delay  on  the  part  of  the
         respondent in not making a  decision  on  the  application  for  an
         extension of discretionary leave between 21 September 2012  and  22
         April 2015 which, given that children were involved, is relevant to
         the  exercise  of  proportionality  which  should,   Section   117B
         notwithstanding,   have   been    considered    in    respect    of
         proportionality;

    iii) in failing to consider the best interests of the  appellant's  son,
         the doctor having concluded he wished to see him in a year's time.

 5. On 5 August 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson  granted  permission
    on all grounds stating:

         "The judge has given adequate reasons  for  his  conclusions  which
         were not perverse or irrational.  Although  the  considerations  of
         Section 117A-D is terse, there is no suggestion that the judge  has
         misdirected  himself  or  that  he   has   applied   Section   117B
         incorrectly.  Moreover, there is no indication within the  decision
         that the judge was aware of the decision in Dube  and  it  is  also
         arguable that he has failed to consider the application of  Section
         55 of the BA as regards the best interests of a son."

    Submissions

 6. Miss Pickering also submitted that  in  reality  the  judge's  decision
    would have been significantly different  had  he  had  regard  to  Dube
    (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC) and AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT
    260 (IAC).  She submitted the judge ought to have found positive rights
    applicable in this case.

 7. Miss Pickering submitted that the issue of delay had been properly  put
    to the judge in this a case and that weight could  have  been  attached
    thereto in this case given what was said in EB (Kosovo) and  it  was  a
    matter which properly  went  into  the  proportionality  analysis,  the
    factors in Section B not being exhaustive.  She accepted that what said
    at [12.6] was a proper self-direction as to Section 117A-B but  it  was
    clear from what the judge concluded that he had not taken into  account
    delay and that he had not dealt with all of  the  factors  set  out  in
    Section 117B.

 8. Mr Kingham submitted that the sole issue in this case was whether  this
    would have made a difference given what the judge had found at  [12.3].
    She submitted that it would not.

    Discussion

 9. There is no merit in the submission that the judge had directed himself
    to Section 117C. It is not at all clear from what the judge said  other
    than observing that he had considered the application of Sections  117A
    to 117D as being relevant, that he had wrongly applied section 117C  to
    this case.  Miss Pickering was unable to identify any basis  which  was
    indicative of the judge having done so.

10. I am satisfied also from what the judge said at [12.6] that he had  had
    regard to  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.   The  self-direction  is
    adequate.

11. Whilst AM (Malawi) was decided after Dube, it cannot be said  that  the
    approaches are inconsistent and I note from what was said  at  [33]  in
    Dube about delay. It is also not properly arguable that  the  fact  the
    appellant speaks English is a positive factor, nor indicative  that  he
    has been less of a burden.

12. It does not follow from Dube that a judge must  consider  expressly  or
    explicitly all of the factors set out in Section 117B.   It  is  to  be
    borne in mind that the error in  that  case  was  a  failure  to  apply
    Section 117A to 117D at all.  I note what was said in Dube at [27]:-

         27. Applying these observations to this appeal, it is clear that it
         was incumbent on the judge to  apply  ss.117A-117D  considerations:
         although the claimant's application and the  respondent's  decision
         preceded this date, the FtTJ determined this  case  on  29  October
         2014 and was therefore bound to apply its provisions. At  the  same
         time, there is no legal error in his  decision  simply  because  he
         failed to  identify  its  provisions  precisely  and  confused  its
         provisions with ones found in the Immigration  Rules.  Legal  error
         would only arise if he  failed  to  apply  relevant  ss.  117A-117D
         provisions in substance. The Applicant was not a foreign  criminal;
         hence the only considerations  potentially  relevant  to  her  were
         those contained in s.117A, 117B and 117D.

13. Applying these principles to the facts of this case, it is sufficiently
    clear from his decision that the judge did have proper  regard  to  the
    best interests of the appellant's child. It was open him to  find  that
    there was no health reasons as to why the child should need  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom and it is clear, as he noted, that there  was  no
    evidence that what continuing care is required could not be provided in
    Pakistan.  The evidence of continuing care was  limited;  the  evidence
    was that the doctor needed to see the child in  one  year's  time.   No
    other basis is suggested other than health reasons that the child would
    not be best cared for by living with his parents as part of the  family
    unit and returning to Pakistan.

14. There was adequate consideration of Section 55 of the 2009 Act  by  the
    judge and it is to be noted that the child was not  a  qualified  child
    for the purposes of Section 117D.

15. With respect to delay, it cannot be  said  that  this  was  a  relevant
    factor which could or should have  been  taken  into  account.   It  is
    sufficiently clear that the judge was aware of this fact and it is  not
    established that he did not take it into account.  Bearing in mind  the
    principles set out in EB (Kosovo) as referred  to  above  in  Dube,  it
    cannot be argued that the delay caused any material disadvantage to the
    appellant. On the contrary, he was able to remain in the United Kingdom
    for a further period whilst his child will  receive  medical  care  and
    education.

16. Accordingly, for these reason, I am not satisfied that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an  error  of  law.  I
    therefore uphold the decision.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS.

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.



Signed                                  Date:  1 April 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

