

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA071812015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 4 April 2016                               |On 17 June 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    C O O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Richards, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Webb, NLS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant in this appeal was the  Respondent  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and the Respondent was the Appellant. For the sake of clarity  I
   refer to them as the Secretary of State and  Claimant  respectively.  The
   Claimant is a national of Nigeria. She claimed asylum and her application
   was refused by the Secretary of State in a  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
   (RFRL) dated 10 April 2015. A decision was made to remove her by  way  of
   directions under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.  The
   Claimant appealed that decision under s82 of the Nationality, Immigration
   and Asylum 2002 Act and her appeal was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Suffield-Thompson in a decision promulgated on 23 September 2015.


2. At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  Secretary  of  State
   accepted that the Claimant had been  the  victim  of  abuse  by  her  ex-
   husband. The First-tier Tribunal found that the Claimant would be at risk
   from her husband's family in her home area. She then  considered  whether
   the Claimant would be able to internally  relocate  and  found  that  she
   would not. She also found that there was insufficient state protection.


3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal the  decision  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal. In granting permission,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Astle considered that it was arguable that the Judge's  consideration  of
   internal relocation at paragraph 37 was inadequate and unsupported.


   The Grounds


4. Ground one contends that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take  into
   account and/or resolve conflicts of fact or opinion on material  matters.
   The Judge found that the Claimant had never worked and so had  no  skills
   to offer were she returned if Nigeria. The Judge, it is asserted,  failed
   to take into consideration  that  the  Claimant,  whilst  in  the  United
   Kingdom, had been awarded a Master of Science in Environmental Management
   from the University of Derby. It is submitted that the qualification is a
   material matter, when considering if the Claimant  possesses  any  skills
   which the Judge had not taken into account and the failure to do  so  was
   an error of law.


5.  Ground  two  contends  that  the  determination  contains  no  objective
   evidence to support the Judge's conclusion that there were very few  jobs
   in Southern Nigeria at the time due to the economic situation. It is said
   that it is unclear what  evidence  the  Judge  relied  on  to  make  this
   finding. Further, it is argued that it is clear from paragraph 23 of  the
   decision that the Secretary  of  State's  representative  submitted  that
   there were NGO's the Claimant could turn to for support and the Judge had
   not considered whether the Claimant could not seek such assistance.

   The Hearing


6. Mr Richards submitted that the Claimant  was  found  to  be  at  risk  on
   return due to domestic violence. At paragraph  37  of  the  decision  the
   Judge dealt with whether it would be unduly harsh  for  the  Claimant  to
   return and relocate in Nigeria in her particular  circumstances.  It  was
   noted that she was a single mother with two small children and  the  Home
   Office country guidance was that some could and others could not relocate
   and it was down to the individual circumstances. The key finding was that
   she had never worked and so had no skills. Mr Richards submitted that  it
   did not take account of two significant factors. Firstly it did not  take
   into account the existence of shelters for women in Nigeria which was set
   out in detail at paragraph 61 of the RFRL where there  was  an  extensive
   list of organisations. He asked me to find that was  at  least  something
   that should have been considered in the short term because  when  it  was
   said that there were few jobs in Nigeria due to  the  economic  situation
   that clearly impacted significantly in terms of a returning woman who was
   uneducated. The Claimant was not in that category. She had a first and  a
   Master's degree and it may well be the case that she would  be  in  great
   demand in Nigeria for the skills and the learning that she possessed. One
   would assume that she came to the UK having obtained her first degree  in
   Nigeria to have a Master's to increase her  employment  opportunities  in
   Nigeria. At the very least the Judge should have considered that this was
   not a Nigerian woman  with  no  or  very  little  education.  She  was  a
   resourceful, intelligent, highly educated woman and it was  against  that
   background that  the  Judge  ought  to  have  assessed  whether  internal
   relocation would be unduly harsh. That was a conclusion not open  to  the
   Judge on the evidence before  her  and  it  was  a  conclusion  that  was
   inadequately reasoned. In respect of the internal  relocation  issue  the
   First-tier Judge materially erred and it should be set aside.


7. Mr Webb submitted that the Judge should have mentioned the  qualification
   but the failure was not material in the light of the  objective  evidence
   that was before the Judge which she referred to in submissions. Paragraph
   134 to 148 of the Appellant's  bundle  demonstrated  that  even  a  well-
   educated woman  would  need  to  have  male  support  in  order  to  have
   employment in the south and in  the  north  due  to  the  strong  Islamic
   culture and she would be precluded from obtaining any employment at  all.
   In relation to the shelters there  was  evidence  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge at p194 that shelters were available for a short time.  It
   was not just short term support that needed to be considered but also how
   to continue following the removal  of  that  support.  The  Secretary  of
   State's bundle showed that it was unduly  not  harsh  if  there  were  no
   children to support. She  had  children  to  support  and  the  objective
   evidence said she would not be able to access accommodation. The  finding
   that she could not relocate was open  to  her  on  the  evidence  in  the
   Country of Origin Information Report version 1, 2015 paragraph 2.5.3.


8. Mr  Richards  submitted  that  if  there  was  evidence  to  support  the
   conclusion then she was bound to make reference to it. He relied  on  his
   earlier submissions.


9. Mr Richards submitted that if I were to find that there was an  error  of
   law the appeal could be retained in the Upper Tribunal. Article 8 had not
   been dealt with and there would need to be findings.  Mr  Webb  submitted
   that if the Upper Tribunal could probably deal with it.


   Discussion and Findings


10. In reaching her conclusions in relation to internal flight,  the  First-
   tier tribunal correctly directed herself as to the law that  she  had  to
   take account all relevant circumstances pertaining to  the  claimant  and
   her country of origin, in deciding whether it was  reasonable  to  expect
   the claimant to relocate or whether it would be unduly  harsh  to  expect
   her do so. She found at paragraph 37:


   "The Appellant has never worked so has no skills to offer if she were  to
   return to the South of Nigeria. There are very few  jobs  there  at  this
   time due to the economic situation of were to  return  to  the  South  of
   Nigeria. There are very few jobs there at this time due to  the  economic
   situation of Nigeria."


11. Mr Webb does not dispute that the Judge was  wrong  in  her  conclusions
   about the Claimant's skills. The Claimant stated in her asylum  interview
   at B20 of the Secretary of State's bundle that  she  had  a  Bachelor  of
   Science from Nigeria,  a  Master's  Degree  in  Environmental  Management
   completed in the UK. Whilst in the UK she worked for  the  University  of
   East London as an Environmental Food  and  Health  Worker  and  had  also
   worked as an Energy Support Officer and Energy Assessor whilst in the UK.
   There was therefore no factual basis for the Judge's conclusion that  the
   Claimant had no skills to offer  and  had  never  worked.  She  therefore
   failed to take into account material evidence and proceeded  on  a  false
   factual basis in concluding that internal flight would be unduly harsh.


12. Mr Webb argues that the findings were nevertheless open to the  Tribunal
   on the evidence before it and  hence  the  error  was  not  material.  He
   referred me to background evidence at page 134 to 136 of  the  Claimant's
   bundle in relation to the issue of  whether  women  who  head  their  own
   households  without  male  or  family  support  can  obtain  housing  and
   employment in large cities. The First-tier Tribunal made no reference  to
   this evidence, and whilst the report states that obtaining employment  in
   Nigeria is very difficult it dates from 2012 and was not referred  to  by
   the Judge.  Further, neither this evidence nor  the  COIR  paragraph  2.5
   (p98 of the Claimant's bundle) lead ineluctably to the conclusion  highly
   educated and skilled  women  in  Nigeria  with  children  are  unable  to
   relocate. Had the Judge considered the Claimant's circumstances  as  they
   really were  she  may  have  come  to  a  different  conclusion.  In  the
   circumstances I find the error was material.


13. I also find that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  resolve  a  material
   dispute of fact in relation to the issue of relocation. The Secretary  of
   State raised both in the RFRL and in submissions that there were NGO's to
   which she could turn to help. The First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  engage
   with this evidence and failed to give any reasons as to why the  Claimant
   would be unable to access this support. I find that this error  was  also
   material as had she so engaged, her conclusions may have been  different.




14. I therefore find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained
   a material error of law and must be set aside.


15. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  consider  Article  8  ECHR  but  the
   Claimant has children, born in the United Kingdom one of whom  is  now  8
   years old and therefore a qualifying child for the  purposes  of  section
   117 (B) (6) of the 2002 Act. I consider that this is a case  where  clear
   findings of fact need to be made not only in relation to internal  flight
   but also a full assessment will need to be made in relation to Article 8.
    I find that in the light of Part 7.2 (a) of the Practice Statements  for
   the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal and  Upper-
   Tier Tribunal, the extent of judicial fact  finding  is  such  that  this
   matter should be re-heard in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a  material  error  of
   law and must be set aside and in the light of the fact  finding  required
   the appeal will be heard in the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date 17th June 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
