
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07630/2013
     AA/07632/2013
     AA/07631/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke              |Decision & Directions          |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 8th October 2014                        |On 10th November 2014          |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

     SHAMSOON NAHAR                                               First
                                  Appellant

 JEBUN NESA HEBA                                           Second Appellant

   MEHRUN NESA MEHRBA                                      Third Appellant
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Schwenk, of Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. On 11th February 2014  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Campbell gave permission  to  the  appellants  to  appeal  against  the
    determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N P Dickson in  which
    he dismissed the appeal against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  to
    refuse asylum, humanitarian and human rights protection for  the  first
    named appellant and to issue removal directions.  The second and  third
    named appellants are the minor daughters of the first  named  appellant
    and separately appealed against the removal decisions made against them
    consequent upon the decision against the first appellant.  They are all
    citizens of Bangladesh.

 2. In granting permission Designated Judge Campbell noted that  the  first
    named appellant claimed to be at real  risk  of  return  to  Bangladesh
    following the breakdown of her marriage after years of  domestic  abuse
    from her husband who was a man of some influence in the  Awami  League.
    Judge Dickson had found that the appellant's claims were not credible.

 3. The grounds of application  contended  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    finding that documentary evidence showing that the first appellant  had
    suffered abuse had little weight when an expert's report gave  detailed
    reasons for the conclusion that the documentary evidence  was  genuine.
    The judge had appeared to base his finding on  information  to  suggest
    that  there  was  no  difficulty  in  obtaining  false   documents   in
    Bangladesh. The judge had also failed to give reasons for rejecting the
    first named appellant's brother's evidence and had failed to take  into
    account the first named appellant's  explanation  for  the  absence  of
    mention in a Medical Report of the serious injuries  inflicted  by  her
    husband.  Additionally  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  reasons  for
    rejecting  the  appellant's  account  of  receipt  of  documents   from
    Bangladesh.

 4. Designated Judge Campbell thought all  grounds  were  arguable  because
    there appeared to have been insufficient engagement with the report and
    no assessment of the brother's evidence and  a  failure  to  take  into
    account the first named appellant's explanation in relation to  medical
    evidence.

Error on a point of law

 5. At the Upper Tribunal hearing before me the appellant was not  present.
    I heard submissions  from  both  representatives  in  relation  to  the
    alleged errors on points of law and then,  having  concluded  that  the
    determination does show material errors such that it should be re-made,
    remitted the appeal for consideration afresh by the First-tier Tribunal
    sitting at Nottingham.  A  summary  of  the  submissions  made  and  my
    conclusions and reasons follow.

 6. Mr Schwenk argued that the first named  appellant  had  put  forward  a
    factually complex account to support her claim to have been a victim of
    domestic violence which, if true, would entitle her to  refugee  status
    because, I infer, of the absence of protection from the  state  because
    of the husband's political status.  He argued that  the  expert  report
    and its addendum gave evidence to authenticate the  documents  yet  the
    judge had failed to  deal  specifically  with  these  even  though  the
    expert's comments were  summarised  in  the  determination.   The  only
    reasoning was given in paragraph 70.  Further, the judge had failed  to
    explain why he rejected the evidence of  the  first  named  appellant's
    brother when reaching conclusions about  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    paragraph 64.  Further, the judge had not  considered  the  appellant's
    rebuttal statement (page 1 of her main bundle) which explained why  the
    Medical Report had not mentioned burns and  cuts.   This  evidence  had
    simply been rejected by the judge at paragraph 64.  Finally, the  judge
    had not taken into consideration the appellant's explanation (page 4 of
    the rebuttal statement) about the envelope in which she had received  a
    document from a Dr Hossain.

 7. Mr McVeety drew attention to the response of 26th February  2014  which
    argued that the  judge  had  directed  himself  appropriately  and  was
    entitled to reject the evidence submitted.  He  pointed  out  that,  in
    relation to the medical report, the appellant had  said  that  she  was
    bleeding when she arrived at  hospital  so  her  explanation  that  her
    husband had attempted to cut and burn her was inadequate.  Further,  he
    thought that the appellant's explanation about  the  envelope  and  the
    letter was similarly inadequate.  However, he conceded that the reasons
    given by the judge for rejecting the evidence of the brother were brief
    but argued that the judge was entitled to consider all the evidence  in
    the round and, in  any  event,  the  brother  was  not  an  independent
    witness.  Additionally, he argued that the judge was right to  indicate
    that the expert could not give evidence about credibility but only  the
    features of the evidence he examined.   The  judge's  consideration  of
    documents was, he submitted, adequate.

 8. In conclusion, Mr Schwenk maintained that the  brother's  evidence  had
    been ignored and that he was an independent witness  as  his  statement
    showed.  The expert had also conducted  a  forensic  examination  which
    corroborated the authenticity of the documents referring to the  detail
    in each.  In relation to the medical report the  appellant  could  have
    been bleeding from her mouth as she explains.

Concusions

 9. The determination is comprehensive and well written and summarises much
    of the significant amounts of evidence put before the judge.   However,
    I am satisfied that the grounds point to errors  on  the  part  of  the
    judge in failing to refer to and comment upon significant areas of  the
    appellant's evidence before reaching  conclusions  which,  in  material
    areas, are inadequately reasoned.

10. The judge summarises the report  of  Dr  Chandra  in  some  detail  and
    accepts his expertise in relation to domestic violence and the validity
    of documents. However, his rejection of  the  documentary  evidence  in
    paragraph 70 is plainly for the sole  reason  that  objective  evidence
    shows that there is no  difficulty  in  obtaining  false  documents  in
    Bangladesh. There is no cogent explanation for  rejecting  the  experts
    views. The appellant's supporting evidence required a  more  analytical
    approach, particularly when the expert had pointed  to  information  in
    the documents which would not have been there if they had been false.

11. Additionally, in relation to documentation, the  judge  does  not  show
    that he took into consideration explanations given  by  the  appellant.
    At paragraph 64 the judge rejects the appellant's claims in relation to
    the incident said to be supported by a medical report on the basis that
    the report makes no mention of burns or cuts of any description despite
    the appellant's explanation that her husband had attempted  to  assault
    her and, although she was bleeding, it was in her mouth where her teeth
    had loosened (page 3 of the statement).   The  judge  appears  to  have
    overlooked the explanation when concluding that the medical report  was
    not consistent with the description of injuries given by the appellant.



12. As to the evidence  of  the  first  appellant's  brother,  no  specific
    reasons are given for rejecting it.  The first sentence in paragraph 64
    of  the  determination  contains  the  conclusion  that  the  brother's
    evidence along with that of the appellant is not credible but  goes  no
    further.  In relation to the receipt of documentation  from  Bangladesh
    the judge also appears to have overlooked the  appellant's  explanation
    (page 4 of her rebuttal statement) to the  effect  that  the  documents
    submitted to the respondent did not come in the envelope  sent  to  the
    Home Office.  The appellant's claims in this respect were not commented
    upon before the judge reached  the  conclusion  that  the  Home  Office
    conclusions about the letter from Dr Hossain were to be preferred.

13. All of the matters to which I have referred above were clearly material
    to the judge's conclusion that the appellant's asylum claim was not  to
    be believed.  As that conclusion is affected by the errors to  which  I
    have referred the appeal must be heard afresh.  So it is appropriate to
    remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  having  regard  to  the
    provisions of paragraph 7.2 of the Practice  Statement  by  the  Senior
    President of 25th September 2012.

DIRECTIONS

 1.  This  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Nottingham for hearing afresh on 5th December 2014.

 2. The appeal should not be heard before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    N P Dickson.

 3. The time estimate for the hearing is four hours.

 4. A Bengali (not Sylheti) interpreter will be required.

 5. The time estimate is four hours.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  nor  do  I
consider one appropriate before the Upper Tribunal.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt              8th October 2014



