
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07515/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 August 2017                             |On 7 September 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                             Hadi Khaled Mizban
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sadiq, Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Hadi Khaled Mizban, was  born  on  1  January  1950  and
    claims to be a Kuwaiti citizen.  His appeal against the decision by the
    Secretary of State to remove him following  revocation  of  his  asylum
    status was allowed in the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Morris)  in  a
    decision promulgated on 26 March 2015.  The Secretary of State appealed
    to the Upper Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 20  January  2016,
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell, found that Judge Morris had  erred
    in law such that his decision fell to be set aside.  Having  set  aside
    the decision, Judge Birrell remade the decision dismissing  the  appeal
    on all grounds.  The appellant appealed to the Court of  Appeal  which,
    by a consent order dated 30 May 2017, allowed the appeal  and  remitted
    the appeal to the Upper Tribunal "for a determination of the issues".

 2. I note from the grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal  submitted  by
    Adam, Solicitors for  the  appellant,  that  it  was  accepted  by  the
    appellant that the Upper Tribunal had been correct to find an error  of
    law in Judge  Morris's  decision.   The  grounds  state  that,  "it  is
    accepted that the First-tier Tribunal failed at all or appropriately to
    delineate reasons for finding in favour of the appellant".  Before  me,
    Mr Sadiq agreed that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.  He told
    me that several witnesses would need to be called to give evidence at a
    de novo hearing.  One witness was currently abroad and unavailable.  In
    the circumstances, I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law
    such that its decision falls to be set aside.  Since there will need to
    be a  fresh  hearing  and  a  new  fact-finding  exercise,  I  find  it
    appropriate for that to be conducted  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    which I now return this appeal.  The First-tier  Tribunal  will  remake
    the decision.  By doing so, I correct the error found in the  Court  of
    Appeal to have been  perpetrated  by  Deputy  Judge  Birrell;  as  both
    parties now agree, she had unequivocally stated at the  hearing  before
    her that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  but,
    for reasons that remain unclear, she had failed to adopt that course of
    action .

Notice of Decision

 3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 26 March 2015 is
    set aside.  This appeal is returned to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not
    Judges Morris or Birrell) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

 4. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 5 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





