

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and   Asylum   Chamber)                      Appeal   Number:
AA/07803/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On April 13, 2015                        |On April 23, 2015         |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                               MR IRFAN BRAQI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Heller, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild &
      Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Albania who is almost twenty years of
       age. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on June 18,  2012.  He
       entered without a valid passport  or  travel  document  and  claimed
       asylum  on  June  28,  2012.  The  respondent  refused  his   asylum
       application on July 19, 2013 and on the same  date  a  decision  was
       taken to remove him from the United Kingdom.

    2. The appellant appealed  that  decision  on  August  19,  2013  under
       section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    3. The appeal originally came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Prior on September  17,  2013  and  in  a  decision  promulgated  on
       September 25, 2015  he  refused  the  appeal  on  all  grounds.  The
       appellant appealed that decision and on October 21,  2013  Judge  of
       the First-tier Tribunal Cruthers gave permission to appeal  and  the
       matter next came before Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Campbell  on
       December 2, 2013. In a determination dated June  6,  2014  he  found
       there had been an error in law and remitted the matter back  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.

    4. The case was  thereafter  listed  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Wright (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on  December
       5, 2014 and in a determination promulgated on December 23,  2014  he
       refused the appellant's appeals on all grounds. The appellant lodged
       grounds of appeal on January 19, 2015 and on January 29, 2015  Judge
       of the First-tier Tribunal Heynes gave permission to appeal  finding
       it arguable that the FtTJ's  treatment  of  the  credibility  issues
       constituted an error in law.

    5. The matter came before me on the above date  and  the  parties  were
       represented as set out above. The appellant was present.

ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

    6. Mrs Heller relied on her  lengthy  grounds  of  appeal  and  further
       expanded on them at the above hearing. She submitted  the  FtTJ  had
       failed to properly have regard to the country guidance  decision  of
       EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC) and this led him
       to fall into error. Additionally, she submitted:

        a. Grounds One and Nine   The  FtTJ  failed  specifically  to  have
           regard to the history of the alleged feud, the notoriety of  the
           alleged killing, the numbers killed, the length  of  time  since
           the last death or the relationship of the last person killed  to
           the ability of the other party's family to locate the  appellant
           in a different area. The person concerned was  a  mayor  of  his
           municipality and had far greater influence because he would,  by
           implication, have more contacts.


        b. Ground Two             The FtTJ failed to  have  regard  to  the
           background evidence that had been submitted.

        c. Ground Three           It was accepted that  the  other  grounds
           fell away unless this ground succeeded because if the  FtTJ  was
           entitled to reach the findings he did on the facts of  the  case
           then there would be no risk. However, Mrs Heller  submitted  the
           FtTJ did not  have  an  even-handed  approach  to  the  evidence
           because he made findings without a  full  consideration  of  the
           evidence. For example, in paragraph [9] of his determination the
           FtTJ reflected on the refusal letter and put  his  own  comments
           (before considering all the evidence) about certain events.  The
           FtTJ failed to take into account newspapers  also  misspelt  the
           surnames and his comments on the letter from the police and  the
           PRMA are unfair because the appellant would have been criticised
           if no letter was produced but he is criticised because a  letter
           was produced. The FtTJ acted unfairly.

        d.  Grounds Four and Five Whilst  the  FtTJ  stated  he  took  into
           account the appellant's it is submitted he failed to have regard
           to the age of the appellant when  the  incidents  occurred.  The
           appellant's age is highly significant and explains some  of  the
           discrepancies  including  the  one-month  discrepancy   in   the
           appellant's travel claim.

        e. Ground Six              The  FtTJ  failed  to  give  reasons  to
           support  his  claim  that   Bashkim   Shabaj   did   break   the
           reconciliation/truce  and  the  appellant's  lack  of  knowledge
           should not be held against him.

        f. Ground Seven           Whilst the FtTJ made adverse findings  on
           two documents at paragraph 33(xx) of his  determination  because
           they were produced late it had been open to him to  adjourn  the
           case to allow the respondent time to check the documents.

        g. Ground Eight            The  FtTJ  only  produced  part  of  the
           appellant's account and the  explanation  given  was  plausible.
           Whilst the FtTJ made findings on implausibility it is  submitted
           that the FtTJ failed to have regard to the  fact  the  appellant
           claimed he was isolated. Under the Rules of Kanun he is entitled
           to protection and Mrs Heller submitted the FtTJ concentrated  on
           peripheral matters and ignored the core of the claim namely  the
           blood feud.

        h. The grounds are not a mere disagreement and the decision  should
           be set aside.

    7. Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24  letter  dated  February  13,  2015.
       Whilst the determination is not easy to read the FtTJ demonstrated a
       clear grasp of the facts and at paragraph [33] set out  three  pages
       of inconsistencies in the appellant's claim. The  comments  made  by
       the FtTJ are not inappropriate as they merely reflected his view  on
       the case and he did give detailed reasons for rejecting  the  claim.
       The findings were not perverse and were clearly  open  to  him.  The
       FtTJ had regard to the country  guidance  decision  of  EH  and  the
       findings were all open to him.

    8. I reserved my decision but indicated that if  there  were  an  error
       then the matter would be remitted back to the first-tier for a fresh
       hearing.

ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

    9. Both representatives agreed that the  key  issue  in  this  case  is
       whether the FtTJ was entitled to make the credibility findings  that
       he did because if he was then the argument relating to possibly non-
       compliance with guidelines in EH would have no relevance or  bearing
       on the case.

   10. This  was  the  appellant's  second  appeal  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and when it came before the FtTJ his appeal was  dismissed.
       Mrs Heller has argued that the FtTJ erred and  Mr  Tarlow  maintains
       the FtTJ made findings that were open to him and gave ample  reasons
       for his findings.

   11. This was an extremely detailed determination and whilst I agree with
       Mr Tarlow that the determination could be difficult to follow  I  am
       satisfied for the reasons I will give that the FtTJ dealt  with  all
       relevant matters and had regard  to  all  issues  that  were  argued
       before him. It follows therefore that I find no error in law.

   12. The FtTJ acknowledged in paragraph [2] of his determination that the
       hearing was to be heard afresh following the setting  aside  of  the
       original decision. The FtTJ proceeded to set out the  background  to
       the case albeit inserting at various  points  of  his  determination
       some general observations.

   13. Mrs Heller has argued (Ground  Three  of  the  grounds)  that  these
       observations mean the determination is defective and should  be  set
       aside because in her words the FtTJ was putting "the cart before the
       horse". However, I am satisfied that these observations can properly
       be cross-referenced to his subsequent findings  on  the  appellant's
       claim particularly at paragraph [33]. The determination needs to  be
       read as a whole. The Tribunal has on numerous  occasions  emphasised
       there is no need for a forensic examination of  all  the  facts  and
       there is no requirement on the FtTJ to make  findings  on  each  and
       every part of an appellant's case.

   14. Mrs Heller's has not taken issue with  the  FtTJ's  summary  of  the
       evidence and FtTJ has  set  out  at  paragraphs  [8]  and  [17]  the
       appellant's  case  and  at  paragraphs  [10],  [18]  and  [19]   the
       respondent's refusal letter and  details  of  the  cross-examination
       that was conducted at the hearing. The FtTJ went on  to  make  clear
       that in considering the  appellant's  case  he  had  regard  to  the
       grounds of appeal (paragraph [11]) and the  documents  submitted  by
       both the appellant and the respondent  (paragraphs  [12],  [13]  and
       [16]). There is no merit to Ground Three of the grounds of appeal.

   15. Mrs Heller has advanced in Ground Two of her grounds of appeal  that
       the FtTJ failed to have regard to the background evidence. The  FtTJ
       has demonstrated in his determination that he was aware  of  all  of
       the  documents.  He  considered  the  documents  submitted  by   the
       appellant's representatives as recorded in  paragraph  [28]  of  his
       determination and he subsequently placed that evidence  against  the
       guidance given  in  the  country  guidance  decision  of  EH.  I  am
       satisfied there was no requirement for the  FtTJ  to  set  out  each
       document placed before him.

   16. At Grounds Four and Five Mrs Heller argued the FtTJ failed  to  have
       regard to the appellant's age and in particular his age when some of
       these incidents are said to have occurred. The FtTJ  made  clear  at
       paragraphs [31] and [33] of his determination that he has had regard
       to his age and whilst the  FtTJ  does  not  specifically  state  the
       appellant's age he went on to make a number of significant  findings
       about his account. The FtTJ was aware of  the  background  including
       the appellant's age when some of these incidents occurred but he did
       not base his findings on the appellant's account alone but  also  on
       the basis of other evidence placed before the  Tribunal.  I  do  not
       accept the FtTJ failed to have regard to the appellant's age.

   17. In Ground Six of her grounds of appeal Mrs Heller  has  argued  that
       the FtTJ failed to give reasons to support his  claim  that  Bashkim
       Shabaj did break the reconciliation/truce. The FtTJ  considered  the
       appellant's whole claim in 34 sub-paragraphs of  paragraph  [33]  of
       his determination and  his  reasons  for  rejecting  the  claim  are
       explained in some detail. The findings at sub-paragraphs 14  and  16
       are made after consideration of the whole of the  evidence  and  the
       FtTJ is entitled to consider the evidence in the round. There is  no
       error in his approach to this aspect of the evidence.

   18. Mrs Heller criticised, in Ground Seven of her grounds of appeal, the
       FtTJ for adopting the  approach  he  took  in  sub-paragraph  20  of
       paragraph [33]. However, the FtTJ gave  reasons  for  rejecting  the
       evidence and those reasons were  open  to  him.  They  were  neither
       unreasonable nor perverse. There is no evidence that  the  FtTJ  was
       invited to adjourn the case but in any event the FtTJ  was  entitled
       to adopt the approach he did and attach  such  weight,  as  he  felt
       appropriate to the evidence.

   19. Mrs Heller's Ground Eight is nothing more than a  mere  disagreement
       to the FtTJ's findings. The FtTJ referred to the evidence in  making
       his  findings  and  cross  referenced,  in  his  determination,  the
       evidence on numerous occasions.

   20. Having considered those grounds of appeal I considered  Grounds  One
       and Nine of the grounds of appeal. Mrs Heller accepted that  if  the
       other grounds fell away then her argument on EH would have no merit.
       The FtTJ made a considerable number of adverse findings and contrary
       to Mrs Heller's submissions these findings were  open  to  him.  The
       FtTJ clearly reminded himself about the country guidance case of  EH
       as evidenced by his reference to that case and  its  conclusions  in
       paragraphs [30]  and  [32]  of  his  determination.  His  subsequent
       findings at paragraph [33] meant he rejected the appellant's  claims
       and found he would not be at risk. I am satisfied he was entitled to
       make all of the findings he did in paragraph [33] and as  Mr  Tarlow
       submitted these grounds are nothing more than a mere disagreement.

   21. I therefore find the FtTJ did not materially err in his approach  to
       the  appellant's  asylum,  article  3  or  humanitarian  protections
       claims. Article 8 was not pursued in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
       does not form part of the arguments before me.

DECISION

   22. There was no material error. The original decision is upheld.

   23. The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
       pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I see no reason to alter that order.


Signed:                                 Dated:




 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal I make no alteration to the fee award.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
