
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-kRL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07689/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9th January 2017                       |On 8th February 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               mr Edris Rezai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. When this matter first came before me on 21st October 2015 I found that
    there were material errors of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  I found that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge disclosed a material error of law solely relating to the  judge's
    analysis as to whether the Appellant was  at  risk  as  an  involuntary
    returnee returning  to  Iran  with  a  passport  with  no  exit  stamp.
    I intimated in those directions that the matter should come back before
    me for further  directions  on  the  first  available  date  after  1st
    February 2016.  That duly took place and the matter was restored before
    me on 15th July 2016 where I gave further directions that the matter be
    listed for rehearing on the first  available  date  thereafter.   Those
    directions indicated

      1) That following the publishing  of  the  authority  of  SSH  and  HR
         (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT  00308  on
         29th June 2016 the appeal be relisted for hearing.

      2) That it was recorded that the matter remain in the  Upper  Tribunal
         reserved to myself sitting at Manchester.

      3) That the parties were reminded  that  the  only  extant  issue  was
         whether the  Appellant  is  at  risk  as  an  involuntary  returnee
         returning to Iran with a passport but no stamp.

      4) I granted leave to either party to file at the Tribunal  and  serve
         upon the other party copies of such objective evidence not  already
         served upon which  they  intend  to  rely  and  to  serve  skeleton
         arguments in support of their respective positions at  least  seven
         days prior to the restored hearing.

      5) That it was recorded that the matter proceed by way  of  submission
         only.

 2. It is following those directions that this matter returns before me  on
    the limited issue of the  risk  to  the  Appellant  as  an  involuntary
    returnee returning to Iran with a passport  but  with  no  stamp.   The
    Appellant continues to be represented by  his  instructed  Counsel,  Mr
    Nicholson.  Mr Nicholson is fully familiar with this matter having been
    involved with it since the matter came before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  He has provided a helpful skeleton argument dated  4th  January
    all of which I have considered.  On this  occasion  the  Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Ms Isherwood.

Submission/Discussion

 3. Mr Nicholson accepts and acknowledges that the issue is whether or  not
    following the decision in SSH  and  HR  (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum
    seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC)  the  Appellant  is  at  risk  on
    return to Iran.  In addition to his oral submissions he relies  on  his
    skeleton argument and an up-to-date bundle of  objective  evidence  and
    case law provided by his instructed solicitors.  Mr Nicholson starts by
    taking me to paragraphs 13 and 14 of his skeleton argument  emphasising
    that he is not reopening the issue that  is  before  the  Tribunal  but
    merely seeking to emphasise it.  He submits that the Appellant here  is
    likely  to  raise  "particular  concerns"  given  the  nature  of   the
    Appellant's claim and seeks to rely on  the  reference  to  "particular
    concerns" to be found at paragraph 23 of SSH and HR.  He  submits  that
    the Appellant would be questioned, as accepted by the country guidance,
    and submits that there is a special court and that  the  issue  is  not
    whether the Appellant would be in difficulty  while  attending  at  the
    court, but rather what happens to him while he is waiting to get there.
     So far as that issue is concerned it is his submission that the up-to-
    date country guidance has  neither  set  out  nor  addressed  the  very
    practical  likelihood  that  there  are   questioning   and   detention
    facilities where a returnee would be held and questioned  amounting  to
    interrogation which would amount in itself to a breach  of  Article  3.
    He consequently submits that the Secretary of State has still erred  in
    failing to exercise anxious scrutiny to the Appellant's claim in  terms
    of the risk he faces at Tehran Airport on return, given the "particular
    concerns" likely to be raised by his presence  there  and  the  further
    likelihood of questioning and/or detention before attending  the  court
    at or near the airport.

 4. He submits that people returning without documents will be  treated  as
    having left illegally and will be questioned and likely to  be  brought
    before a court and that conditions in detention which he  considers  to
    be wider than prison, are likely to breach Article 3.  He submits  that
    this was accepted at paragraphs 9 and 25 of SSH  and  HR.   Further  he
    points out that the Appellant has been out  of  the  country  for  some
    years and it is inevitable that he will be asked where he has been  and
    submits that questions are likely to be asked that  will  lead  to  his
    being detained whilst inquiries are carried out.  He submits  that  the
    recent country guidance authority leaves a gap  as  to  the  conditions
    that would be found in detention and as soon  as  he  is  in  detention
    there would be a breach of Article 3 which is a low threshold.  He asks
    me to allow the appeal.

 5. Ms Isherwood starts by reminding me that the  starting  point  are  the
    adverse credibility findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, pointing
    out that the judge did not accept  the  Appellant's  evidence,  finding
    inconsistencies within it.  She points out that the  Appellant  at  the
    time of the hearing was a 27 year old Kurdish man  from  Iran  and  she
    asks me to give due consideration to the head note of SSH and HR.   She
    takes me to paragraphs within  the  decision  pointing  out  that  they
    establish, based on Dr Kakhki's evidence, that a person who returns  to
    Iran on a laissez passer would  be  questioned  but  that  the  country
    guidance notes that the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  a  person
    returning on a laissez passer would be on a wanted list.  She then goes
    on to emphasise that there is a general  consistency  to  the  evidence
    that  a  person  returning  on  a  laissez  passer,  having  left  Iran
    illegally, would be subjected to no more than a  fine  and  probably  a
    period of questioning although there is no indication in  the  evidence
    that that questioning would be of a kind  or  in  a  place  where  ill-
    treatment could be expected.  Further she emphasises  at  paragraph  23
    that the Tribunal hearing SSH and HR could see no reason  to  doubt  Dr
    Kakhki's evidence that there is a special court at or near the  airport
    which considers the case of returnees, but she emphasises he found that
    the evidence did not show a real risk of  ill-treatment  in  breach  of
    Article 3 amounting to persecution as a  consequence  of  attending  at
    that court.  Thereafter she emphasises that the starting point  has  to
    be that the Appellant's evidence was not accepted and she submits  that
    applying the  facts  to  this  case  and  in  particular  applying  the
    conclusions reached within SSH  and  HR  that  the  Appellant's  appeal
    should be dismissed.

 6. In brief response Mr Nicholson submits that there were no findings made
    in the First-tier decision that the Appellant is or is not a  supporter
    of the regime.  Further he takes me to  paragraph  7  of  his  skeleton
    argument which he submits addresses the issue of return  and  that  the
    question is to do with risk of detention before the Appellant gets to a
    court.  He submits that the Appellant being Kurdish and having been  in
    the UK for  some  time  that  he  is  at  risk  and  he  maintains  the
    submissions made within the skeleton argument.

Country Guidance Authority

 7. SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)  Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    00308 is authority for the following propositions

      a) An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to Iran, who  does  not
         possess a passport, will be returnable on a laissez  passer,  which
         he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on  proof  of  identity  and
         nationality.

      b) An Iranian  male  in  respect  of  whom  no  adverse  interest  has
         previously been manifested by the Iranian state  does  not  face  a
         real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights  on  return
         to Iran on account of having left Iran  illegally  and/or  being  a
         failed  asylum  seeker.   No  such  risk  exists  at  the  time  of
         questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of  illegal
         exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have been  established.   In
         particular, there is not a real  risk  of  prosecution  leading  to
         imprisonment.

Findings

 8. I remind myself that a  proper  approach  to  credibility  requires  an
    assessment of the evidence and of the general claim.  This was done  by
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  so  far  as  the  issue  on  the
    Appellant's credibility is  concerned  the  judge  made  findings.   He
    considered  the  internal  consistency  of  the  claim,  the   inherent
    plausibility of the claim and the consistency with external factors  of
    the sort typically found within country  guidance.   The  fact  remains
    that the Appellant's evidence was not accepted.

 9. It is from this starting point that  the  appeal  is  made.   The  main
    thrust of Mr Nicholson's argument is that being a Kurd and having  been
    out of the country for some time the Appellant is likely to be detained
    and the conditions within that detention are likely to  breach  Article
    3.  To a certain extent that question is not answered, he submits by SS
    and HK but in addition to the submissions  made  by  Ms  Isherwood  the
    country guidance does give additional assistance.  It is accepted  that
    people may be prosecuted and imprisoned for  the  separate  offence  of
    illegal exit, but they are to be distinguished from cases  where  there
    is no history and where the person is no  more  than  a  failed  asylum
    seeker who exited Iran illegally.   The  Tribunal  did  not  find  that
    people are sentenced to  imprisonment  for  illegal  exit  per  se  and
    actually emphasise that the evidence suggests that there is no appetite
    to prosecute for illegal exit alone but if  there  is  another  offence
    illegal exit will be added on.

10. They note that it was never suggested before the Tribunal panel in  the
    country guidance authority that an individual faces risk on  return  on
    the sole basis of being Kurdish although it  was  accepted  that  being
    Kurdish was relevant as to  how  returnees  would  be  treated  by  the
    authorities.  However they noted that there was  no  evidence  of  ill-
    treatment of returnees and no relevant adverse interest  factors  other
    than their Kurdish ethnicity and they concluded that the  evidence  did
    not show risk of ill-treatment to such returnees though  they  accepted
    that it might be an exacerbating factor for  a  returnee  otherwise  of
    interest.  What Mr Nicholson seeks to suggest is that the conditions in
    detention whilst waiting in the event that the  Appellant  were  to  be
    brought before a special  court  would  breach  Article  3.   With  the
    greatest of respect to Mr Nicholson nowhere within SSH and HR  is  that
    submission either made  or  sustained.   In  fact  as  is  set  out  at
    paragraph 15 of SSH and HR

         "There is a general consistency to  this  evidence  that  a  person
         returning on a laissez passer, having left Iran illegally, would be
         subjected to  no  more  than  a  fine  and  probably  a  period  of
         questioning although there is no indication in  the  evidence  that
         that questioning would be of a  kind  or  in  a  place  where  ill-
         treatment could be expected.".

11. Consequently what we have in this case is an  Appellant  firstly  whose
    evidence lacked credibility before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and
    secondly clear guidance in the most recent country  guidance  authority
    to indicate that someone returning in the position that  the  Appellant
    would find himself would not be at risk.  In such  circumstances  I  do
    not find that this is an Appellant who is likely to  raise  "particular
    concerns" given the nature of his claim, that there  is  no  reason  in
    this case why I should depart from the assistance given by the country
    guidance authority and consequently the Appellant's appeal is dismissed
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained, both on asylum and on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
