
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07346/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 December 2013                           |On 24 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                          Sutharmini Balasuntharam

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Pinder, Counsel, instructed by Patricks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who was born on 17 March 1989,  is  a  national  of  Sri
    Lanka.  She originally entered this country on 8 April  2013,  pursuant
    to entry clearance granted to her on 16 March 2013 as a  student.   She
    claimed asylum on 20 June 2013,  but  was  served  with  papers  as  an
    illegal entrant, the respondent having considered that she had  entered
    using deception.

 2. Following interviews, the respondent refused her claim for  asylum  and
    served removal directions on her.

 3. The appellant appealed against these decisions and her appeal was heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Oxlade, sitting at Hatton Cross  on  3
    September 2013.  In a determination prepared on 20 September  2013  and
    promulgated shortly thereafter, Judge Oxlade dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal.

 4. The appellant now appeals against this decision, permission  to  appeal
    having been granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  J  M  Holmes  on  17
    October 2013.

 5. The appellant's case is contained within the detailed grounds  prepared
    by Iain  Palmer  of  Counsel  and  submitted  on  her  behalf  and  was
    succinctly but very ably argued before me at the hearing by Ms  Pinder.
    It is not necessary for the purposes of this determination to  set  out
    these arguments in full, but I have had regard to everything which  was
    said during the course of the hearing as well as to all  the  documents
    contained within the file when reaching my decision.

 6. Among the grounds on which it is claimed that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination should be set  aside  is  that  there  was  a  procedural
    irregularity, as will be discussed  below.   Judge  Oxlade  essentially
    rejected the appellant's claim on the basis of the adverse  credibility
    findings which she made, but in the course  of  her  determination,  at
    paragraph 53, she stated,  when  dealing  with  some  of  the  evidence
    adduced on behalf of the appellant, as follows:

         "The appellant relies on evidence of torture from her  captors,  in
         the form of a medical report.  It confirms the  injuries  that  the
         appellant bears, and refers to them being consistent with  history.
         However, it does not say when they were caused nor identify if they
         were caused by friend or  foe.   The  location  suggests  that  the
         appellant could not have self-harmed.  It makes  no  comment  about
         whether or not the injuries are  consistent  with  the  appellant's
         timeframe, nor specify the width of the  possible  timeframe.   The
         medical evidence does not eliminate as a realistic possibility that
         these were caused in 2009 when the appellant was in the IDP or in a
         rehabilitation  camp.   He  did  not  say  why  the  injuries  were
         considered to be so severe that they would not have been done  with
         the appellant's permission.  In short there is medical evidence  of
         scarring consistent with the appellant's case, but  there  is  room
         for other explanations, however  unpalatable  the  implications  of
         that may be."

 7. It is common ground that at no stage  during  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal was it  put  to  the  appellant  either  in  cross-
    examination or by the judge that the injuries might have been inflicted
    with the permission of the appellant, in order to bolster a  subsequent
    asylum claim.  It is submitted on her behalf that  if  such  a  serious
    allegation is  to  be  considered,  this  should  in  fairness  to  the
    appellant  have  been  raised,  in  order  to  give  the  appellant  an
    opportunity of dealing with this  suggestion.   As  was  noted  by  the
    Tribunal during the course of the hearing, at the very least if such  a
    suggestion had been made, the appellant's Counsel  would  have  had  an
    opportunity of addressing such concerns as the judge might have had  in
    this regard in his closing submissions.  An obvious point  which  might
    have been considered by the judge, had this been canvassed, was whether
    if the injuries had indeed been  inflicted  with  the  consent  of  the
    appellant, she would have waited so long before making her asylum claim
    (the claim was not made until over two months after her arrival in this
    country).

 8. Although there are other grounds upon which it is asserted  that  Judge
    Oxlade's decision should be set aside, for the reasons which follow, it
    is not necessary for me to address these grounds.

 9. It is clear from the determination of the First-tier Tribunal that  the
    appellant's credibility or, as the judge found,  lack  of  credibility,
    was central to the decision.  It is also clear that the judge gave less
    weight to the medical evidence which had been adduced because,  as  she
    has stated, the report did not express any view as to  whether  or  not
    the injuries which the appellant had suffered could have been inflicted
    with her consent.  In my judgment, if this was a concern which was held
    by the judge, in circumstances where this had not been  raised  by  the
    respondent, this concern ought to have been raised at the  hearing,  so
    that at the  very  least  the  appellant's  representative  could  have
    addressed such concern as the judge might  have.   Also,  if  need  be,
    further medical evidence could have been obtained  to  deal  with  this
    possibility.  I agree that there was a procedural unfairness in  taking
    this point without giving the opportunity to the appellant to deal with
    it, if she could.

10. As the evidence needed to be  dealt  with  in  the  round,  before  any
    credibility findings were made, and as the judge appears to have  given
    less weight to the medical report than she otherwise would have because
    her concern, which had never been expressed, had not  been  dealt  with
    within the medical report, this error was, in my judgment, material  to
    the outcome of this  appeal.   Had  the  medical  evidence  been  given
    greater weight, as it might  have  had  the  appellant  been  given  an
    opportunity of addressing the concerns which the judge had,  it  cannot
    be said that the judge would have been bound to make the same findings.
     It follows that this determination must be set aside and the  decision
    remade.

11. Before me, on behalf of the respondent, Mr Melvin accepted that if  the
    Tribunal was to find that the determination contained an error  of  law
    such that the decision had to be remade, in the circumstances  of  this
    case it would be difficult for the respondent to argue that any part of
    the decision could be maintained.  In my judgment  Mr  Melvin  must  be
    right, because the error identified above affected her consideration of
    credibility throughout.

12. Having had regard to paragraph 7 of the President's Practice  Statement
    to the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with
    regret I consider that the effect of the  error  contained  within  the
    determination as identified above  was  such  that  the  appellant  was
    effectively  deprived  of  a  fair   hearing,   because   the   judge's
    consideration of  the  appellant's  credibility  was  coloured  by  her
    failure to afford her an opportunity of dealing with  her  concerns  as
    indicated above.  I consider further that the nature and extent of  the
    judicial fact-finding which will now be necessary  in  order  for  this
    decision to be remade is such that, having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective, it is appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and I shall so order.



Decision

I set aside  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oxlade  as
containing a material error of law, and  direct  that  this  appeal  now  be
remitted for a re-hearing by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  sitting  at  Hatton
Cross, to be put before any  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Oxlade.



Signed:                                 Date: 14 March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


