
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07405/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


| Heard at Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10th  April 2015                      |On 20th May 2015                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                               Mr Unisa Kamara
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms Mascord, of Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mr Unisa Kamara date  of  birth  25th  July  2014  is  a
    citizen of Sierra Leone.  Having considered all the circumstances I  do
    not make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Barker promulgated on 12th January  2015,  whereby
    the judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    Respondent dated 16th September 2014. The decision  by  the  Respondent
    was to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom after refusing  the
    appellant asylum or other relief whereby he would be able to remain  in
    the UK.

 3. By decision made on the 11 February 2015 leave to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination.

 4. The only ground upon which leave has been granted relates  to  appendix
    FM and paragraph EX. 1. Leave was not grant on the  remaining  grounds.
    The judge had dismissed the Appellant's claim to  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection or relief on grounds of Article 2 and 3 of the ECHR  and  in
    so doing had found that the Appellant's  account  to  substantiate  his
    claim was not credible.

 5. The Appellant was seeking to rely upon  his  relationship  with  a  Mrs
    Kamara, with whom the Appellant had been living from  March  2013.  Mrs
    Kamara has a child and it is the relationship of the Appellant to  that
    child that is the foundation of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal. It is
    submitted  that  the  Appellant  has  a  real  and   genuine   parental
    relationship with Mrs Kamara's child and that  by  reason  thereof  the
    Appellant can succeed under Appendix FM.  The evidence otherwise was to
    the effect  that  the  biological  father  of  the  child  had  had  no
    involvement with the child for some time.

 6. In making that submission reliance is placed on a Home Office policy as
    set out in Paragraph 11.2.1 of the Home Office Guidance Appendix FM 1.0
    Family Life (as a Partner or a Parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes
    November 2014.

 7. In the decision Judge Barker ruled that the Appellant could not succeed
    under Appendix FM because in looking at whether  the  Appellant  was  a
    parent for the purposes of the Immigration Rules  paragraph  6  of  the
    rules excluded the Appellant from being a parent because only  a  step-
    parent, where the corresponding natural parent had died, could  qualify
    as a parent.

 8. On behalf of the Appellant it is submitted that the  policy  identified
    gives a different meaning to the term parent to be applied in  appendix
    FM in that [as cited in the passage set out in the grounds] :-

         'The phrase goes beyond  the  strict  legal  definition  of  parent
         reflected in the definition of  "parent"  in  paragraph  6  of  the
         Immigration Rules, to encompass situations in which  the  applicant
         is paying a genuinely parental role in a child's life,  whether  or
         not recognised as a matter of law or not.

         This means that an applicant living with a child of  their  partner
         and taking a step-parent role in the  child's  life  could  have  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship with them even if they
         have not  formally  adopted  the  child,  but  only  if  the  other
         biological parent played no part in the child's life.......'

 9. The Appellant's representative has submitted a copy of an extract  from
    the policy guidance from which  the  extract  set  out  is  taken.  The
    guidance begins:-

         '11.2 Factors to Consider

         The decision  maker  must  consider  the  following  factors  where
         relevant:

         Where the application is being considered under paragraph  EX.1.(a)
         in respect of the 10 year partner  or  parent  route  the  decision
         maker  must  decide  whether  the  applicant  has  a  genuine   and
         subsisting relationship with the child. This will  be  particularly
         relevant where the child is the child of the  applicant's  partner,
         or where the parent is not living with the child.'

10. The policy then continues as set out in paragraph 8.

11. The Appellant's representative submits  that  the  policy  informs  the
    approach that should be taken  to  EX.1  and  its  application  to  the
    situation of the Appellant.

         Paragraph EX.1 provides:

         Section EX: Exceptions to certain eligibility requirements for
         leave to remain as a partner or parent

         EX.1. This paragraph applies if

             (a)

                  (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a child who-

                      (aa) is under the age of 18 years; or was under the
                      age of 18 years when the applicant was first granted
                      leave on the basis that this paragraph applied (HC
                      760 13.12.2012)

                      (bb) is in the UK;

                      (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
                      continuously for at least the 7 years immediately
                      preceding the date of application; and

                  (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                  leave the UK; or

             (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship
             with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen,
             settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or
             humanitarian protection and there are insurmountable obstacles
             to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

12. It was submitted on behalf of the Respondent that EX.1 only excludes an
    applicant from certain of the requirements of the rules under  Appendix
    FM. One of the requirements of the rules, which it does not exclude  an
    individual from, is paragraph  "Relationship  Requirements  -ELTRPT.2.3
    which provides:-

         E-LTRPT.2.3. Either-

             (a) the applicant must have sole parental responsibility for
             the child; or the child normally lives with the applicant and
             not their other parent (who is a British Citizen or settled in
             the UK)  or

             (b) the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives
             must be-

                  (i) a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

                  (ii) not the partner of the applicant; (which here
                  includes a person who has been in a relationship with the
                  applicant for less than two years prior to the date of
                  application) (HC 565 06.09.2012) and

                  (iii) the applicant must not be eligible to apply for
                  leave to remain as a partner under this Appendix.

13. The Appellant does  not  have  sole  parental  responsibility  and  the
    Appellant lives with the parent of the child as  the  partner  of  that
    person. Accordingly whether the Appellant can rely upon EX.1 would  not
    be  material  in  any  event  as  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph E-LTRPT.2.3.

14. Further the case of Sabir (Appendix FM-EX1 not  free  standing)  [2014]
    UKUT 00063 (IAC) makes clear that EX.1 does not create a free  standing
    right  of  appeal.  As  is  evident  from  paragraph  9  of  Sabir  the
    requirements of Appendix FM have to be read sequentially and EX.1  does
    not create a separate category of individual that can succeed under the
    rules, it only excuses an applicant from meeting certain of the  rules.
    The applicant has to meet the other requirements of the rules.

15. Here the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of E-LTRPT2.3 and  EX.1
    does not exclude compliance with that requirement. For that if  for  no
    other reason the Appellant could not satisfy the  requirements  of  the
    rules and Appendix FM. Accordingly any error in applying Appendix FM is
    not material, even if there were an error with regard to  the  approach
    of whether a step-father can rely on the rules.

16. With regard to the Appellant being  a  step-father,  paragraph  6  does
    permit a step-father to be considered to be a parent for  the  purposes
    of the rules but only in certain limited circumstances.

17. The policy guidance is clear in its  opening  that  in  respect  of  an
    individual, who is a applying under the 10 year partner route or parent
    route, which can include in limited circumstances a step-father. As the
    case law makes  clear  it  does  not  create  a  separate  category  of
    individual.

18. The policy merely enables a decision maker, in considering the  factors
    in assessing  whether  there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship, to look at factors wider than the definition contained in
    paragraph 6 and one is not limited to looking at parent just  in  terms
    of paragraph 6. However one has to be a parent in the  first  instance.
    In the light of the case  law  the  approach  by  the  judge  does  not
    disclose any error of law.

19. For the reasons set out there is a no material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.  I uphold the decision to dismiss  this  matter  on  all
    grounds.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
