
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07982/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                efrom kibrom
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, instructed by Immigration Advice
Service (IAS)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Efrom Kibrom, was born on 12 January 1990 and claims  to
    be a citizen of Eritrea.  He was refused asylum by a decision dated  24
    September 2014 when a decision was also taken to remove  the  appellant
    as an illegal entrant.  He appealed against that decision to the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis) which, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  1
    December 2014 allowed the appeal.  The Secretary of State  appealed  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  By a decision dated 26 February 2015, I set  aside
    the First-tier Tribunal decision and directed that a decision would  be
    remade following a resumed hearing which took place at  Bradford  on  2
    September 2015.  My reasons for finding that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law were as follows:

 2. The respondent, Efrem Kibrom, was born on 12 January 1990 and claims to
    be a male citizen of Eritrea.  I shall hereafter refer to the appellant
    as the respondent and the respondent as the appellant (as they appeared
    respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).  The  appellant  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis) against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 24 September  2014  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom by way of directions under Section 10 of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999.  The respondent had refused the appellant's claim  for
    asylum.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a determination promulgated  on  1
    December 2014, allowed the appeal on asylum and human  rights  grounds.
    The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. The respondent had  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a  Pentecostal
    Christian (refusal letter, [39]).  However, the respondent disputed the
    appellant's claim that he was an Eritrean citizen and  considered  that
    the appellant was "believed to  be  a  national  of  Ethiopia."   [42].
    Because the appellant would not face a real risk of persecution or ill-
    treatment in Ethiopia, the respondent declined  to  grant  him  refugee
    status.  Judge Hillis considered the evidence which was before him  and
    found that "The  sole  source  of  the  evidence  before  me  that  the
    appellant is an Eritrean by  birth  is  his  own  testimony."   By  the
    appellant's own account, he had left Eritrea at a  very  young  age  (4
    years) as regards Ethiopia, Judge Hillis found:

         "Equally, I cannot conclude for the same reasons set out above that
         the appellant is, in fact, an  Ethiopian  national.   There  is  no
         evidence before me the appellant either personally or by someone on
         his behalf has ever sought to be granted any formal  naturalisation
         or residential status  in  Ethiopia.   I  bear  in  mind  that  the
         appellant was a juvenile when he claims he last lived in  Ethiopia.
         I  find,  on  the  evidence  before  me,  that  Ethiopia  was   the
         appellant's country of habitual residence."

 4. The judge went on to find [32] that there was "no presumption that [the
    appellant] would be accepted on removal  to  Ethiopia  as  one  of  its
    nationals by the Ethiopian authority."  The judge found that there was:



         "... no evidence before me that the appellant is in  possession  of
         or could obtain any identity documents to show that he is Ethiopian
         and would simply have to rely on his own knowledge of Ethiopia, his
         previous school records if they are available and  his  ability  to
         speak Amharic even if he failed to mention  his  declared  Eritrean
         nationality for fear of deportation to Eritrea due to the real risk
         of persecution on removal to Eritrea  as  a  Pentecostal  Christian
         which is not an issue in this appeal (sic)." [34]

    The judge directed himself to MA (disputed nationality) Ethiopia [2008]
    UKIAT 00032.  The respondent asserts that the judge incorrectly applied
    MA or that he failed to engage with the contentions made in the refusal
    letter that the appellant's evidence as regards Ethiopia  was  at  odds
    with the background material relating to that country.

 5. The appellant claimed to have been educated in Ethiopia.   The  refusal
    letter [33] noted that:

         "... even for Ethiopian children education is not a  right  and  is
         not deemed to be an important  element  of  a  child's  upbringing.
         Therefore, it is considered as an Eritrean refugee in Ethiopia  you
         would not have been offered the opportunity to study at school over
         and above Ethiopian children.  As such it is considered  that  your
         character is not consistent with the objective evidence."

    The judge did not engage with that contention or, if he did reject  it,
    he gave no reasons for doing so.  Further, although the judge did refer
    to MA, he has not referred to  ST  (ethnic  Eritrean  -  nationality  -
    return) Ethiopia CG  [2011]  UKUT  252  (IAC).   Part  of  the  country
    guidance of ST ([4-5]) is relevant to the issues before the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I note that a copy of that case  was  in  the  papers  put
    before Judge Hillis:

         (4)  Although,  pursuant  to  MA  (Ethiopia),  each  claimant  must
             demonstrate that  he  or  she  has  done  all  that  could  be
             reasonably expected to facilitate  return  as  a  national  of
             Ethiopia,  the  present  procedures  and  practices   of   the
             Ethiopian Embassy in London will provide the backdrop  against
             which judicial fact-finders will decide whether  an  appellant
             has complied with this requirement. A person who  is  regarded
             by the Ethiopian authorities as an  ethnic  Eritrean  and  who
             left Ethiopia during or in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the
             border war between Ethiopia and Eritrea,  is  likely  to  face
             very  significant  practical  difficulties   in   establishing
             nationality and the attendant right to return,  stemming  from
             the reluctance of the Ethiopian authorities to countenance the
             return of someone it regards as a "foreigner", whether or  not
             in  international  law  the   person   concerned   holds   the
             nationality of another country (paragraphs 93 to 104).

         (5)  Judicial fact-finders will expect a person asserting arbitrary
             deprivation of Ethiopian nationality to approach  the  embassy
             in London with all documentation emanating from Ethiopia  that
             the person may have,  relevant  to  establishing  nationality,
             including ID card, address, place of birth, identity and place
             of birth of parents, identity and whereabouts of any relatives
             in Ethiopia and details of the person's schooling in Ethiopia.
             Failing production of Ethiopian documentation  in  respect  of
             such matters, the person should put in  writing  all  relevant
             details, to be handed to the embassy. Whilst persons  are  not
             for this purpose entitled to portray themselves to the embassy
             as Eritrean, there  is  no  need  to  suppress  details  which
             disclose an Eritrean connection (paragraph 105).

 6. Whilst I acknowledge that the appellant in the present appeal  has  not
    assert that he was arbitrarily deprived of Ethiopian nationality, it is
    clear that he has undertaken none of the steps referred to in  ST.   As
    the passages which I have  quoted  from  Judge  Hillis's  determination
    indicate, the judge has dealt only  with  the  difficulties  which  the
    appellant  might  encounter  upon  return  to  Ethiopia;  he  has   not
    considered at all whether the plausibility of the appellant's return to
    Ethiopia might have been explored by the appellant through contact with
    the Ethiopian Embassy in London.  It is clear from ST, that,  in  order
    to discharge the burden of proof upon him or her, an appellant will  be
    expected to take the steps referred to at headnote [4-5] if  he  wishes
    to prove that he  is  not  a  citizen  of  Ethiopia  or  cannot  regain
    citizenship of which he has been arbitrarily deprived. Because  he  has
    failed to examine these matters, Judge Hillis's analysis is incomplete.
     In addition, I find that the judge should have engaged with  important
    contentions made in the refusal letter, for  example,  as  regards  the
    appellant's claimed education in Ethiopia.  Accordingly,  I  find  that
    Judge Hillis' determination is unsound and should be set  aside.   None
    of his findings of fact shall stand.  The decision may be remade in the
    Upper Tribunal; I accept that the appellant  may  now  wish  to  obtain
    evidence of the kind envisaged in ST but otherwise there is no need for
    an extensive and new fact-finding  exercise.   I  direct  therefore  as
    follows:

      a) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  None of
         the findings of fact shall stand.

      b) The decision will be remade following  a  resumed  hearing  in  the
         Upper Tribunal before Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane.

      c) The parties shall send to the Tribunal and to each other copies  of
         any documentary evidence upon which they may seek to rely no  later
         than five days before the date fixed for the resumed hearing in the
         Upper Tribunal.  Time estimate shall  be  two  hours.   An  Amharic
         interpreter will be provided by the Tribunal.

 7. The burden of proof is on the appellant and the standard  of  proof  is
    whether  there  is  a  real  risk  that  the  appellant  would  suffer,
    respectively, persecution or treatment contrary to  the  ECHR  Articles
    2/3 if he were to be returned to Eritrea or Ethiopia. The  decision  to
    make  removal  directions  specifies  both  Eritrea  and  Ethiopia   as
    countries to which the appellant may be removed.

 8. In her reasons for refusal letter which is dated 23 September 2014, the
    Secretary  of  State  accepts  that  the  appellant  is  a  Pentecostal
    Christian [39] but rejected other aspects of his claim.  The  appellant
    claims that he was born in Eritrea and is therefore an Eritrean citizen
    he also states that he spent the years 1994-2007  living  in  Ethiopia.
    He speaks Amharic but also  Arabic  and  claims  to  speak  Tigrina  (a
    primary language of Eritrea).  The Secretary of State  considered  that
    the Appellant was either an  Ethiopian  citizen  purporting  to  be  an
    Eritrean or would be admitted to Ethiopia where  he  would  not  be  at
    risk.  It was accepted by the Secretary of State that followers of  the
    Pentecostal Christian faith are at risk in Eritrea.

 9. I have considered all the evidence  both  documentary  and  oral.   The
    appellant gave evidence before the Upper Tribunal at the hearing  on  2
    September 2015.  I have those papers which were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the previous occasion and also an expert report prepared by
    Mr David Seddon which was prepared in the spring of 2015.

10. Cross-examined by Mrs Pettersen, the appellant explained  that  he  had
    left Ethiopia in 2007 and travelled to Sudan with his aunt.  He  claims
    that he left Ethiopia because  he  had  no  status  ("documents").   He
    claims that he went to school in Ethiopia for about three years  (1997-
    1999).  He has no contact now with his uncle or aunt who both, when  he
    was last aware of their whereabouts, were in Ethiopia.   The  appellant
    married in 2002 and his wife is from Eritrea  but  she  also  lives  in
    Sudan now undertaking  domestic  work.   The  appellant  contacted  the
    Eritrean Community who produced a letter dated 9 April 2015.  So far as
    he was aware, the enquiries made regarding his  nationality  and  which
    were referred to in  that  letter  had  been  questions  asked  of  the
    appellant himself and not of any (unidentified) third party.

11. I refer to the difficulties which arose with  the  previous  First-tier
    Tribunal decision and the failure of the judge  to  apply  the  country
    guidance case law in particular, ST (ethnic Eritrean  -  nationality  -
    return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT 252 (IAC).  As I noted in my  error  of
    law decision [5], the  appellant  does  not  claim  that  he  has  been
    arbitrarily deprived of Ethiopian nationality.  He has, however,  lived
    for a very long period of his relatively short life in Ethiopia and the
    question arises as to whether or not he would be admitted  to  live  in
    that country  either  as  a  citizen  or  otherwise.   Dr  Seddon,  the
    appellant's expert witness, helpfully  dealt  with  the  administrative
    procedures which may be of relevance to the appellant in his report:

         "When asked why [the appellant] could not return  to  Ethiopia,  he
         answered that  he  had  no  documents  was  concerned  that  if  he
         approached the authorities in Ethiopia for residency  he  would  be
         imprisoned as a criminal or deported to Eritrea.  According to  the
         [reasons for refusal letter], directives  were  issued  in  January
         2004 by the Ethiopian  Immigration  Department  to  regularise  the
         status of Eritreans returning to  Ethiopia  and  in  any  case  the
         objective evidence suggests that the Ethiopian authorities have not
         returned any Eritreans to Eritrea since 2000.  Furthermore,  it  is
         possible for Eritreans to obtain Ethiopian citizenship and there is
         no objective evidence to suggest that  Eritreans  in  Ethiopia  are
         detained by the authorities as criminals and killed or deported, as
         claimed.  It was suggested that, "although it may not  be  easy  to
         obtain in all  cases,  citizenship  is  possible  in  Ethiopia  for
         Eritreans"."  [Paragraph 36]

12. Dr Seddon goes on to note that the appellant claims to be  an  Eritrean
    citizen and that it would "necessarily mean  abandoning  any  claim  to
    Eritrean  citizenship  (dual  nationality  is  not  permitted)  if  the
    appellant were to follow that course of action and  seek  to  become  a
    citizen of Ethiopia."  Dr Seddon asks, rhetorically, "Why  should  [the
    appellant] give up his own  nationality?"   I  accept  Mrs  Pettersen's
    submission that much of Dr Seddon's  report  amounts  to  advocacy  and
    special pleading,  rather  than  objective  expert  evidence  and  that
    limited weight should be attached to it in  consequence.   The  passage
    which I have quoted above is, in my opinion, an example of that.

13. Dr  Seddon  states  that  the  appellant  has  none  of  the  necessary
    documentation required to approach the Ethiopian  authorities.   Having
    said that, Dr Seddon appears to accept that the respondent  is  correct
    in her assertion that the appellant's fear that he would be deported to
    Eritrea from  Ethiopia  or  jailed  for  having  no  documentation  was
    unfounded.

14. In my error of law decision,  I  made  directions  [5]  to  enable  the
    appellant to adduce new evidence "of the kind envisaged in ST ..."  and
    a witness statement has been adduced by the appellant  indicating  that
    he approached the Ethiopian Embassy in London on  31  March  2015.   It
    appears that he attended at the  embassy  because  his  solicitors  had
    received an email  dated  26  March  2015  from  an  officer  (Mulugeta
    Asseratte Kassa) at the embassy stating, "Further to your email enquiry
    I am pleased to inform you that the  Consular  Service  is  willing  to
    listen to your client at any time during working hours as  you  do  not
    need a special appointment."  In the light of that email, the appellant
    travelled to London.  However, he claims that,

         "When  I  arrived  at  the  embassy  I  entered  the  building  and
         approached the reception.  I spoke  to  a  gentleman  there  and  I
         explained that my representative  has  been  in  contact  with  the
         embassy and I produced a copy of the email that the embassy sent to
         my representative.  I was told that it was impossible for me to  be
         seen.  I was told the reason why they sent that email was for me to
         attend physically for me to be told in person that I would  not  be
         seen in respect of my query."

15. Frankly, I do not accept that evidence as truthful.  The respondent has
    not cast any doubt on the authenticity of the email from the  Ethiopian
    Embassy and I find that it is not credible that  such  an  email  would
    have been  sent  to  the  appellant's  representatives  with  the  sole
    intention of forcing the appellant  to  travel  from  Leeds  to  London
    simply in order to be told to go away again.  There is no reason at all
    to suppose that the consular service of a sovereign state would act  in
    such a manner.   There  are  photographs  annexed  to  the  appellant's
    statement showing him outside the Ethiopian Embassy.   In  my  opinion,
    that is as far as the appellant got on 31 March 2015 and I find that he
    has fabricated his account of having been sent away from the embassy by
    a  member  of  the  reception  staff.   There  is  an  email  from  the
    representative to the embassy dated 10 April 2015  complaining  of  the
    alleged treatment of their client but, significantly, no reply has been
    disclosed.  I have no evidence  from  the  representatives  to  confirm
    there had been no reply and, in light of the embassy's response  of  26
    March 2015, I simply do not accept there would have been  no  reply  to
    the representative's later  email.  Alternatively,  a  reply  has  been
    received but has not been disclosed to the Upper Tribunal.

16. I find, therefore,  that  the  appellant  has  sought  to  deceive  the
    Tribunal as regards  the  efforts  he  made  either  to  establish  his
    Ethiopian nationality or to clear his passage to Ethiopia, a country in
    which he has spent a large part of his life.  One has to  question  the
    Appellant's motives for seeking to deceive the Tribunal in this manner.
     I consider it reasonably likely that he has done so because he  is  an
    Ethiopian citizen who wishes to conceal that fact.  In any  event,  the
    appellant has failed to establish that he  would  not  be  admitted  to
    Ethiopia either as a citizen of that country or some other status  (see
    the quotation in Dr Seddon's report above).  At [5.3], Dr  Seddon  also
    noted that:

         "If [the appellant] were to be allowed to return  to  Ethiopia,  he
         would be obliged to [go] through a lengthy and difficult  procedure
         to obtain the necessary documentation and eventually permission  to
         reside as a non-national in Ethiopia.  He will  also,  even  if  he
         were to succeed  in  obtaining  residence  without  citizenship  or
         citizenship, be at a serious disadvantage in Ethiopia owing to  the
         fact that he has not lived there since 2007 (eight years) and would
         have no close family  to  provide  security  and  support.   Living
         conditions are not easy and unemployment  is  rife;  mere  survival
         would be extremely difficult for a young male on  his  own  without
         family or friends."

17. I consider this to be another example of Dr Seddon  slipping  into  the
    role of advocate, rather than expert witness.  His assertions that  the
    appellant would be at "serious disadvantage" because he has  not  lived
    in Ethiopia for a number of years is unsupported by any evidence at all
    as is his assessment that "mere survival would be  extremely  difficult
    for a single young male"; Dr Seddon ignores the fact that the appellant
    is  familiar  with  Ethiopian  society,  speaks  languages  which   are
    understood in that country and is a healthy young man  apparently  able
    to find work and support himself.  In  the  light  of  the  appellant's
    conduct as regards the Ethiopian Embassy, I consider it likely that  he
    is also in contact with his aunt and uncle and  possibly  other  family
    members still resident in Ethiopia who would be able to assist him.   I
    do not accept his assertion that he has  lost  touch  with  his  family
    abroad.

18. Finally, Dr Seddon has not explained why the appellant  should  not  be
    "obliged to go through a lengthy and difficult procedure to obtain  the
    necessary documentation" when the only alternative is  for  him  to  be
    granted refugee status in the United Kingdom; there  is  no  reason  to
    think  that  undertaking  "lengthy  and  difficult  procedures"   would
    infringe his human rights or prove anything more than an inconvenience.
     It is unfortunate that the appellant has chosen not even to attempt to
    cross the first hurdle, namely explaining his situation to the officers
    of the Ethiopian Embassy in London.  Having considered all the evidence
    carefully, I find that the appellant  is  likely  to  be  an  Ethiopian
    citizen who has sought to conceal that fact and that he has  failed  to
    discharge the obligations on him (outlined in ST) to establish,  whilst
    still resident in the United Kingdom, a right  to  return  to  live  in
    Ethiopia.  He is not at risk on return to Ethiopia either on account of
    his religion, ethnicity or for any other reason.  In the circumstances,
    the appellant's asylum and human  rights  (Articles  2/3)  appeals  are
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

This appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

This appellant is not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 10 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

