
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07274/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2nd August 2016                       |On 5th August 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                  ABIDA [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair (instructed by greater Manchester
                  Immigration Aid Unit)
For the Respondent:  Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an application to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant  in
    relation to a Decision and Reasons of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Davies) promulgated on 26th October 2015  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's asylum appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    on 25th November 2015. The Judge agreed that the application raised  an
    arguable error of law.

 3. Ground 1 refers to the Judge's  refusal  to  grant  an  adjournment  to
    secure the attendance of what is claimed to be a  key  witness  in  the
    appeal, the Appellant's cousin. It is said that he attended court on  a
    previous occasion when the appeal  was  adjourned  but  was  unable  to
    attend on the hearing date of 26th March  2015  due  to  a  Health  and
    Safety audit taking place at his place of  work,  on  which  basis  his
    employer would not  give  him  leave.  The  ground  relied  on  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  which  identified  the
    central question as  being  whether  the  refusal  of  the  adjournment
    deprived the affected party of his right to a fair hearing. The grounds
    argued that the refusal in this case did so deprive the Appellant. They
    then set out the basis upon which it is said that the absent  witness's
    evidence was crucial to key aspects of the Appellant's case.

 4. The second ground is that the Judge failed to give any or any  adequate
    reasons for  his  adverse  credibility  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant, her daughter and additional witnesses.

 5. The third ground argues that the Judge did not consider the evidence in
    the round and made his primary finding without any reasons.

 6. At the hearing before  me  Ms  Mair  expanded  upon  the  grounds.  She
    referred me  to  the  absent  witness's  statement,  contained  in  the
    Appellant's bundle, which indicated that he was the  main  provider  of
    support to the Appellant and he was an independent witness. He set  out
    a large number of issues in his witness statement and she  argued  that
    the Appellant was deprived of a fair hearing. She argued that this  was
    a material error of law.

 7. She then argued that there was  an  abject  failure  by  the  Judge  to
    provide reasons for rejecting evidence. She referred to paragraph 93 of
    the Decision and Reasons as being speculative  and  that  his  findings
    went against the weight of  evidence  in  that  all  of  the  witnesses
    evidence, including the witness statement of the  absent  witness,  was
    that the Appellant's husband's treatment of her and  her  children  was
    appalling and the Judge did not explain why he rejected the  weight  of
    evidence.

 8. She referred to the reference by the Judge to the  Appellant's  husband
    having made all the arrangements for medical treatment and pointed  out
    that the Appellant simply did not have  the  wherewithal  to  make  the
    arrangements herself, that she was unaware of any arrangements made  by
    her husband and argued that the Judge had no reason to depart from  the
    preponderance of evidence which all went in favour of the Appellant.

 9. Finally, she referred to the fact that the Judge had listed the  matter
    for a further hearing in order to look at  the  medical  evidence.  200
    pages of medical  evidence  had  been  submitted,  which  was  entirely
    supportive of  the  Appellant's  case  and  indeed  the  evidence  from
    Pakistan indicated that although the younger child had been x-rayed  in
    Pakistan  the  x-rays  did  not  reveal  that  she  suffered  from  any
    particular illness. Overall, she argued, the Judge's findings were  not
    reasoned and the decision was therefore tainted by material  errors  of
    law and should be set aside.

10. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Harrison relied upon the Rule 24
    Notice which argued that the Judge had directed himself  appropriately.
    He considered the adjournment request in the light  of  the  overriding
    interest and found  it  unnecessary  to  adjourn  in  order  to  justly
    disposal of the appeal. He argued that the  four  witnesses,  including
    the Appellant, made lengthy  and  detailed  statements  and  the  Judge
    provided reasons for not believing the evidence of  the  Appellant  and
    witnesses.  The  Judge  considered  the  costly  medical  treatment  in
    Pakistan and that treatment in the UK would be free, even  though  they
    are not entitled to that treatment.  It  is  said  that  based  on  the
    evidence, the Judge was entitled to take that  into  consideration  and
    find against the Appellant.

11. With regard to the  Appellant's  allegations  against  her  husband  he
    argued that the Judge rejected these for reasons that were open to him.

12. Additionally, Mr Harrison pointed out that as there was  an  additional
    hearing seven months after the initial hearing, it would have been open
    to the representatives to make application for the Judge to  hear  from
    the witness who had been absent from the initial hearing; they did  not
    do so.

13.  He argued that the Judge had given adequate  reasons  so  far  as  the
    evidence of Dr Ballard was concerned  and  referred  to  paragraph  101
    where the Judge noted that his opinion was based on the  account  given
    by the Appellant, which he had found not to be credible and as a result
    the expert's evidence was not useful.

14. The Appellant's case is that she had arrived in the United Kingdom on a
    valid visit visa in July 2013 with her husband and four  children.  She
    claimed asylum in April 2014. It  is  her  case  that  when  living  in
    Pakistan, due to difficulties with her  husband  she  returned  to  her
    parents for a year and a half between 1998 and 1999.

15. The family came to the UK to visit her sister-in-law  and  stayed  with
    her from July to August 2013. The Appellant also has other close family
    members in the UK.

16. The Appellant's eldest child suffers from Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI),
    also known as brittle-bone disease, having been diagnosed  by  5  to  7
    doctors in Pakistan. She been unable to attend school due to  being  in
    plaster as a result of injuries suffered by her.

17. The two middle children are well.  The  youngest  daughter,  Rafia  had
    suffered fractures when she was aged one or two in Pakistan but had not
    been diagnosed as suffering from OI. She broke her leg in December 2012
    which required insertion of a metal plate. Three months later she broke
    her other leg. She obtained treatment from a  clinic  in  Karachi.  The
    Appellant did not know that she was suffering from OI.

18. Her husband would shout at  her  children  and  not  show  any  emotion
    towards her.

19. Whilst in the UK Rafia fell and was in pain in July or August 2013  and
    the Appellant's husband  threatened  the  Appellant  that  if  anything
    happened to her he would kill the Appellant. He left the Appellant  and
    her two daughters, taking the two healthy children  to  stay  with  his
    sister in the UK before returning to Pakistan on  19th  September  2014
    without having any further contact with the Appellant.

20. Before her husband left, the Appellant had taken Rafia to a  doctor  in
    Manchester. Her husband made the arrangements. The doctor arranged an x-
    ray but the Appellant did not take her for it and  she  still  did  not
    know Rafia was suffering from OI.

21. The Appellant then attended a second  appointment  in  Manchester  with
    Rafia and was told that she was probably suffering from OI.  This,  she
    said, annoyed her husband.

22. While her husband and two healthy children left the UK within the  time
    prescribed by their visas the Appellant could not leave due to problems
    she was having with her husband.

23. The Appellant was asked at the NHS hospital to show her entitlement  to
    treatment.  She  was  unaware  that  treatment  was  not  available  to
    visitors. She suspected her husband knew this and that was why  he  did
    not attend the appointments.

24. She cannot relocate to where her parents live in  Jhelum.  Her  husband
    has no concern for her or her disabled daughters and she fears  him  if
    she is returned to Pakistan.

25. The Secretary of State noted in the  refusal  that  the  Appellant  had
    given differing accounts of when she had seen a consultant in  the  UK.
    She did not accept the Appellant's evidence to be credible or that  she
    was a member of a particular social group.  She  did  not  believe  the
    Appellant feared her  husband  or  that  he  had  no  concern  for  his
    daughters. Even if she did there was both a sufficiency  of  protection
    and  the  opportunity  to  internally  relocate  within  Pakistan.  The
    Secretary of State did not believe the  Appellant  had  in  truth  been
    abandoned by her husband and was not a truthful witness over  all.  The
    Secretary of State believed the Appellant and children would  have  the
    support of family members in Pakistan.

26. In his decision the Judge set out the Appellant's case and the  reasons
    for the refusal. He noted that he heard first of all an application for
    an adjournment. He set out in paragraph 6 that he  had  been  asked  to
    adjourn due to the non attendance of one of the witnesses but he  found
    it not to be necessary for the just disposal of  the  appeal  that  the
    hearing should be so adjourned and  decided  to  proceed.  The  grounds
    refer to the Judge making comments that as a packer in  a  factory  the
    witness could not have been crucial to the  health  and  safety  audit.
    Whether or not that comment was justified is irrelevant to the issue of
    whether or not he was correct to refuse to adjourn.  It  does  indicate
    that he did not accept the excuse  given  for  the  witness's  absence.
    However, it is  the  case  that  the  Appellant's  bundle  contained  a
    statement from the witness which was lengthy and detailed and also  the
    case that the Judge could still hear from the Appellant and  her  adult
    daughter. As he had a witness statement from the absent witness I agree
    that the interests of justice did not require an adjournment.

27. I can see no error of law in the Judge's decision. It is also  of  note
    that, as Mr Harrison pointed out, the Representatives made  no  attempt
    to ask the Judge to hear that witness's  evidence  when  they  had  the
    opportunity to do so when the case was listed on  a  later  date.  They
    cannot therefore, at that time have considered the  witness's  evidence
    to be crucial as they now assert.

28. Ms Mair is wrong when she says that witness is independent. He  is  the
    Appellant's cousin and clearly close to her  and  no  more  independent
    than the other witnesses.

29. Moving on to consider the adequacy of reasons I turn  to  the  Decision
    and Reasons. The Judge set out the evidence.  He  heard  oral  evidence
    from the Appellant who confirmed the contents of her witness  statement
    and said that her daughter, Rafia had been released  from  hospital  in
    January 2015 and was diagnosed with OI in February. She now spent  time
    in  bed  and  a  wheelchair  and  receives  ongoing  treatment  from  a
    physiotherapist. She  had  a  further  appointment  at  the  Manchester
    Children's Hospital where consultants were planning to remove the plate
    from her leg and replace it with a rod. The plate had been inserted  by
    surgeons in Pakistan.

30. In cross-examination she told the  Judge  that  she  had  brothers  and
    sisters and her husband's relatives in the  UK.  There  was  a  lot  of
    intermarriage between the two families. The children had cousins in the
    UK, one of whom also had OI. Rafia had not been diagnosed  with  OI  in
    Pakistan.

31. She could not live with her parents in Jhelum as they were elderly  and
    would not be able to look after her and her disabled children.  If  she
    went to them they would simply send her back to her husband.

32. She said that she got confused about dates and that she did  not  claim
    asylum at the earliest opportunity because she did not  know  about  it
    and had not been told about it by her family members. She came  to  the
    United Kingdom to visit family members and her husband had asked her to
    come. She claimed asylum when advised to do so by her cousin.

33. In re-examination she told the Judge that she had not claimed asylum at
    the first opportunity because her husband threatened he would not allow
    her two disabled daughters to return to Pakistan and  if  he  ever  saw
    them again he would kill them. Her cousin was the first person to  tell
    her about the possibility of claiming asylum.

34. The Judge then heard evidence from the elder daughter, an  adult.   She
    has OI and was using a wheelchair. She has had OI all her life and  she
    understood a cousin as well as her sister had also been diagnosed  with
    the disorder. She said her father returned  to  Pakistan  in  September
    2013 and she did not know that he was going. Her mother had been  upset
    when she found out.  She  said  her  relatives  in  Pakistan  were  her
    mother's parents and her mother's siblings. Her mother has two  sisters
    and a brother in Pakistan. Her brother runs a clothing  shop  owned  by
    her grandfather. She had not seen her grandfather very often.  She  has
    attended various hospitals in Pakistan  including  in  Karachi,  always
    being taken by her father.

35. In re-examination she confirmed that she had only gone to  hospital  to
    have a fracture set and that the  doctors  have  told  her  father  she
    should not move around a lot. Her father related this to her mother and
    she said that her parents treated her with care. She had  not  received
    in Pakistan either the six monthly injections or physiotherapy that her
    young sister receives in United Kingdom.

36. The  Judge  then  heard  submissions  from  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Representative  who  argued  that  the  claim  was  not  credible.  The
    Appellant's credibility was damaged by the delay  in  claiming  asylum.
    Her sister had been in the UK for 20 years with a large extended family
    and there were numerous people who could have assisted her in  claiming
    asylum. If she had genuinely been seeking  protection  she  would  have
    done  so  straightaway.  She  had   not   dealt   credibly   with   the
    contradictions that arose during her interview with the Respondent  and
    it was not credible that her younger daughter would  not  be  similarly
    diagnosed in Pakistan given that her elder  sister  suffered  from  the
    disorder. He argued it was not credible that the elder  daughter  would
    not receive proper treatment in  Pakistan  for  OI  and  the  objective
    evidence clearly indicated that treatment was available.

37. He referred to letters from the  National  Health  Service  in  the  UK
    indicating treatment for OI is  not  available  in  Pakistan  which  is
    clearly not the case.

38. He submitted that the claim that the husband was so horrified about the
    medical condition of his  daughters  that  he  abandoned  them  is  not
    credible given that  he  had  taken  his  daughters  for  treatment  in
    Pakistan and paid for it.

39. He indicated that her estrangement from her husband was  not  accepted,
    but even if they were separated she  could  receive  support  from  her
    brother and treatment was available for her daughters.

40. He argued that if the husband wanted to  harm  the  Appellant  and  his
    daughters he had plenty of opportunity to do so in Pakistan and yet  he
    had not. His actions were not those of a man who wished them harm.  The
    report of Roger Ballard, he said, amounted to advocacy on behalf of the
    Appellant.

41. The Judge then set out Ms Mair's submissions to him which stressed that
    all of the evidence he had heard was that the  Appellant  had  suffered
    years of emotional abuse and neglect by her husband and the children by
    their father.  She said it was known that domestic violence was rife in
    Pakistan and there were cultural reasons why she could  not  return  to
    her parents. She submitted that shelters were not suitable for children
    in wheelchairs and referred to  the  Appellant's  explanation  for  the
    delay in claiming asylum.

42. She argued  that  the  children  would  not  receive  adequate  medical
    treatment in Pakistan and that  the  best  interests  of  the  children
    dictated they should remain in the UK.

43. The Judge then explained that after spending five hours considering the
    documents he decided that he needed further evidence on a point he  was
    unable to resolve. He said that this related  to  public  interest  and
    that this was a finely balanced case. He noted the suggestion that  the
    Appellant and her husband and  children  in  reality  came  to  the  UK
    specifically to access medical treatment. He  referred  to  a  document
    which indicated that the family had registered with a GP  very  shortly
    after they arrived in the UK and he asked for medical evidence from the
    GP.

44. The Judge then set out how he had a further  hearing  in  October  2015
    (original hearing  in  March).  He  referred  to  the  fact  that  both
    representatives were content to proceed by way of submissions only.  He
    noted then, having set out the submissions, that the GP records did not
    indicate when the family registered with a GP but  it  was  clear  that
    they had done  so  when  they  were  not  entitled  to.  The  documents
    indicated a large  amount  of  money  spent  on  medical  treatment  in
    Pakistan. There was evidence consistent with Rafia being  diagnosed  in
    the UK. The fact that the Appellant had not taken her daughter for  the
    x-ray indicated, according to Ms Mair, that she was  not  intending  to
    utilise the NHS.

45. The Judge then started his findings at paragraph 92.  He  states  there
    that he has concluded it  reasonably  likely  that  the  Appellant  and
    daughter and the other witnesses have not given truthful evidence.

46. Ms Mair criticises the fact that that finding contains no reasoning and
    that he starts  his  findings  saying  the  witnesses  are  untruthful.
    However, a Judge can put his conclusions either at the beginning of his
    findings and then  set out why he has reached that conclusion or he can
    set out his individual findings and put  his  conclusion  at  the  end.
    Putting the conclusion first is not  an  error  of  law  unless  it  is
    unreasoned.

47. The Judge set out very clearly what the evidence revealed in this case,
    namely that the Appellant and her husband was well aware  that  medical
    treatment for their children in Pakistan  is  expensive.  They  have  a
    large number of family members in the UK and would have been well aware
    of the existence of the NHS and the fact that it is free and they would
    also have been aware that they were not entitled to use it.

48. He concluded that the Appellant's  account  of  ill  treatment  by  her
    husband both towards her and towards the children  in  Pakistan  was  a
    fabrication because it was clear from the evidence that he was far from
    the uncaring father she claimed. He  had  taken  steps  to  ensure  his
    daughters received proper medical care in Pakistan and indeed  he  paid
    for it. The  Judge  found  it  clear  from  the  evidence  that  it  is
    reasonably likely that  the  Appellant  and  her  husband  had  made  a
    decision to come to the UK in order to  access  medical  treatment  for
    free. He found the suggestion that her husband would kill  her  if  she
    returned to Pakistan to be without credibility, given  the  actions  of
    the husband in the UK. It was he who had arranged for the family to see
    a GP which flew in the face of her claim that he wants to kill both his
    wife and his daughters because they are disabled.

49. He found it not  credible  that  the  husband  suddenly  abandoned  the
    Appellant in the UK returning with the two  healthy  children.  He  was
    aware of their medical condition over a considerable period in Pakistan
    and had not abandoned them.

50. The Judge found on the basis of the  Appellant's  lack  of  credibility
    that it is reasonably  likely  she  is  not  even  estranged  from  her
    husband. He found it reasonably likely that he had returned to Pakistan
    to allow her to make a fabricated asylum claim.

51. The Judge then goes on at paragraph 98 to find that even  if  she  were
    credible  internal  relocation  would  be  available  to  her  and  her
    daughters in Pakistan where she has family members to  assist  her  and
    where treatment is available.

52. The Judge did take into account the opinion of the expert Roger Ballard
    but noted that his evidence was only of assistance if  the  Appellant's
    claim was credible, which it was not. Contrary to Ms Mair's submission,
    the fact that the Appellant did not take Rafia for an x  ray  does  not
    indicate that she had no intention of obtaining NHS treatment when  she
    was not entitled as she subsequently did take her for treatment - which
    remains ongoing.

53. The Judge was entitled to reach the conclusions he did on the  evidence
    before him; indeed it would have been surprising  had  he  reached  any
    other conclusion. It is hardly surprising that the Judge in  this  case
    concluded that the asylum claim had been fabricated in order to  ensure
    the family could access medical treatment  for  two  severely  disabled
    children at no cost when it had proved very costly when  they  were  in
    Pakistan.

54. I disagree with Ms Mair's assertion that  to  find  they  were  "health
    tourists" was speculation on the Judge's part.  On the evidence it  was
    inevitable.  While  the  family  may  not  have  been  given  a  formal
    diagnosis for Rafia in Pakistan, they must have considered  it  a  very
    real possibility given two serious fractures in a short space  of  time
    when they had the experience of an older child suffering from the  same
    thing.

55. I do not find that the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and the
    decision is therefore upheld.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

There has been no application for an anonymity order and I do not make one


Signed                              Date 4th August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
