


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07941/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Sent           |
|On : 18 July 2014                             |On : 25 July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Y H
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Davison, instructed by Blavo & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.  For  the  avoidance  of
confusion, however, I shall refer hereinafter to the parties  by  the  names
used before the First-tier Tribunal, with the Secretary  of  State  referred
to as the "respondent" and YH as the "appellant".

 The appellant, who was born on 7 September 1978, claims to be a citizen  of
Eritrea but is believed by the respondent to be a national of  Ethiopia.  He
left Eritrea in November 2007 and  travelled  to  Kenya  where  he  remained
until 1 May 2011. He then flew to France using a false passport  and  on  23
May 2011 he boarded a vehicle which brought him to the  United  Kingdom.  He
claimed asylum on 24 May 2011. His claim was refused on 22 June 2011  and  a
decision was made the same day for his removal from the UK.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier Tribunal before Judge Andonian on 5 August 2011 and  allowed.
Permission was granted to the respondent on 12 September 2011 to  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal. On 23 February 2012 Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Wood
set aside the decision for error of law  and,  following  a  hearing  on  13
August 2012, re-made the decision by dismissing the appeal.  Permission  was
granted to the appellant to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  and  it  was
ordered by consent in the Court of Appeal that the  appeal  be  allowed  and
the matter remitted to the Upper Tribunal for a complete reconsideration.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant's claim can be  summarised  as  follows.  He  is  an  Eritrean
national born in Assab who, at the age of  two  years,  relocated  with  his
family to Deberezeit in Ethiopia. He studied  and  worked  in  Ethiopia.  In
1999 he converted from Orthodox Christianity  to  Pentecostal  Christianity.
In April 2000  his  parents  were  deported  to  Eritrea  by  the  Ethiopian
authorities whilst he was away. In September 2000 he applied  for,  and  was
issued, a residence permit allowing him to live and work  in  Ethiopia.  The
permit was renewable every six months. He applied for four or  five  permits
in total. His problems in Ethiopia  began  in  December  2002  when  a  work
colleague and friend of Somali descent was arrested at work on suspicion  of
being a member of the Oganden Liberation Front  and he was himself  arrested
four hours later accused of being a spy for the Eritrean government. He  was
taken to the Defence Ministry Camp in  Jigjiga  and  detained  for  25  days
before being released as  a  result  of  the  payment  of  a  bribe  and  on
condition that he leave the country within 24 hours. On 11 January  2003  he
left Ethiopia and went to Eritrea, where he registered his return  with  the
immigration department in Assab and was issued  with  an  Eritrean  identity
document. In May 2003 his mother was hit by a car  and  was  left  disabled,
with the result that he was temporarily exempted from military  service  for
six months. His mother died on 21 July 2004 but he was  still  never  called
up. On 15  September  2004  he  was  arrested  at  home  when  conducting  a
Pentecostal prayer meeting and was detained at  a  police  station  for  two
days before being sent to prison. His uncle eventually found  out  where  he
was and secured his release through a bribe on 1  or  2  November  2007.  He
left Eritrea that month and travelled to Kenya where  he  remained  until  1
May 2011. He flew to France on a false passport and then came to the  United
Kingdom.

The respondent did not accept that the appellant was  an  Eritrean  national
or  that  he  had  registered  his  return  to  Eritrea  with  the  Eritrean
Immigration Department. It was considered that his account of  being  exempt
from military service  in  Eritrea  was  inconsistent  with  the  background
information. It was considered that he  fulfilled  the  criteria  needed  to
prove that he  was  an  Ethiopian  national  or  that  he  could  re-acquire
Ethiopian nationality and that the  Ethiopian  authorities  would  therefore
readmit him into the country and treat him as  an  Ethiopian  national.  The
respondent accepted that the appellant was a Pentecostal Christian  but  did
not accept his account of being detained from his home at a  prayer  meeting
and put in prison. It was not accepted that he would be at  risk  on  return
to Eritrea on account of having left  illegally.  Neither  was  it  accepted
that he would be at any risk on return to Ethiopia.

In a supplementary refusal  letter  dated  4  August  2011,  the  respondent
rejected the appellant's claim to be at risk on  return  to  Ethiopia  as  a
result of imputed political links to the Oganden National  Liberation  Front
(ONLF) and rejected his account of his arrest by the  Ethiopian  authorities
in December 2002 as being inconsistent with the background information.

The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian on  5
August 2011. Judge Andonian considered that the respondent's  challenges  to
the appellant's credibility were unclear but noted that it  appeared  to  be
the case that the respondent accepted the  appellant's  Eritrean  ethnicity,
accepted that he did not  currently  hold  Ethiopian  nationality,  accepted
that he fled to Eritrea in 2003 and  accepted  that  he  was  a  Pentecostal
Christian.  What  appeared  to  be  disputed  was  the  appellant's  claimed
Eritrean nationality, but  he  accepted  the  appellant's  account  in  that
regard. He considered the basis  of  the  respondent's  assertion  that  the
appellant  was  entitled  to  Ethiopian  nationality  to  be   unclear   and
considered it unreasonable to expect him to approach the  Ethiopian  Embassy
given his claimed fear of the  Ethiopian  authorities.  He  found  that  the
appellant was at risk of persecution in Eritrea on account of his  religion,
as a perceived draft evader and due to  his  illegal  exit.  He  also  found
that, aside from the question of deprivation of nationality, he was at  risk
of persecution in Ethiopia as a result of  his  political  beliefs  combined
with his ethnicity. He allowed the appeal on  asylum  and  Article  3  human
rights grounds.

The respondent sought permission to appeal  against  that  decision  on  the
grounds that the judge had wrongly found that the  respondent's  credibility
findings  were  unclear  and  had  misunderstood  which   aspects   of   the
appellant's claim had been accepted by the respondent. It was asserted  that
the appellant's claim not to hold Ethiopian nationality  had  been  rejected
in the refusal letter. The grounds  asserted  further  that  the  judge  had
failed to address the adverse  credibility  findings  made  in  the  refusal
letter and the addendum letter in regard to the appellant's claim to  be  at
risk in Ethiopia, which in  turn  materially  affected  his  conclusions  in
regard to his ability to acquire or confirm his Ethiopian nationality.

Permission was granted on the grounds raised, on 12 September 2011.

In a Statement of Reasons attached to  an  Order  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
remitting the matter to the Upper Tribunal on 4 June  2014,  the  respondent
accepted that there was merit in the appellant's argument as  to  errors  of
law made by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Wood both in  his  decision  to  set
aside Judge Andonian's decision and  in  his  own  decision  dismissing  the
appeal.

Appeal hearing

 The appeal came before me on 18 July 2014. It was  agreed  by  all  parties
that the consequence of the Order made by  the  Court  of  Appeal  was  that
Judge Wood's decisions had been quashed and that the  current  position  was
that the respondent's appeal against Judge Andonian's decision allowing  the
appellant's appeal had yet to be determined. It  was  therefore  for  me  to
decide whether Judge Andonian's decision ought to be set aside by reason  of
error of law.

I therefore heard submissions on the error of law. It was  agreed  that  the
respondent had conceded that the appellant could not be returned to  Eritrea
on account of his Pentecostal  Christian  faith  and  that  accordingly  the
respondent's challenge was in regard to the findings relevant to removal  to
Ethiopia.

Consideration and findings.

I find merit in the respondent's second challenge in regard to  the  judge's
findings  on  risk  on  return  to  Ethiopia.  At  paragraph   28   of   his
determination the judge found that  the  appellant  would  not  be  able  to
approach the Ethiopian Embassy to demonstrate that he could not  acquire  or
re-acquire Ethiopian nationality, as he had  "a  good  reason  to  fear  the
authorities of Ethiopia". Whilst it  can  be  assumed,  from  the  following
paragraphs concerning the risk on return to OLNF supporters, that the  basis
for  that  finding  was  the  appellant's  claim  to  fear   the   Ethiopian
authorities as a result of events in December 2002, he failed to  engage  in
any way with the respondent's challenge to his account of those events.

In the addendum to the refusal letter, the respondent gave detailed  reasons
as to why the appellant's account of his arrest and  detention  in  Ethiopia
was not accepted, concluding that it was inconsistent  with  the  background
information. Judge Andonian was clearly aware of that challenge, as  he  set
it out in full at paragraphs 18 to 20 of his determination. However  nowhere
in his findings did he  seek  to  engage  with  it,  but  rather  he  simply
accepted the appellant's account of events without  giving  any  substantive
reasons for so doing. At paragraph 25, he found, in  somewhat  vague  terms,
that the appellant's  description  of  events  in  Ethiopia  was  consistent
internally and with objective known facts, yet  he  failed  to  explain  how
that was the case, particularly when it was the respondent's case  that  the
account was inconsistent with the  background  information.  As  Ms  Everett
submitted, that failure was material given that it dictated his findings  on
the appellant's ability to acquire or re-acquire his Ethiopian  nationality.
That is particularly so, given the Upper Tribunal's  guidance  at  paragraph
(3) of the  head-note  to  ST  (Ethnic  Eritrean  -  nationality  -  return)
Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT 252.

Accordingly I find  that  the  judge's  conclusions,  with  respect  to  the
appellant's ability to acquire/ re-acquire Ethiopian  nationality  and  with
regard to risk on return to Ethiopia, are not sustainable. I  therefore  set
aside his decision in that respect.

It was agreed by the parties that, in the event an error of  law  was  found
in the judge's decision and it was set aside, it would  be  appropriate  for
the case to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  order  for  fresh
evidence to be heard and  fresh  findings  to  be  made  in  regard  to  the
appellant's account of events in Ethiopia  and  the  question  of  Ethiopian
nationality and risk on  return  to  Ethiopia.  Whilst  there  has  been  no
specific challenge to the judge's findings on  the  appellant's  account  of
his registration with the Eritrean Immigration Department,  it  is  relevant
to note that the circumstances of his arrival in  Eritrea  are  to  a  large
extent dependant upon an acceptance of his account  of  his  departure  from
Ethiopia and therefore findings will have to  be  made  in  that  regard  in
order properly to determine the question of nationality.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be heard before any judge aside from Judge Andonian and Judge Wood.








                               Signed   [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
