
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: AA/07407/ 2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th February 2014                           |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                          MR RAVICHANDRAN JEYARUBAN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen (instructed by S Satha & Co)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Davidson) by which, in a determination dated
    30th November 2013, he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse his asylum claim and to  return
    him to Sri Lanka.

 2. The Appellant is of Tamil ethnicity born in  1978.  The  basis  of  his
    asylum claim is that  after completing his studies in 1995 he worked at
    a petrol station from 1996 and while there he and others working  there
    helped the LTTE by supplying them with fuel.  The  Appellant  left  the
    petrol station in 1997 after  the  manager  and  his  co  workers  were
    arrested on suspicion of helping the LTTE.

 3. From 1998 until 2001 the Appellant  delivered  parcels  for  the  LTTE,
    collecting them from shops after they had closed and delivering them to
    an LTTE soldier. He also watched army camps for the LTTE.

 4. In April 2001 the Appellant travelled to Colombo because he  was  being
    pressured by the LTTE to join and fight. He left  Sri  Lanka  for  Oman
    using his own passport.

 5. He returned in September 2011 from Thailand. He was questioned  at  the
    airport for an hour and then taken to prison where  he  was  questioned
    about helping the LTTE and delivering parcels. He  signed  a  piece  of
    paper which he could not read. His uncle engaged a solicitor, Mr P  who
    helped obtain his release and he was  released  on  20th  May  2013  on
    payment of a bribe. He was released  on  conditional  bail  subject  to
    reporting conditions. However, he was advised by  Mr  P  to  leave  the
    country which he did with the help of an agent.

 6. The Secretary of State refused the application as she  did  not  accept
    the Appellant to be credible as there were inconsistencies in important
    elements of his account. She noted that on his  own  admission  he  had
    never been a member of the LTTE and had never trained  or  fought  with
    them. He was considered at the highest to be a  low-level  sympathiser.
    Notwithstanding his claim  that  the  police  were  suspicious  of  his
    activities in March 2001 and told him to report  every  Friday  he  was
    nevertheless able to leave the country to go to Oman twice and then  to
    Thailand each time using his own passport.

 7. The Secretary of State  also considered it implausible that he would be
    arrested and detained in 2011 for activities that had purportedly taken
    place 10 years earlier and after  the  cessation  of  hostilities.  The
    Secretary of State also relied on the current situation in  Sri  Lanka,
    in particular that the authorities were not targeting LTTE  members  in
    the same  way  as  they  had  done  during  the  conflict  and  a  mere
    sympathiser would not be at risk.

 8. The Judge heard the Appellant's case  over  two  days  in  October  and
    November  2013.  There  had  initially  been  an  application  by   the
    Appellant's representative  for  an  adjournment  in  order  to  obtain
    additional evidence from Sri Lanka. That was refused  but  then  during
    the course of the hearing  the  Appellant  was  taken  ill  and  so  an
    adjournment was necessary.

 9. The Judge's findings start at paragraph 44 of the determination.

10. It is the Judge's credibility findings that are challenged by Ms  Allan
    as unsafe and tainted by material errors of law. In her submissions  to
    me she argued firstly that the Judge had erred in the way in  which  he
    had considered  s  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants,  etc)  Act  2004.  She  indicated  that  in   starting   his
    consideration of credibility with section 8 the Judge  had  erred.  She
    relied on the case of JT (Cameroon) [2008} EWCA  Civ  878.  It  is  now
    trite law that section 8 matters are factors to be taken  into  account
    in determining credibility. A judge is required by section  8  to  take
    into account the matters that are there listed as being detrimental  to
    credibility. At paragraph 21  of  JT  Lord  Justice  Pill  referred  to
    section 8 as "no more than a reminder to  fact-finding  Tribunals  that
    conduct coming within the categories stated in section 8 shall be taken
    into account in assessing credibility. If  there  was  a  tendency  for
    tribunals simply to ignore these matters  when  assessing  credibility,
    they were in error. It is necessary to take account of  them.  However,
    at one end of the spectrum, there may, unusually,  be  cases  in  which
    conduct of the kind identified in section 8 is held to carry no  weight
    at all in the overall  assessment  of  credibility  on  the  particular
    facts. I do not consider  the  section  prevents  that  finding  in  an
    appropriate case". He goes on to say that where section 8  matters  are
    held to be entitled to some weight, the weight to be given to  them  is
    entirely a matter for the fact finder.

11. It is clear that section 8 matters are unlikely  to  be  determinative,
    depending on the facts of the case, in the assessment  of  credibility.
    The weight to be attached to them will vary from case to case depending
    upon the facts but as is clear, weight is a matter for  the  Judge.  In
    this particular case the Judge considered section 8 before going on  to
    his other credibility findings. That per se is not an error of law. The
    judge has to start somewhere and has to take section  8  into  account.
    Where it appears in the determination is irrelevant. It is  the  weight
    to be attached to the various matters that must be looked at.

12. In this particular case the Judge noted the Appellant  entered  the  UK
    apparently using a false passport in June 2013 but waited over a  month
    before claiming asylum, thus failing to take advantage of a  reasonable
    opportunity to make an asylum claim. The Judge had thought that if  the
    Appellant was in such fear of his life that he felt compelled to travel
    using a false passport he would expect him to make an asylum  claim  at
    the earliest possible moment. That was a finding open to the Judge  and
    is one factor that he took into  account  when  assessing  credibility.
    There is no error of law in that reasoning.

13. The Judge then goes on to find the Appellant's credibility also damaged
    by his use of a false passport. The Judge finds  his  use  of  a  false
    passport lacking credibility itself as he has previously used his own.

14. The judge then goes on to consider that  the  section  8  matters  have
    damaged the Appellant's credibility.  He says that means that  he  must
    give particular anxious scrutiny to the remainder of the claim but that
    the section 8 matters are not determinative. I find that the judge  was
    entitled to find as he did with regard to section 8  and  there  is  no
    error of law.

15. Next  Ms  Allen  argued  that  the  Judge  made  confused  findings  on
    credibility. She referred  to  paragraph  51  where  the  Judge  said:-
    "unfortunately for the Appellant I do not accept as  credible  much  of
    his evidence in relation to his asylum claim, and even if I accept  his
    claim at its highest, I consider that he was a  low-level  adherent  to
    the LTTE of little interest to the authorities." At  paragraph  56  the
    judge said that he finds "this whole account  inherently  implausible".
    That, Ms Allen argued is a contradiction; either the Judge  found  much
    of the claim incredible or all of it.

16. I do not accept the assertion that the judge has made  conflicting  and
    contradictory findings. At paragraph 51 the Judge set out a summary  of
    the totality of his findings; that much what the Appellant claimed  was
    incredible and that at its highest he was a low-level adherent  to  the
    LTTE of little interest to the authorities. He thereafter goes  on,  in
    the following paragraphs,  to  examine  the  specific  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's claim  and  gives  the  reasons  for  his  overall  adverse
    credibility finding. The comment  at  paragraph  56  that  "this  whole
    account is inherently implausible" I find specifically relates to  that
    part of his claim set out at paragraph 55. It does  not  refer  to  the
    entirety of what the Appellant has said. The part  of  the  Appellant's
    claim as set out in  paragraph 55 was that he returned to Sri Lanka  in
    2003 using his own passport without difficulty. He left again in  2004,
    again using his own passport and again without difficulty. He  returned
    in May 2011 again using his own passport and again without  difficulty.
    He married in May 2011 in Sri Lanka and then left for Thailand  and  it
    was only upon his return to Sri Lanka in September  2011  that  he  was
    arrested, interrogated for  an  hour  and  then  taken  to  prison  and
    mistreated on suspicion of helping the LTTE. It is clearly that account
    which the judge finds inherently implausible at paragraph 56 not  least
    because after a history of travelling to and from Sri Lanka  using  his
    own passport and without any difficulty, all of a sudden in 2011 he  is
    arrested, detained and mistreated on account of  low  level  activities
    that had taken place 10 years before. Furthermore that arrest came  two
    years after the  defeat  of  the  LTTE  in  2009.  I  do  not  see  any
    contradiction in the Judge's logic or  reasoning  or  his  findings  in
    relation to credibility.

17. The determination is also criticised by Ms Allen for the way  in  which
    the Judge looked at the medical report of Professor  Lingam.  Ms  Allen
    argued that the Judge erred in failing to take the medical report  into
    account when assessing credibility.  He  looked  at  it  only  when  he
    turned to consider Article 3 and his claim on the basis of his  medical
    condition. Arguably the judge erred in failing to consider the  medical
    evidence throughout his assessment of credibility rather than confining
    it to his consideration of the Article 3 claim. However, even  if  that
    was an error I find it was not a material error in  this  case.  I  say
    that based on the medical report itself. It is a report which is  brief
    in the extreme. Although it runs to 7 pages in total there is only  one
    paragraph of findings at page 5 and those findings  do  not  assist  in
    relation to credibility findings.

18. Professor Lingam recited what the Appellant claimed happened to him  in
    particular that he was beaten on the back  of  the  head  with  a  hard
    material believed to be a large wooden pole which caused him  to  start
    bleeding from the back of his head until he lost consciousness. He  was
    then taken to hospital for treatment where he was  given  "sutures  for
    the laceration to the back of his head and had fluid  drained  and  had
    stitches". The Appellant told  Professor  Lingam  that  he  had  severe
    headaches and memory loss following that incident and he told him  that
    problem still continues to date. The Professor then stated that history
    to be typical of brain concussion but it is now too late to investigate
    by an MRI scan. With respect that is singularly unhelpful. In the first
    place Professor Lingam recites  that  the  Appellant  had  sutures  and
    stitches - Sutures and stitches are one and the same.  There  does  not
    appear to have been any examination of subsequent medical treatment  in
    the UK. The Appellant reported memory loss but there is no  examination
    or testing of his function by the expert. There is no  opinion  on  the
    Appellant's ability to recall events or give evidence. Accordingly, the
    medical report does not assist in assessing credibility.  The  fact  is
    that the expert does  not  give  an  opinion  which  could  assist  the
    Appellant either in terms of the  head  injury  or  in  relation  to  a
    deformity to the little finger on the  Appellant's  right  hand.  Thus,
    while the judge ought to have taken the medical evidence  into  account
    when assessing credibility, the nature of the medical  evidence  is  so
    singularly unhelpful in this case as to render that error immaterial.

19. Ms Allen also argued that the Judge, in dealing  with  the  Appellant's
    attendance  at a demonstration in the UK , failed to take into  account
    the country guidance case that that would place him  at risk

20. The judge has clearly had his mind on the  country  guidance  case  and
    recites the risk categories set out therein  at  paragraph  66  of  the
    determination. The  first  category  is  individuals  who  are  or  are
    perceived to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka because they are
    or are perceived to  have  had  a  significant  role  in  post-conflict
    separatism. That does not apply to this Appellant.

21. The second category is journalists or human rights activists  who  have
    criticised the government and in particular its  human  rights  record.
    Clearly, the Appellant does not fall into that category.

22. The third category is individuals who are witnesses to war crimes;  not
    this  Appellant   and  lastly,  persons  whose  name   appears   on   a
    computerised "stop" list accessible at the airport comprising a list of
    those against whom there is an extant court order  or  arrest  warrant.
    Such individuals will be stopped at the airport and handed over to  the
    authorities in pursuant to such an order or warrant. The Appellant does
    not fall into that last category  either.  The  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant had never been arrested and tortured as claimed. He may  have
    been stopped and questioned at the airport but the Judge did not accept
    his claim to have been detained for a considerable length of  time  and
    persecuted during detention. As such, his name would not  appear  on  a
    "stop" list and he would not be at risk.

23. Overall, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  determination  is  detailed,
    takes all the evidence into account and finds for numerous reasons that
    the Appellants claim to be at risk on return to  Sri  Lanka  is  simply
    without any credibility. His travel history over a considerable  period
    of time after, on his account, he ceased any assistance to the LTTE and
    prior to his claimed period of detention is a very  significant  factor
    in  the  adverse  credibility   findings.   The   challenges   to   the
    determination in the grounds and orally by Ms Allen amount to  no  more
    than a disagreement with the Judge's reasoned adverse findings.

24. For the above reasons I find that the First-tier Tribunal did not  make
    a material error of law in its determination and accordingly the appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal  is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 17th February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
