
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07078/2014
                                                               AA/06923/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 July 2016                          |On 9 August 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            B S (FIRST appellant)
                            F S (SECOND appellant)
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Harding, Counsel, instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are appeals by the first and second Appellants against the single
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley (the judge), promulgated
    on 9 May 2016.  The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal had been  against
    the Respondent's initial decisions of 2 September 2014 in  relation  to
    the first Appellant and 1 September 2014  in  relation  to  the  second
    Appellant, to remove them from the United Kingdom by way of  directions
    under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. The first Appellant is the mother of the second Appellant, and both are
    Albanian nationals.  Their asylum claims were based  upon  the  claimed
    existence of a blood feud.  It was said that the feud originated out of
    a land dispute and that in July 2012 the first Appellant's husband  was
    murdered by a member of the opposing family.  It  was  said  that  this
    feud was ongoing and both the Appellants would be at risk of  reprisals
    if returned to Albania now.

The judge's decision

 3. In a detailed decision the judge sets out the evidence, submissions  of
    the Appellants, and then goes on to make a number of findings of  fact.
    At paragraph 71 the judge notes that she  found  some  aspects  of  the
    evidence to be credible but others not  so.   The  favourable  findings
    relate specifically to the killing of the first Appellant's husband  on
    25 July 2012.  The judge found that this  horrific  event  had  been  a
    trigger for the first Appellant's PTSD.

 4. On a number of other  issues  however,  the  judge  found  against  the
    Appellant.  In general terms the judge found that:

          a) there had never in fact been a blood feud;

          b) that the opposing family had not destroyed their property;

          c) that a burglary at the Appellant's home had not been committed
             by the opposing family;

          d) that the Albanian authorities  had  taken  proper  actions  in
             respect of locating and prosecuting the  perpetrators  of  the
             murder in 2012;

          e)  that  the  Appellant's  own  family  had  engaged  with   the
             authorities in respect of the criminal activities;

          f) that the Appellant's family had not been involved in a claimed
             car bomb attack on the opposing family;

          g) that the opposing family did not  have  significant  reach  or
             influence;

          h) that neither party wished to engage to prosecute a feud;

          i) and that the first Appellant's  son  had  not  been  in  self-
             confinement as a result of any feud.

   5. As a result, the judge concluded that the Appellants were not at  risk
      from the opposing family if they were to return to Albania.




   6. In addition, the judge dealt with the first Appellant's mental  health
      difficulties but concluded that these were not sufficiently severe for
      her to succeed under either Articles 3 or 8 of the ECHR.  Both appeals
      were therefore dismissed on all grounds.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The core of the challenge to the judge's decisions is to  be  found  at
    paragraph 4 of the grounds of appeal.  Therein are set out four aspects
    of the evidence upon which it is said the judge failed to make findings
    on relevant matters.  The last of these is said to be of  the  greatest
    import: the Appellant had given her telephone number to the police  and
    had then been threatened by the opposing family on  that  same  number,
    indicating collusion between the  authorities  and  her  enemies.   The
    grounds go on to assert that there is a lack of reasoning and that  the
    judge may have failed to have taken the first Appellant's mental health
    into account when making findings of fact.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on 7
    June 2016.

The hearing before me

 9. Mr Harding relied on the  grounds.   He  submitted  that  the  evidence
    referred to in paragraph 4(d) of his grounds had not been dealt with by
    the judge  although  the  evidence  itself  had  been  referred  to  in
    paragraph 21 of the decision.  Mr Harding submitted  that  this  was  a
    material omission in that the evidence, if accepted, linked the  police
    to the opposing family.  This was a crucial factor in assessing whether
    or not an active blood feud existed.  In respect of paragraph  4(a)  of
    his grounds, again  the  matter  was  not  dealt  with  by  the  judge:
    cumulatively this was important.  If threats had started in  2006  this
    was relevant to whether a blood feud existed or  not.   In  respect  of
    paragraph  4(c)  the  judge  had  not  viewed  the  evidence  of  self-
    confinement in the round.

10. Ms Ahmed asked me to look at the judge's decision as a whole.  Even  if
    the judge had found that a telephone call had been made  following  the
    first Appellant's identification of one of the  attackers,  this  would
    not have made a difference to the appeal as a whole.

Decision on error of law

11. At the hearing I reserved by decision on error of law.

12. Having considered the judge's decision and submissions made to me  with
    care, I find that there are no material errors of law  in  the  judge's
    decision.  With specific reference to Mr Harding's grounds, my  reasons
    are as follows.

Paragraph 4(a) of the Grounds

13. It is right that the judge appears not to have dealt expressly with the
    evidence that the opposing family made threats of one sort  or  another
    from 2006 (see paragraph 16 of the judge's decision).  However,  having
    regard to paragraph 74 it appears to me as though the  judge  did  have
    this issue in mind when finding that there had not been  a  pattern  of
    threats from 2006 which could have amounted to a blood  feud.   Further
    or in the alternative, this evidence could not in my view have  made  a
    material difference to the outcome of the judge's decision as a  whole.
    The Appellant's claim has always been put on the basis of a blood feud,
    not simply criminal activities by the opposing  family.   It  is  clear
    from what is said by the judge in paragraphs 75, 77, 81, 82 and 84 that
    there was a dispute involving  the  opposing  family,  the  Appellant's
    family and numerous  other  people  relating  to  the  issue  of  land.
    However, the judge has found that the Appellant's family were  not  the
    primary actors in this dispute, that the opposing  family  had  not  in
    fact carried out some of the actions alleged  by  the  Appellants,  and
    that the killing of the first Appellant's husband  was  not  in  effect
    simply a continuation or escalation of the land dispute.  With this  in
    mind, and having regard also to decisions from the higher  courts  that
    not every single item of evidence has to be dealt with specifically  by
    judges when  giving  their  decisions,  I  find  that  the  failure  to
    expressly address the issue of threats  from  2006  onwards  is  not  a
    material error of law.

Paragraph 4(b) of the Grounds

14. I am somewhat confused by this challenge to the judge's decision.   The
    grounds state that, "the judge has not made  findings  on  ...  whether
    there had been a threatening telephone call  prior  to  the  burglary".
    The alleged burglary was said to be on 1 July  2012.   The  judge  made
    clear findings that the opposing family had had no involvement in  this
    and this had not been specifically challenged, but  in  any  event  the
    judge gave adequate reasons for her conclusion on this point.  Then  at
    paragraph 19 of the judge's decision  she  states  that  a  threatening
    phone call was reported on 19 July 2012, that being after  the  alleged
    burglary and not prior to it as alleged in the grounds  of  appeal.   I
    looked at all the information before me to see whether or not this  had
    just been a simple error by either the drafter of the  grounds  or  the
    judge but I am unable to resolve  the  point  and  in  any  event,  the
    judge's findings on the issue of the burglary overall are  in  my  view
    clear and sustainable and there is no material error of law here.

Paragraph 4(c) of the Grounds

15. This relates to whether or not the first Appellant's son was  in  self-
    confinement in Albania due to a blood feud.  I have had specific regard
    to paragraphs 89, 90, 97 and 98 of the judge's decision but  have  also
    read these passages in the context of all of the  other  findings  made
    both before and after.  Although the judge may have  expressed  herself
    rather more clearly, in my view it is sufficiently  apparent  from  the
    decision as a whole that the  son  had  not  been  in  self-confinement
    whether  before  the  first  Appellant's  departure  from  Albania   or
    thereafter.  Given her findings as a whole, there was no reason for him
    to have gone into self-confinement given that the opposing  family  had
    taken no action against the Appellant's family following the murder  in
    2012, that the Appellant's family had not instigated any  attacks  upon
    the opposing family, and given  that  the  Appellant's  other  son  had
    remained in Albania without any  concerns  having  been  identified  in
    respect of his safety.  In paragraph 97 the judge does  state  in  what
    appears to be fairly  clear  terms  that  the  son  was  not  in  self-
    confinement up in the north of Albania.  In my view on the evidence  as
    a whole she was entitled to find that certain family members had  moved
    up there from Tirana because the home and business in the  capital  had
    been sold and they had to find  alternative  accommodation,  which  was
    provided in due course by the first Appellant's brother.

Paragraph 4(d) of the Grounds

16. This is, as suggested by Mr Harding, probably the most important of the
    alleged errors.  It is right that the judge has  not  made  an  express
    finding on this particular aspect of  the  evidence.   Looking  at  the
    decision as a whole it  is  clear  that  whilst  some  aspects  of  the
    evidence were accepted, perhaps most importantly  the  killing  of  the
    husband in 2012, almost  all  of  what  is  alleged  to  have  occurred
    thereafter  has  been  rejected  by  the  judge.   There  are  multiple
    findings, in my view supported by sound reasons, to the effect that:

          a) the police acted properly  in  pursuing  and  prosecuting  the
             perpetrators  of  the  murder:  indeed  two   of   them   were
             imprisoned;

          b) the Appellant's own family engaged with the authorities;

          c) the Appellant's family had not sought to take any  retribution
             against the opposing family at any time following the murder;

          d) there were no actions taken by the opposing family against the
             Appellant's family in terms of 'pre-emptive strikes'.

17. In light of the above I conclude in the first instance that  the  judge
    was implicitly rejecting that any threatening telephone call  was  made
    following the first  Appellant's  identification  of  Leonard  and  the
    provision of her telephone number to the police.

18. If in fact such a call was made and the judge has committed an error in
    failing to specifically address the point, I nonetheless conclude  that
    this would not have had a material effect on the outcome having  regard
    to the judge's findings as a whole.  I reiterate the following matters:
    first, that the opposing family in fact took  no  actions  against  the
    Appellants or any other  members  of  the  family  from  2012  onwards;
    second, that the  Appellant's  family  continued  to  engage  with  the
    authorities and did not themselves seek to take any revenge against the
    opposing family; third, as the  judge  said  in  paragraph  93  (having
    primarily found that the opposing family did  not  have  any  reach  or
    influence), if there  had  been  any  adverse  influence  the  evidence
    indicated that the opposing family were simply not committed to finding
    the Appellants or any other members of their family. All of this is  of
    course consistent with the judge's overall view that a blood  feud  had
    simply never arisen in this case.

19. Finally I would note once again what I have said before in  respect  of
    not every element of the evidence in a particular  case  having  to  be
    addressed by a judge.  In this  particular  case  the  judge  has  made
    numerous detailed findings of fact covering the whole  history  of  the
    claim as it was put to her.  In my view she  has  carefully  considered
    the evidence as a whole, has placed reliance  on  documentary  evidence
    relating to the legal proceedings in Albania adduced by the  Appellants
    themselves, and has in essence found that there were  criminal  actions
    perpetrated but that no blood feud had ever arisen. In  any  event  the
    judge also found that there was no active blood feud as at the date  of
    the hearing.

20. In respect of the reasons challenge, in my view the  reasons  given  by
    the judge for the numerous findings are adequate and  clearly  open  to
    her on the evidence.

21. In respect of the Appellant's mental health the judge clearly had  that
    in mind (see paragraphs 102 to 104 of the decision). In any event,  the
    adverse findings of fact were not based upon  inconsistencies  relating
    to inability to remember certain events and  such  like,  matters  that
    might be relevant to the mental  health.  In  large  part  the  judge's
    findings were in  fact  based  upon  the  evidence  of  the  Appellants
    themselves, independent sources and  an  application  of  the  guidance
    provided in EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC).

22. For all the reasons given above the First-tier Tribunal decision  shall
    stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  any
material errors of law.

The Appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 8 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date: 8 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
