
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07656/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 February 2016                           |On 10 March 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                LUTFOR RAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Pratt, WTB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Lutfor Rahman, was born on 6 July 1989  and  is  a  male
    citizen  of  Bangladesh.   He  appealed  against  a  decision  of   the
    respondent to remove him from the United Kingdom  having  rejected  his
    asylum claim.  The decision was dated 19 August 2014.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge L A L Paul) in a determination promulgated  on  20  May
    2015 dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are a number of grounds  of  appeal  all  of  which  concern  the
    judge's handling of the medical evidence before her.   It  is  asserted
    that the judge should  not  have  found  that  the  appellant  was  not
    suffering from mental health illness or post traumatic stress  disorder
    (PTSD) when there was a diagnosis from the expert medical  witness  (Dr
    Ough) which indicated such a diagnosis.  The appellant also  says  that
    the judge failed to follow the approach in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ  367
    and dealt with the medical evidence only having already concluded  that
    the appellant was not a credible witness.  Further, the judge failed to
    deal with the consistency  between  the  appellant's  account  and  the
    injuries which he had suffered.  Finally the judge  is  criticised  for
    her handling of the medical evidence as to  physical  scarring;  it  is
    asserted that the judge speculated as to possible alternative causation
    of the scarring (see JL (medical reports -  credibility)  China  [2013]
    UKUT 00145 (IAC)).

 3. The appellant's claim for asylum was based on his  claim  (rejected  by
    the judge) that he was a homosexual.

 4. I find that the judge did not err in  law  either  as  alleged  in  the
    grounds of appeal or at all.  First, I am not satisfied that the  judge
    has breached the principle in Mibanga.  At [56], the judge  wrote  that
    she had "considered all the  evidence  taking  into  account  oral  and
    written evidence whether I refer to it specifically  or  not.   In  the
    light of my analysis of the evidence I make  the  following  findings".
    That self-direction is correct in law and I have no reason to find that
    the judge did not consider the evidence as a totality  before  reaching
    any findings as to the appellant's credibility.  Indeed,  at  [62]  the
    judge refers to the medico-legal report and to the inconsistent account
    of the appellant's sexual encounters which he had given to  the  doctor
    and which contrasted with the account  which  he  gave  at  his  asylum
    interview.  I agree with Mr McVeety, for the  respondent,  that  it  is
    plain that the judge has read and referred to the medical report whilst
    making his findings as to credibility.  There was  nothing  in  law  to
    preclude him from doing so.

 5. Further, the mental health  assessment  made  by  the  doctor  and  the
    diagnosis of "moderate to severe PTSD" was  plainly  based  to  a  very
    large extent on  self  reporting  by  the  appellant.   Throughout  the
    medical report, the expression "he tells me" is used several times and,
    whilst I fully acknowledge (as, I believe, did  Judge  Paul)  that  the
    medico-legal report is a product of an expert  using  his  or  her  own
    professional expert judgment to consider all  the  evidence,  including
    the appellant's own account, it  was  open  to  the  judge,  given  the
    appellant's manifest unreliability in other parts of his  evidence,  to
    conclude that the doctor had been given an unreliable  account  by  the
    appellant.  Indeed, the  judge  was  very  careful  to  note  that  the
    doctor's diagnosis had been based in part on  the  appellant's  account
    but also on "clinical observations" of the appellant at interview  with
    the doctor.  However, there was nothing to prevent the judge concluding
    that the appellant was not a  gay  man  and  finding  it  difficult  to
    "accept the opinion of Dr Ough within the medico-legal report" that  he
    was.  Significantly, the judge  went  on  [86]  to  find  "it  hard  to
    correlate the information contained within the report  with  the  other
    evidence before me".  The judge is here  referring  not  to  "findings"
    which he has  already  reached  but  the  other  evidence  which  I  am
    satisfied she considered as a totality before reaching any conclusions.
     As the Tribunal concluded in the case of HH (medical evidence;  effect
    of Mibanga) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00164 the approach advocated  by  the
    Court  of  Appeal  in  Mibanga  should   not   act   as   a   "forensic
    straightjacket" to the fact-finding Tribunal:
         The Tribunal considers that there is  a  danger  of Mibanga being
         misunderstood. The judgments in that case are not intended to place
         judicial fact-finders in a  form  of  forensic  straightjacket.  In
         particular, the Court of Appeal is not to  be  regarded  as  laying
         down any rule of law as to the order in which judicial fact-finders
         are to approach the  evidential  materials  before  them.  To  take
         Wilson J's "cake" analogy, all its  ingredients  cannot  be  thrown
         together into the bowl simultaneously. One has to start  somewhere.
         There  was  nothing  illogical  about  the  process  by  which  the
         Immigration Judge  in  the  present  case  chose  to  approach  his
         analytical task.

 6. As regards the appellant's injuries, I find that the  judge  approached
    these in a legally cogent manner.  At [80], the judge concluded that it
    was "not possible that the injuries were incurred as a  result  of  the
    appellant disclosing that he was a gay man".   The  judge  noted  that,
    "... the author of the report  had  concluded  that  the  injuries  are
    highly consistent with the beating described by the appellant ..."  but
    there was nothing in the report to compel the judge  to  conclude  that
    the injuries were in any way connected  with  the  appellant's  claimed
    sexuality.

 7. For the reasons I have given, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 20 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

