
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Aa/07698/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 July 2016                       |On 03 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                   N P R P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holt instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Sri Lankan national and her  daughter,  also  a  Sri
    Lankan national, is dependent on her claim. The Respondent refused  her
    application for asylum and concluded that returning her  to  Sri  Lanka
    would not put the UK in breach of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights. The Appellant appealed that decision under section  82  (1)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the  2002  Act).  Her
    appeal was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  K  Watson  in  a
    decision promulgated on 14 March 2016. The Appellant sought  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and  permission  was  granted  on  all
    grounds on 8 April 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie.

    The Grounds

 2. Ground 1 asserts that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take  into
    account relevant evidence, namely evidence of the Appellant's Christian
    beliefs. It is asserted that the  Judge  quoted  selectively  from  the
    Appellant's  interview  in  concluding  that  the  Appellant  was   not
    evangelical. It is asserted that the Appellant said  in  oral  evidence
    that she could not remember if there were problems with  the  interview
    and that in her witness statement at paragraphs 22 and 23 she  provided
    an explanation for what she meant and that the Judge had no  regard  to
    this evidence. It is also said that the Judge made no reference to  the
    Appellant's  detailed  account  of  her  evangelism  in   her   witness
    statement.  It is further said that the  appeal  was  premised  on  the
    explicit concession by the Respondent that the  incidents  alleged  had
    occurred to the Appellant's husband as a result of his preaching as  an
    evangelical Christian which  logically  would  have  to  incorporate  a
    concession he was an evangelical Christian  which  the  Judge  was  not
    entitled to go behind. It is argued that this error was material  given
    that the Judge considered that non-evangelical Christians were  not  at
    risk.

 3. Ground 2 contends that there is a misdirection in law and that there is
    a failure to  take  relevant  evidence  into  account,  namely  country
    evidence. It is  said  that  the  Judge  seems  to  have  confused  the
    existence of information produced by the UK government with  a  country
    guidance promulgated by the Upper Tribunal, believing the former to  be
    binding on her which is wrong in law. The Judge stated that the reports
    of attacks on Christians provided by the Appellant did not persuade her
    to "depart from the Country Guidance provided". She then referred to  a
    FCO corporate report on Sri Lanka and there  was  in  fact  no  country
    guidance. The Judge then stated that there was nothing that led her  to
    "depart from the COI included in the bundle." It is said that there was
    no Country Information report produced by the Respondent and it was not
    clear what the Judge thought she was not departing  from.  It  is  also
    asserted that this led the Judge to take  the  wrong  approach  to  the
    evidence raising a presumption that the Respondent's  information  must
    be followed rather than weighing the evidence in the round. This, it is
    said, leads her to put little weight on other significant evidence such
    as the International Religious Freedom Report, a respected  publication
    of the US State Department which cannot be characterized as "anecdotal"
    as it was referred to by the Judge. It is argued that the  Judge  would
    have reached a different conclusion on the risk faced by Christians  in
    Sri Lanka,  whether  evangelical  or  not,  had  the  evidence  in  the
    Appellant's bundle been considered.

 4. Ground 3 states that the Judge placed weight on an immaterial matter in
    that she relied on the Appellant's answer to what had changed since the
    refusal of her husband's asylum claim to conclude that she only  wanted
    to stay in the UK for economic reasons. The Appellant had  referred  to
    developments in the UK and it is said that it  is  not  clear  how  the
    Appellant could be expected to describe a worsening  situation  for  in
    Sri Lanka when she had not been home since her first claim for asylum.

 5. Ground 4 asserts that the Judge made findings on a mistaken premise  in
    making an adverse finding based on the Appellant having delayed  making
    an asylum claim despite the fact  that  this  was  not  raised  by  the
    Respondent in the refusal letter which also did not make any  reference
    to section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
    etc) Act 2004.  It is also said that a further application was made  in
    2013 by the husband for both of them. It is also said  that  the  Judge
    may have confused what was binding on her in this context  as  well  as
    the weight she placed on needing an intervening cause  for  the  asylum
    application made in 2014 as opposed to the one refused in 2008  without
    referring to the 2013 application. The 2014 application was made due to
    her husband's convictions. It was also said that it appeared  that  the
    Judge was placing weight upon the 2008 refusal as if it were a previous
    negative tribunal decision.

 6. It is further argued that  the  Judge  placed  weight  on  an  apparent
    inconsistency between  the  Appellant  saying  that  her  daughter  was
    unaware she  was  raped  and  her  daughter  having  read  the  witness
    statement. Her daughter was in fact given a  redacted  version  of  the
    Appellant's statement to read by  the  Appellant's  representatives  to
    protect her from that information and it was not  possible  to  correct
    this in evidence because the Appellant went first and  questioning  the
    daughter about whether she knew about the rape was self-defeating.

 7. Ground 5 asserts that the Judge failed to take  into  account  relevant
    considerations. The Judge found that the Appellant's daughter  had  not
    lived continuously in the UK for seven years while under 18 at the date
    of the mother's application when they had been in the UK for six  years
    and three months. It is said that this fails to take into account  that
    the Respondent initially made an unlawful decision one month before the
    daughter had been in the UK for seven years. That decision was unlawful
    because the claim was wrongly  certified  and  overturned  on  judicial
    review. The grounds argue that had that not happened she would have had
    an appeal after she had been in the UK for  seven  years  and  still  a
    child. By the time the Respondent  re-made  the  decision  she  was  an
    adult. The grounds also assert that the Judge also did not  mention  in
    her decision how the daughter's life was turned upside  down  when  her
    father was convicted of  sexual  offences  and  this  was  relevant  to
    proportionality. It is also said that the  judge  fails  adequately  to
    take into account the contribution the daughter made to the UK  through
    her voluntary work.

    The Hearing

 8. Mr Holt expanded on the grounds of appeal. With regard to ground 1, the
    Appellant gave evidence of her evangelism in her witness statement  and
    none of that evidence could be found in paragraph 16 or in paragraph 17
    of the decision. The Judge had adopted an overly selective  reading  of
    q16 of the interview and failed to give any weight to explanation as to
    what she meant by "speak". It was explained in good detail.  That  gave
    rise to a material error  of  law.  It  was  made  more  material  when
    considered against the background. The  Respondent  did  not  make  any
    negative findings in relation to her claim to be evangelical. Secondly,
    against the background that the Respondent accepted  that  her  husband
    was targeted for work as a pastor this error was even brighter.

 9. With regard to Ground 2 the Foreign and  Commonwealth  report  at  D63,
    that was not country guidance and certainly not guidance that  a  Judge
    could depart from.  It  replaced  the  lower  asylum  standard  with  a
    different standard for an appellant to provide evidence  to  warrant  a
    departure. As to materiality, it was very significant. There was a good
    deal of evidence provided  in  relation  to  the  risk  to  evangelical
    Christians. At D37-50 were a collection of news reports. At D81 to  D85
    there was a further news report from Aid to the Church in Need but most
    importantly the language used by the Judge to describe the evidence was
    "anecdotal". The report at D52 - D61 was from US State  Department  and
    that might be a ground of appeal in itself.

10. Regarding grounds 3 and 4  the  Judge  asked  the  Appellant  what  had
    changed since the asylum claim and the response was to refer to  events
    in the UK. She did not say that  her  husband  had  committed  criminal
    offences and she had made a separate claim. The Judge placed  too  much
    weight on that to say that is why she was in the UK. Ground 4 concerned
    the treatment of delay. Delay was raised in the hearing for  the  first
    time. The claim was made six years after  arrival  in  the  UK  but  no
    consideration was given to the fact that her husband's claim was  dealt
    with first. If that relationship had remained in place there  may  have
    been no such criticism made. The Judge's  finding  that  there  was  no
    intervening cause was to import a condition that should not  be  there.
    Ground 4.5 was the factual challenge. At  paragraph  25  the  rape  was
    described as a further inconsistency. The whole paragraph was  infected
    by a misunderstanding. The mother gave evidence that her  daughter  did
    not know about the rape. The daughter was asked if she had the mother's
    statement and she said yes. It  was  redacted.  The  inconsistency  was
    wrong in fact and therefore wrong in law. It led an error  in  relation
    to the credibility assessment of the claim of rape.  The  tribunal  was
    left with the impression that either the daughter had lied or that  the
    mother had lied about  whether  she  had  lied  about  talking  to  her
    daughter about the rape. It was not the Judge's fault.

11. With regard to Ground 5, it could not be argued that para 276 ADE could
    have been relied on  in  an  earlier  appeal.  There  was  an  unlawful
    decision and consequently the daughter reached her majority by the time
    of the appeal. In the consideration outside the Rules that entire  idea
    was absent from the decision. The treatment outside the Rules  did  not
    take into account that the delay was caused by the Respondent.  At  the
    date of the appeal hearing she was 18 years and she had been in the  UK
    for 8 years and 4 months. There was an unlawful decision on 12 February
    2014 and a lawful decision on 23 April 2015 which was a delay of a year
    and two months. If one assumed that the same factors were to  apply  if
    it had been heard 1 year and 2 months earlier she would have been in UK
    for 7 years and two months.

12. Mr Richards submitted that no material error of law  was  demonstrated.
    In relation to the issue of whether the Appellant was evangelical,  the
    Judge was criticised for the approach to question 16. She  pointed  out
    that the Appellant said "I don't preach - I did  not  get  involved  in
    converting  people"  and  that  was  significant.   The   point   about
    evangelical conduct was about converting people, the  type  of  conduct
    that was potentially going  to  bring  one  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities. The fact that her husband was accepted as  an  evangelical
    Christian was of no account. The key finding  by  the  Judge  that  the
    Appellant was not involved in evangelical conduct was well-reasoned and
    sound. In relation to paragraph  19  of  the  determination  there  was
    perhaps on a first reading, some confusion as to  what  the  Judge  was
    referring to when she mentioned country guidance but when one read  the
    paragraph as a whole and the references she gave it was clear that  she
    did not refer to any case law but country guidance in the  wider  sense
    and the one saw identified  which  was  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
    guidance on the  page  cited  and  in  essence  she  outlined  evidence
    submitted by the Appellant. She concluded that she  was  not  bound  by
    country evidence. Any proper reading of that paragraph must come to the
    conclusion that she was preferring one set of  country  information  to
    another.  There was nothing wrong with that. The section 8 point was of
    no account. She was obliged to take into account a delay and it was not
    a matter that she made a good deal of.  It  was  there  and  there  was
    nothing wrong with it.

13. The point about the daughter being unware of the rape allegation was of
    no significance. The Judge dealt with that issue in full  in  paragraph
    24 and concluded at the end of paragraph 24 that  she  found  that  the
    Appellant had not shown she was raped and that it was a claim  made  to
    bolster application. She then went on to add that there was  a  further
    inconsistency. That inconsistency had no bearing on a  conclusion  that
    had already been reached.  In  relation  to  Article  8  claim  of  the
    daughter, it was given full and detailed consideration  by  the  First-
    tier Judge who did not just look at the  Rules  but  conducted  a  full
    Razgar analysis. There was  considerable  analysis  with  the  daughter
    taking all matters into consideration that the decision to  remove  her
    and her mother  was  proportionate.  There  was  no  injustice  to  the
    daughter in how the Judge conducted her analysis. It should stand.

14. Mr Holt submitted that in relation to the daughter at paragraph 36  the
    Judge said the decision was finely balanced. Had there  been  a  slight
    difference either way it could have made a difference. On the last page
    of grounds the Judge had failed to have sufficient regard to the  value
    to the contribution she had made.  UE Nigeria v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [201] EWCA Civ  975  provided  that  the  fact  the
    community would lose something of value was  capable  in  principle  of
    affecting the balancing exercise. It was not possible to conclude  that
    it would not have been different. Normally it might be low  weight  but
    where it was described as far more finely balanced it was  likely  that
    the tribunal would have taken a different approach  had  these  factors
    been taken into account.

    Discussion and Findings

15. Ground 1 impugns the First-tier Tribunal's findings on the grounds that
    the Tribunal misapprehended or failed to  take  into  account  relevant
    evidence regarding the Appellant's account that she was an  evangelical
    Christian. At paragraph 16 of  the  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stated:

         "16. I do not accept that the  appellant  was  engaged  herself  in
         evangelical activities.  At  Q  16  of  the  asylum  interview  she
         specifically stated that  she  did  not  preach  and  did  not  get
         involved in converting  people  (AB  A44).  In  oral  evidence  the
         appellant stated that the only problem she had with the  report  of
         that interview was that it reported that she had  defaced  pictures
         of 'Buddhists' but that should have been interpreted as pictures of
         'Buddha'. She raised no other issues with the interpretation of the
         interview or its contents".

16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  then  considered  the  contents  of  two
    letters from individuals in Sri Lanka in  the  Appellant's  bundle  and
    found that they did not indicate "significant proselytising  activity".
    She also took account of a letter from the Appellant's  church  and  an
    email from a pastor from a Cardiff church and  found  that  neither  of
    them made mention of evangelical work. She found that the  contents  of
    that correspondence was similar to the activities  that  the  Appellant
    indicated that she took part in in Sri Lanka. She then found  that  the
    Appellant was a Christian  but  was  "not  engaged  in  any  particular
    evangelical work or activities and was not so engaged in Sri Lanka".

17. It is alleged that in coming to her conclusions the  Judge  selectively
    quoted from the Appellant's interview and failed to take  into  account
    the contents of her witness statement.  The  Appellant  was  asked,  at
    question 16 of the  interview,  "Were  you  preaching  Christianity  to
    anyone?" Her answer is recorded as "No I don't preach but  I  do  speak
    some time but I don't preach.  I  didn't  get  involved  in  converting
    people. I got involved in prayer meetings and everything". The issue of
    her activities was dealt with again at question 27 where she was asked:
    "You mentioned earlier a number of incidents that happened in Sri Lanka
    which were as a result of your husband's preaching. Were any  of  these
    incidents as a consequence of anything that you did?". She answered  "I
    was only involved with this thing, but people are  saying,  people  who
    come to my surgery they are  saying  are  being  given  medication  and
    converting them to Christianity. This is how a  lot  of  problems  were
    being created".

18. The Appellant's evidence in her witness statement  about  her  and  her
    husband's preaching is to  be  found  at  paragraphs  22  to  24.   The
    Appellant explains at paragraph 22 and 23:

         "22. To clarify, though I am not  a  Pastor  and  so  not  formally
         preaching, I was most certainly  involved  in  telling  people  the
         Gospel. It is very important to me as an Evangelical Christian that
         I do this. I did this mainly through my professional work,  because
         that is where I met the most people, and where I  had  the  largest
         audience. I would talk to everyone who came in. I would  give  free
         medicine out, and I would tell them I was doing so because  it  was
         part of my religion. It is part of my daily life to speak to people
         about religion and to try and convert people and save their  souls.
         As an Evangelist it is part of my faith to spread the good news  of
         the Lord, to convince people to convert to  Christianity.  Speaking
         to people of different faiths, to try to convert  them  is  a  very
         important part of my faith.

         23.  In Sri Lanka, I  was  able  to  convert  many  people,  people
         changed their lives, and I believe that I saved  their  souls,  and
         saved them from a life of sinning. I would evangelise  by  speaking
         to strangers I meet, people who visit my dispensary and others ..."

19. I find no error in the First-tier's conclusion that the  Appellant  was
    not herself engaged in evangelical activities. She appreciated that the
    Appellant's husband was a pastor and did not go behind the Respondent's
    concession in this regard [18]. It does not follow from this  that  she
    was obliged to accept that the Appellant was  involved  in  evangelical
    activities. She was not obliged to mention every piece of evidence.  In
    VW (Sri Lanka) v SSHD Case C5/2012/ 3037 Lord  Justice  McCombe  quoted
    with approval the comments of Lord Hoffmann in Biogen Inc v Medeva  Ltd
    1997 RPC 1 that:

         "the need for appellate caution  in  reversing  the  trial  judge's
         evaluation of the facts is based upon much more solid grounds  than
         professional courtesy. It is because  specific  findings  of  fact,
         even by the most meticulous judge,  are  inherently  an  incomplete
         statement of the impression which was made upon him by the  primary
         evidence.  His  expressed  findings  are  always  surrounded  by  a
         penumbra of imprecision as  to  emphasis,  relative  weight,  minor
         qualification and nuance... Of  which  time  and  language  do  not
         permit exact expression, but which may play an  important  part  in
         the judge's overall evaluation".

20. Lord Justice McCombe continued that "regrettably there is an increasing
    tendency in immigration cases, when a first  tier  tribunal  judge  has
    given a judgement explaining why he has reached a particular  decision,
    of seeking to burrow out industriously areas of evidence that have been
    less fully dealt with than others and then to use this as a  basis  for
    saying the judge's decision is legally flawed because it did  not  deal
    with the particular matter more fully. In my judgement,  with  respect,
    that is no basis on which to sustain a proper challenge  to  a  judge's
    findings of fact."

21. The First-tier Tribunal was cognisant of the issue to be resolved.  She
    set the relevant dispute of fact at paragraph 15  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's evangelical work. There was a clear  contradiction  in  the
    Appellant's evidence as  the  Appellant  was  recorded  as  stating  in
    interview that she had not been involved in converting  people  and  in
    her witness statement that she was able to convert many people  in  Sri
    Lanka. Whilst the Judge did not refer directly  to  the  statement  and
    this contradiction she referred to relevant evidence and  gave  reasons
    for  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  not  engaged   in   particular
    evangelical activities in Sri Lanka.

22. Ground 2 contends that the Judge failed to take into  account  relevant
    background evidence. I conclude that there is an error of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's approach to the background evidence submitted  by
    the Appellant. At paragraph 19 of the decision the First-tier  Tribunal
    stated:

         "The  appellant  has  provided  general  reports  of  attacks   and
         discrimination against Christians in Sri Lanka. These are anecdotal
         and I find that they do not persuade me to depart from the  Country
         Guidance provided. The country guidance at  page  AB  D68  confirms
         that there are attacks on religious minorities including Christians
         in Sri Lanka. These are not state actors and  the  issue  therefore
         will relate to sufficiency of protection."

23. I do not consider that  the  Judge  confused  the  background  evidence
    provided with Country Guidance issued by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  It  is
    obvious from her explicit reference to the document at AB D68 that  she
    was referring to a document produced by the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
    Office and was using the term "country guidance" to describe background
    evidence.  However, I conclude that her reference  to  other  evidence,
    including the  US  State  Department  International  Religious  Freedom
    Report on Sri Lanka from 2014 as  "anecdotal"  taken  together  with  a
    reference to the Foreign and Commonwealth's report as being effectively
    binding on her means that she failed to weigh up  the  evidence  evenly
    and appropriately and rejected relevant evidence. Clearly this evidence
    was material because it related to sufficiency of protection.

24. I do not find that the Judge erred as contended in Grounds 3  or  4  in
    relation to her adverse finding regarding the delay in the  Appellant's
    asylum application. The impugned  findings  are  at  paragraph  19,  in
    relation to general credibility and at paragraph 24 in relation to  the
    finding that the Appellant was not raped. The First-tier Tribunal found
    at paragraph 19:

         "In particular I  note  that  at  Q34  of  the  appellant's  asylum
         interview, when asked what had changed since  the  refusal  of  her
         husband's original asylum claim, the appellant did not mention  any
         issues regarding a worsening situation in  Sri  Lanka,  but  rather
         stated that her children wished to go to University and were unable
         to get the funding due to their immigration  status.  I  find  that
         this was an honest answer given by the appellant and that  this  is
         the reason for her claim at this time rather than any worsening  of
         the situation regarding Christians in Sri  Lanka.  I  find  no  new
         intervening cause for  the  asylum  application  made  in  2014  as
         compared to the one in 2008."

25. According to the  chronology  produced  by  the  Appellant  she  was  a
    dependent on her husband's asylum claim which was refused in March 2008
    and according to the grounds, not appealed. She then claimed asylum  in
    her own right in 2013 after her marriage with her  husband  broke  down
    and he was charged with sexual offences. The Appellant  argues  in  her
    grounds that the general  adverse  credibility  finding  at  19  placed
    significant weight on an immaterial matter because she had not returned
    to Sri Lanka and could  not  be  expected  to  describe  the  worsening
    situation there. I do not find any error in the Judge finding that  the
    delay in claiming asylum damaged the Appellant's credibility.  She  did
    not make a claim between 2008 when her husband's claim was refused  and
    2013. I  find  no  flaw  in  the  Judge's  reasoning  and  it  was  not
    unreasonable for her to conclude that she could have claimed earlier.

26. I also find that her findings  at  paragraph  24  with  regard  to  the
    Appellant's delay in mentioning  that  she  was  raped  are  adequately
    reasoned and open to her on the evidence. She rejected the  Appellant's
    account not to have mentioned it earlier because she found  the  reason
    given, namely that she was interviewed  by  men,  did  not  provide  an
    answer as she had been seeing a therapist since 2013 who  was  a  woman
    and had not disclosed the rape to her until 2016. She  notes  that  the
    therapist did not provide a reason why it would  not  be  disclosed  to
    her. However, it is clear, as asserted in Ground 4, that the First-tier
    Tribunal founded an adverse credibility finding on the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had stated that her daughter knew  nothing  about  the  rape.
    This is mentioned in the body of her  reasoning  at  paragraph  24  and
    amplified  at  paragraph  25  where  she  cites   it   as   a   further
    inconsistency. I accept Counsel's explanation in the grounds  that  the
    daughter was given a redacted statement of  her  mother's  to  read  to
    protect her from this knowledge and the  Judge  would  not  have  known
    this. The Judge states at paragraph 25 that the inconsistency  consists
    in the fact that the Appellant stated that her daughter was unaware  of
    the allegation of rape and that  submissions  should  be  made  in  the
    absence  of  the  daughter  but  that  this  was  contradicted  by  the
    daughter's evidence which was to the  effect  that  she  had  read  her
    mother's statement where rape was mentioned  for  the  first  time.   I
    accept that the Judge, although no blame cane been attributed  to  her,
    made an adverse credibility finding in part on the basis of  a  mistake
    of fact as the daughter's knowledge of her mother's rape. I  find  that
    it played a material  part  in  the  Judge's  reasoning  and  therefore
    amounted to an error of law (E and R (2004) EWCA Civ 49).

27. Ground 5 impugns the findings of the First-tier Tribunal on two grounds
    in relation  to  the  proportionality  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    daughter, firstly the delay in lawful decision making and  secondly  in
    relation to the daughter's contribution to society. It is clear that at
    the date of the application in January 2014 she could not have met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE (iv) because she had only been in  the
    UK for 6 years and 3 months. The Appellant argues however, that because
    an unlawful decision was made on in February 2014 denying the Appellant
    an in-country right of appeal, the appeal did not take place until  she
    had reached 18. In R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982  the  Court  of  Appeal
    held that a decision on proportionality of an Immigration Judge who has
    properly directed himself can only be overturned on reconsideration  on
    traditional public law grounds.  In Akaeke (2005) EWCA Civ 947 Carnwath
    LJ observed that the  weight  given  to  a  relevant  factor,  such  as
    unreasonable delay of the Home Office, was a matter for  the  Tribunal,
    "subject  only  to  the  constraints   imposed   by   judicial   review
    principles".

28. The First-tier Tribunal's decision rightly assessed the daughter's case
    outside the Rules and the proportionality exercise is well-reasoned and
    took account of the fact that the daughter was a highly gifted  student
    with strong ties to the UK. The Judge noted that the balancing exercise
    was 'finely balanced'. However, there is no mention  of  the  delay  in
    decision making due to an unlawful decision having  been  made  by  the
    Respondent and the impact of such a delay  on  the  daughter's  private
    life. Whilst it cannot be said that the daughter would  have  succeeded
    in her appeal were she still a child had a lawful  decision  been  made
    earlier, I consider that the delay was a relevant  factor  particularly
    in the life of a child where  it  could  potentially  have  tipped  the
    scales, the  balancing  exercise  having  been  identified  as  "finely
    balanced".   It was a material factor that was not taken into  account.
    I do not consider however that the Judge erred in failing  to  consider
    the ratio of UE (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [201] EWCA Civ 975 where the court found that positive contribution  to
    the community was a public benefit  is  capable  of  being  a  relevant
    consideration   when   assessing   the   public   interest   side    of
    proportionality under Article 8. The argument was  not  articulated  in
    the skeleton argument nor is it noted in the record of proceedings.  It
    was not a point so obvious that the Judge was obliged to have regard to
    it of her own motion.

29. For the reasons given, however, I find that there were errors of law in
    the decision of the First-tier tribunal. I find that in  the  light  of
    the fact-finding required it  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I  set  aside  the  decision  in  relation  to  the  Refugee
    Convention but preserve the finding of fact that the Appellant was  not
    engaged in evangelical activities. I set aside the decision in  respect
    of the daughter under Article 8.



Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing as set out in  paragraph
30 above.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of her family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Dated 30 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
