
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07869/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 November 2016                  |On 23 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     KB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lewis, Counsel, instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, KB, was born in 1983 and is a male citizen of Sri Lanka.
     He appeals  against  a  decision  by  the  respondent  to  refuse  the
    appellant asylum and to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Carroll) which, in
    a decision promulgated on 8 September 2016 dismissed the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The basis of the appellant's  claim  is  summarised  briefly  by  Judge
    Carroll at [12]:

         "The core of the appellant's claim is  that  he  was  a  low  level
         activist on behalf of the LTTE (digging bunkers, for example, for a
         period of one year only between 2008 and 2009).  He claims to  have
         three sisters and that one of his sisters (L) was  an  LTTE  member
         who was arrested in 2009 and detained for a period of  four  years.
         He said at the hearing that  she  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
         approximately one month ago.  He claims also that  his  father  was
         killed because he was in the LTTE.  The appellant  himself  had  no
         difficulties with the authorities until 2014 when he  was  arrested
         and detained after the authorities found his number on  the  mobile
         phone of one, Appan, from whom the appellant bought  rice.   Having
         found  [the  appellant's]  number  on  Appan's  mobile  phone,  the
         appellant was then arrested, detained and tortured."

 3. The judge did not find the appellant's evidence to be credible at  all.
    The judge gave his reasons at [13].  The appellant claimed that he  was
    arrested by the army and sent to prison on 29 June 2014 until September
    of that year.  A bribe was paid to facilitate the  appellant's  release
    from prison.

 4. The  appellant  advances  two  grounds  of  appeal.   The  first  deals
    primarily with the judge's treatment  of  the  medical  evidence.   The
    grounds also challenge the judge's  treatment  of  the  evidence  of  a
    lawyer in Sri Lanka [13(f)] which, the appellant  contends,  the  judge
    unreasonably rejected.  Likewise, the appellant asserts that the  judge
    should not  have  rejected  as  "self-serving"  evidence  from  "family
    members".  The judge attached weight to the fact that  the  appellant's
    sister (see the reference to her above) whilst in  the  United  Kingdom
    did not attend court nor did she give any written evidence.  The second
    ground of appeal challenges the judge's  application  of  the  relevant
    country guidance (GJ (Post civil war  returnees)  [2013]  CG  UKUT  319
    (IAC)).  The judge had failed to evaluate the  level  of  risk  to  the
    appellant on the basis that he may be perceived to be a threat  to  the
    integrity of the Sri Lankan state.

 5. Save when I indicate to the contrary, all references below are  to  the
    subparagraphs of [13], the paragraph in which the  judge  set  out  his
    findings of fact.

 6. First, as regards the absence of written  or  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant's sister, Mr Lewis, for  the  appellant,  told  me  that  the
    sister had now been recognised as  a  refugee  in  the  United  Kingdom
    although I do not have evidence of that assertion.  The judge at  [(b)]
    had found it "frankly astonishing" that the sister had failed to attend
    in order to support her  brother's  appeal.   It  was  clear  from  the
    language used by the judge that he has attached weight to  the  absence
    of the sister when assessing the  credibility  of  the  appellant.   Mr
    Lewis submitted that this was an  incorrect  approach  given  that  the
    appellant's claim focused upon his perceived relationship with the LTTE
    activist Appan (see above).  I do not agree with that  submission.   It
    is true that the appellant's written  statement  deals  primarily  with
    Appan but, at his screening interview (quoted by Judge Carroll at  [3])
    the appellant had told the interviewer that "the army think that  I  am
    still an LTTE member because one of my sisters was a member".  In  that
    statement the appellant clearly establishes a  link  between  the  risk
    which he claims he faces in Sri Lanka and his  sister's  membership  of
    the LTTE.  The language used by the judge is perhaps extreme  ("frankly
    astonishing") but, given the link between the appellant's claimed  fear
    of persecution from the activities of his sister, I find it was open to
    the judge to attach weight to  the  fact  that  no  evidence  had  been
    forthcoming from her.

 7. The grounds criticise the failure of the judge  at  [(c)]  properly  to
    evaluate the evidence of the appellant's brother-in-law who did  appear
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The challenge has little  merit  given
    that the judge correctly noted that "the  appellant's  brother-in-law's
    [evidence] amounted to no more than hearsay."  Having read the  written
    statement of the brother-in-law, I conclude that he can add  little  by
    way of direct evidence to support the appellant's claim.  All that  the
    brother-in-law appears to know of the appellant's claims  is  what  the
    appellant himself told him.

 8. The judge characterises the letter from the attorney in Sri Lanka as "a
    self-serving document" [(f)].  In  the  context  of  all  the  evidence
    before the judge that was a finding available to him (see Ahmed  [2002]
    UKIAT 00439).  The grounds fail to address the findings of the judge at
    [(d)] where the Tribunal deals with a letter purporting  to  have  been
    written by a Member of Parliament for  Vanni  District  concerning  the
    appellant's claim to have done regular business with Appan and to  have
    been in contact with him by telephone from 2010 - 2014.   In  his  oral
    evidence, the appellant claimed to have spoken to Appan at least once a
    day and sometimes more often.  The letter from the MP, however,  refers
    to the appellant having to "communicate with  Gopi  and  Appan  without
    knowing them on his business purpose" (sic).  As the judge observes, it
    is "not apparent why it is said that the appellant did not  know  Appan
    since he had been doing business with him for a period of at least four
    years".  I find that the judge  was  entitled  in  the  light  of  that
    evidence and  for  the  reason  he  has  given  to  consider  that  the
    appellant's credibility had been diminished accordingly.

 9. At [(g)] the judge noted that at his asylum interview the appellant had
    found it "difficult to explain" details concerning his alleged  torture
    in Sri Lanka.  The judge observes that "the appellant is  not  recorded
    as having had any difficulty  in  explaining  details  of  the  claimed
    torture to the experts upon whose reports he relies."  The  grounds  of
    appeal assert that, given  the  nature  of  the  evidence,  it  is  not
    surprising that the appellant had  "difficulty  explaining"  about  the
    torture, clearly a sensitive and painful  matter  for  him.   That  may
    indeed be the case.  Having said that, it was not clear, on the face of
    the evidence, why the appellant should have had  difficulty  explaining
    details of the torture to the Home Office interviewer when  he  had  no
    such difficulty  when  asked  by  the  medical  expert.   However,  the
    interview had moved on and there were no further  questions  about  the
    torture after the appellant had been given a  brief  break  to  compose
    himself.  On the face of it, therefore,  the  judge's  observations  at
    [(g)] may be regarded as problematic although the judge  does  not  (as
    elsewhere in his assessment of credibility) give any indication  as  to
    how compelling he found this part of the evidence to be in his  overall
    decision to reject as unreliable the appellant's evidence.

10. The same is also true of the judge's observations at [(h)].  GP patient
    records put before  the  judge  recorded  that  the  appellant  "claims
    torture in SL in June 2014".  The judge  observes  that  the  appellant
    claimed to have been arrested (and tortured) on 29 June 2014.  Mr Lewis
    submitted that there was no obvious discrepancy between these two items
    of evidence.  That is indeed arguable but, equally, the judge does  not
    state that he found the evidence to be inconsistent or  that  he  found
    that the appellant's credibility had been  diminished  in  consequence.
    It may be argued that the observation regarding the June  2014  torture
    and the problems the appellant experienced at the asylum interview must
    have formed part of the judge's reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's
    credibility since they appear in a paragraph of the decision where  the
    judge sets out elements of the evidence to which he had  "had  regard".
    The question for the Upper Tribunal is whether the judge's comments  on
    these two matters are sufficient to vitiate the credibility  assessment
    as a whole.  For the reasons I have given, the appellant's challenge to
    the other parts of the credibility  assessment  are  not  well-founded.
    After careful consideration, I find that  the  contents  of  [(g)]  and
    [(h)] do not undermine the judge's overall assessment  of  credibility.
    As I have noted, the judge did not actually state  that  he  found  the
    evidence to be inconsistent, implausible or incredible; he has done  no
    more than set out details of the evidence which the appellant  has  not
    challenged on the basis that the account is factually incorrect.  In my
    assessment, the  findings  do  not  taint  the  overall  assessment  of
    credibility whilst the judge has given other  sustainable  reasons  for
    rejecting that credibility.

11. As regards the medical evidence, Mr Lewis submitted that Judge  Carroll
    had wholly failed to engage with this.  It is the case that  there  are
    lengthy medical reports from Dr Dhumad and Dr Martin.   Dr  Martin,  in
    particular, deals at considerable  length  with  the  scarring  on  the
    appellant's body.  Dr Martin  found  that  this  scarring  was  "highly
    consistent with intentionally caused injuries with a hot  round  object
    such as a cigarette butt as described  by  the  claimant".   Dr  Martin
    found that it  was  unlikely  that  the  appellant  had  inflicted  the
    injuries upon himself "in view of the position of some of the scars  on
    the dominant upper limbs (self-harm injuries are more common on the non-
    dominant limb)".  He concluded that the scarring was most likely caused
    by a third party.  He did, however, observe that it was "scientifically
    impossible to differentiate self-infliction of injuries by proxy (SIBP)
    from injuries caused by torture".

12. The judge has  not  engaged  in  any  great  detail  with  the  medical
    evidence.  Mr Lewis submitted that the judge had violated the principle
    set out in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367; the judge had  only  turned  to
    the medical evidence having already concluded that  the  appellant  was
    not a credible witness.  I reject that submission.  Indeed, having  set
    out the burden and standard of proof and recorded the appellant's  case
    and the reasons for the refusal of his asylum claim, the first part  of
    the evidence to which the judge then turned was  the  medical  evidence
    [11]  of  which  he  provides  a  detailed  summary  in  the  following
    paragraphs.  It is clear to me that the medical  evidence  was  at  the
    forefront  of  the  judge's  mind  when  he  began  his  assessment  of
    credibility.  It is true that the judge's assessment  of  that  medical
    evidence is brief:

         "Both Dr Dhumad and Dr Martin are, of course, entirely  reliant  on
         the account of events given to them by the  appellant.   Mr  Andres
         Martin does not rule out  the  possibility  of  self-infliction  of
         injuries  by  proxy  and  confirms  that  it   is   impossible   to
         differentiate such injuries from injuries caused by torture."

13. Albeit briefly, the judge has summarised the  evidence  of  Mr  Martin.
    There is no suggestion that the judge has rejected  the  evidence  that
    the appellant has scarring on his body which was probably imposed by  a
    third party and which is consistent with burns from a  cigarette  butt.
    Given that the judge does not challenge that evidence, a more  detailed
    analysis of the medical evidence may  have  added  little  because  the
    judge has concluded that the medical evidence  does  not  unequivocally
    support the appellant's account as regards causation of  the  scarring.
    To put it another way, the judge's finding that the appellant  had  not
    been arrested and tortured as he claimed is entirely consistent with Mr
    Martin's evidence because Mr Martin has  been  unable  to  exclude  the
    possibility that wounds were  inflicted  on  the  appellant's  body  by
    individuals acting with the appellant's consent; in  other  words,  not
    those individuals who the appellant claims tortured him in Sri Lanka.

14. Finally, whilst the judge has not dealt in any detail with the  country
    guidance, I consider that the second ground of  appeal  does  not  have
    merit.  Given  the  judge's  characterisation  of  this  appellant  (an
    individual who has not been arrested or detained or tortured by the Sri
    Lankan authorities who would have no reason at all to believe that  the
    appellant has been involved with separatist politics either within  Sri
    Lanka or abroad) there is no reason to suppose that the appellant would
    be "perceived to be" a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  either  at
    the point of his return or subsequently whilst living in his home  area
    of the country. Nothing in the current country guidance would  indicate
    that he is likely to be at real risk on return.

15. In the light of what I have said, I find that  this  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 21 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 21 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

