
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07288/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 20 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ABDUL RASHID
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:       Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:      Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) This determination refers to parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2) The SSHD appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Quigley, promulgated on  12  September  2013,  allowing  the  appellant's
   appeal against refusal of recognition as a refugee.

3) Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the grounds  contend  that  the  judge  either  (a)
   failed to resolve whether the appellant's 9 year delay in claiming asylum
   was damaging to his credibility in terms of section 8 of the 2004 Act, or
   (b) should have not  resolved  that  point  in  his  favour  without  his
   previous representative having been given an opportunity  to  comment  on
   the assertion that he gave advice discouraging the appellant from  making
   an asylum claim.

4) Paragraph 3 criticises the judge for finding that the  lack  of  evidence
   that the appellant is openly  gay  or  has  been  involved  in  same  sex
   relationships is not a good reason for  disbelieving  his  account.   Mrs
   O'Brien did not press this point.  It suffices to say  that  the  judge's
   view is not irrational or perverse.  Paragraph 4 is similarly  of  little
   merit.

5) The second substantial point in the grounds is at paragraphs 5-7.  It  is
   argued that the  judge  failed  to  resolve  contradictions  between  the
   evidence as it emerged from (a) a First Information Report  (FIR)  and  a
   newspaper article which the appellant produced on the day of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal hearing and (b) his evidence in his statements and  orally.



6) Finally, at paragraph 8 the grounds suggest that the judge misapplied  HJ
   (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 because she failed  to  consider  whether,  in  the
   absence of involvement in same sex relationships in the UK over the  last
   9 years, the appellant would "act discreetly for reasons other  than  the
   desire to avoid persecution".

7) Having heard from the Presenting Officer on the matter  of  the  previous
   representative not having been  asked  to  comment  on  advice  allegedly
   given, I indicated that I found this ground strained and far-fetched.  It
   did not appear that any relevant submission was made  by  the  Presenting
   Officer in the First-tier Tribunal.  It is possible  that  the  appellant
   might have been advised that a claim based on  being  a  homosexual  from
   Pakistan was not promising, particularly prior to HJ.    That  would  not
   necessarily have been bad advice.  The matter is far from so  clear  that
   the  appellant's  current  representatives  should   have   perceived   a
   professional duty to put it to previous representatives for  comment.   I
   doubt whether anything useful would have emerged from such an exercise.

8) I indicated to Mr Forrest that there  was  only  one  point  of  possible
   substance on which I required to  hear  from  him.   That  concerned  the
   judge's approach  to  the  documents.   Paragraph  37  relates  that  the
   Presenting Officer made submissions on  inconsistency  arising  from  the
   documents produced on the day.  The FIR said that Mr Akbar's  father  had
   taken the appellant to the police, but the appellant said that the police
   discovered him having sexual  relations  with  Akbar  in  a  field.   The
   appellant speculated (apparently in oral evidence) that perhaps  the  FIR
   was framed to protect Akbar, but the Presenting Officer submitted that if
   his parents had such influence the FIR would never have been served.  The
   judge at  paragraph  38  noted  that  it  was  possible  that  fraudulent
   documents could be obtained from Pakistan.  She  then  made  her  finding
   that the appellant is homosexual, and noted the background evidence about
   homosexuals in Pakistan.  At paragraph 42 she said,  "I  find  that  this
   appellant has been the subject of adverse attention in the past by reason
   of his sexual orientation".   That  conclusion  does  not  appear  to  be
   supported by any reasoning, and there is no apparent  resolution  of  the
   points put by the Presenting Officer.

9) Mr Forrest  had  provided  a  skeleton  argument.   In  relation  to  the
   documentary evidence, this argues that there was no duty on the judge  to
   conclude that every document from Pakistan was unreliable, and there  was
   no reason why she might not conclude in the circumstances  of  this  case
   that documents produced by the appellant were reliable.

10) That is correct as far as it  goes,  but  it  does  not  deal  with  the
   judge's failure to deal with the case put to her for the respondent.

11) Mr Forrest submitted that the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
   appellant had suffered adverse attention in the past in Pakistan  because
   of his sexual orientation, and the precise circumstances under which that
   arose were not the crux of the case.  There  was  only  an  inconsistency
   which could be disregarded, and which did not require a specific finding.



12) I reserved my determination.

13) Neither party referred directly  to  the  documents.   They  made  their
   submissions on the basis that there were an FIR and a  newspaper  report,
   and  that  these  do  diverge  from  the  appellant's  written  and  oral
   statements.

14) I find that the judge failed to explain why any weight should be  placed
   on the documents (or, indeed, why they were not  adverse  to  the  case).
   The failure was crucial, because the finding that the appellant had  been
   subject to adverse attention is the reason  for  finding  that  he  would
   resort to concealment of his sexual orientation as a result of a  genuine
   fear of persecution.

15) It seems that the appellant's  behaviour  in  the  UK  has  always  been
   discreet and low-key.  Without a finding based on past adverse attention,
   it might not follow that the approach explained in HJ leads to an outcome
   in his favour.  He has not argued that it suffices to prove  that  he  is
   from Pakistan and is homosexual.

16) The Presenting Officer's submission was that if material  error  of  law
   was found, the determination should be set aside in its  entirety  and  a
   fresh hearing directed in the First-tier Tribunal.

17) There was no suggestion for the appellant that if some findings of  fact
   were set aside, others might be preserved.  I find no scope for that.  It
   would lead to an artificial and difficult exercise in rehearing, and I do
   not think that favourable findings can be disentangled from those reached
   through error.

18) After the hearing I located on file  the  copy  FIR,  with  translation.
   This narrates that  Akbar's  father  reported  to  the  police  that  the
   appellant and his son were committing an unnatural offence in a field  of
   maize, following which "at hue and cry we reached the spot and  witnessed
   the occurrence".  A copy extract, with translation, from the "Daily  Jang
   Multan" reports that Akbar's father told the  newspaper  that  his  son's
   friend, the appellant, took his son from  his  house  and  sodomised  him
   against his  will,  leading  to  his  arrest  and  release.   The  father
   complains that the police have not [re]arrested the  appellant  but  "are
   putting pressure on us to compromise".  He appeals through the  newspaper
   to the Chief Minister of  Punjab  and  other  authorities  to  order  the
   appellant's arrest.

19) The appellant's statement on the other hand  is  that  the  police  were
   passing by the fields when  they  spotted  the  appellant  having  sexual
   relations with his friend.  The police kept them both overnight and  beat
   them.  They released his friend "because his  parents  were  wealthy  and
   bribed the police officer".  The appellant then arranged for  his  friend
   to pay a bribe and permit his escape, which was followed  by  the  police
   notifying all local police stations and advertising for his capture.

20) It is not surprising that  the  Presenting  Officer  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal thought that evidence raised some issues.  Direct  reference  to
   it reinforces my view that its nature, and the respondent's  submissions,
   required analysis and resolution by the judge, which is missing from  her
   determination.

21) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  nature
   of its error is such that none of its findings can stand.  Under  section
   12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement  7.2  the  nature  and
   extent of judicial fact finding necessary for the decision to  be  remade
   is such that it is appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.  The member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to  reconsider
   the case are not to include Judge Quigley.

22) No anonymity order has been requested or made.





                               [pic]
                                20 November 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
