
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA072872015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 March 2016                         |On 23 May 2016                    |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     HB
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by McGlashan
MacKay
For the Respondent:          Ms S Saddiq, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   Bradshaw dismissing an appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2) The appellant was born on [ ] 1984  and  is  a  national  of  Libya.   He
   claimed asylum primarily on the basis that he would be at risk on  return
   to Libya as an atheist.

3) According to the application for permission to appeal, the Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal accepted  that  the  appellant  was  an  atheist  but
   arguably erred by not assessing the appellant's fear of having to  answer
   truthfully questions about religion if he  returned  to  Libya.   It  was
   further arguable that the judge had not properly considered the report of
   an expert witness  and  had  not  properly  addressed  credibility  under
   section 8 of the 2008 Act.

4) At paragraph 86 of the decision, the Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   made findings in the following terms:

    "In considering all the evidence in the round I do not accept that  the
    appellant has a genuine fear of returning to Libya  because  he  is  an
    atheist.  I accept that the appellant, like the majority of his  family
    and in particular his parents, does not practise as a  Muslim  and  may
    not believe in God.  However, I do not accept that  the  appellant  has
    been a credible witness and has provided full and accurate  information
    to the respondent and to the hearing.   It  is  my  view  that  he  has
    artificially built upon this atheist issue to improve  the  chances  of
    success in his claim for asylum and  that  he  is  not  as  claimed  an
    individual who would behave in such a  way  in  Libya  in  relation  to
    publicly displaying an atheist belief so as to cause him to be at  risk
    specially from Islamic extremists.  It is my view that  had  this  been
    the case he would have specifically made reference to such  a  fear  in
    his screening interview, his first port of call  in  his  asylum  claim
    after he had been in the UK for almost eight years, yet he failed to do
    so.  His credibility,  as  already  referred  to,  is  also  materially
    adversely affected by his failure to claim asylum at  an  earlier  date
    and by his clearly untruthful reasons as to why he did not claim asylum
    at an earlier date.  It is my view that his credibility in  respect  of
    the issue of atheism is also adversely affected by the  issues  already
    referred to above in his asylum interview."


5) The judge then went on to consider an expert report by Dr  George,  which
   stated that  there  was  no  part  of  Libya  where  atheists  would  not
   potentially be at risk.  The judge then stated, at paragraph 92:

    "Considering the contents of Dr George's report, founded  upon  by  the
    appellant, even if this appellant was an atheist of the type  described
    by himself (and I do not accept  this)  the  appellant  has  failed  to
    persuade me to the necessary standard of proof that he would be at real
    risk on return of persecution because of  membership  of  a  particular
    social group namely as an atheist in Libya.  It seems  to  me  that  it
    would not be unduly harsh that the appellant return to Tobruk if he  is
    unable to return to his home town of Derna."


6) In the application for permission to appeal,  it  is  observed  that  the
   judge having accepted that the appellant did not practise as a Muslim and
   also that he may not believe in God, it was unclear  what  relevance  the
   other adverse findings, relating to the  appellant's  delay  in  claiming
   asylum and omitting to state at his screening interview  that  he  feared
   return due to being an atheist, would have on the appeal in the light  of
   the favourable findings made.  It was further said  that  the  judge  had
   misconstrued or misunderstood the appellant's case.  This  was  not  that
   the appellant would behave in a public manner by displaying  his  atheism
   but that he would have to conceal his atheism for fear of a real risk  of
   persecution.  Reference was made to the case of HJ (Iran) [2011] 1AC 596.



7) It was further pointed  out  in  the  grounds  that  notwithstanding  the
   expert's view that internal relocation would not lessen the risk  to  the
   appellant the judge held that the appellant  could  relocate  to  Tobruk.
   The evidence did not support this finding.

8) At the hearing before me Ms Saddiq accepted that the issue  arising  from
   the case of HJ (Iran) was not  considered  by  the  judge.   The  judge's
   failure to consider the effect of HJ (Iran) upon the appellant's  atheism
   was an error of law.

9) Having heard from Ms  Saddiq  on  this  point,  I  did  not  consider  it
   necessary to hear from Mr Winter.  I share the  puzzlement  expressed  in
   the grounds of the application for permission to  appeal  about  how  the
   judge was able to question the appellant's claim to be  an  atheist  once
   the judge accepted that the appellant did not practise as  a  Muslim  and
   might not believe in God.  It is possible the judge intended  to  make  a
   distinction between atheism and agnosticism but, if that was the  judge's
   intention, this was not made explicit and no reasoning  was  provided  to
   support it.

10) For practical purposes, the judge accepted that  the  appellant  was  an
   atheist.  The question then was whether this would give rise  to  a  real
   risk of persecution in Libya.

11) The judge noted that at his asylum interview the appellant said  he  did
   not discuss his atheism with friends in Libya because if he did  so  they
   would not be happy about it.  They would probably tell other people  that
   he was a non-believer or atheist and this would put him  in  a  dangerous
   situation.  He was asked about  his  fear  of  returning  to  Libya.   He
   responded that he would be questioned by a  tribal  militia,  or  even  a
   foreign militia, especially about the eight years for which he  had  been
   abroad.  He would be accused of having worked for  foreign  power,  or  a
   foreign country.

12) As stated in the application for permission to appeal,  the  appellant's
   fear did not arise from behaving in a way that would display his  atheism
   but from having to conceal his atheism.  The appellant ought  not  to  be
   expected to lie about his lack of religious belief because of a  fear  of
   persecution.  This is the point which arises from HJ (Iran).  A  directly
   related point was made by the Supreme Court subsequently in RT (Zimbabwe)
   [2012] UKSC 38, where it was confirmed that the principles set out in  HJ
   (Iran) applied to an asylum claim based on an imputed political  opinion.
   A person who would otherwise suffer persecution should not be required to
   take steps to evade it by fabricating a loyalty, which he or she did  not
   hold, to a brutal and  despotic  regime.   The  right  to  a  freedom  of
   thought, conscious and religion extended to those who held  no  political
   opinions, as well as to the committed activist.

13) What was said in (RT) Zimbabwe in relation to political opinion  applies
   equally to religious belief.  The appellant ought not to be  expected  to
   lie about his absence of belief, or to pretend to have a belief which  he
   does not hold, in order to avoid persecution.

14) The Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
   consider whether the appellant would be forced to lie about his  lack  of
   religious belief in order to avoid persecution.  Because  of  this  error
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

15) At the hearing before me the parties were agreed that the proper  course
   would be for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
   hearing at which the appellant's appeal could be properly assessed.

16) There is some confusion in the findings of fact made by  the  judge  and
   for this reason none of the judge's findings  should  be  preserved.   It
   will be for the new Tribunal to decide the issues of fact and whether, on
   the basis of those findings, the appellant has a  well  founded  fear  of
   persecution.

Conclusions

17) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

18) I set aside the decision.

19) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  before
   a different judge with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   In  view  of
the remittal of the appeal, however, and  in  view  of  the  nature  of  the
appellant's asylum claim, I consider it appropriate that an order should  be
made in the following terms.  Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I make an anonymity order.  Unless and  until  a
tribunal or court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any
form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
original appellant.  This order applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.
Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to contempt  of  Court
proceedings.




Signed                                             Date 20th May 2016



Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

