
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07297/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 20 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SC
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Neale, Counsel


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of SC who claims asylum.   This  order  prohibits
    the disclosure directly or indirectly (including by the parties) of the
    identity of the SC.  Any disclosure or breach of this order may  amount
    to a contempt of court.   This  order  shall  remain  in  force  unless
    revoked or varied by a Tribunal or court.



Introduction

 2. SC (whom I  shall  refer  to  as  the  "claimant")  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh who was born on 10 November 1991.   He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 6 June 2011 with a Tier 4  (Student)  Visa  valid  until  31
    December 2013.  That visa was subsequently curtailed  because  of  poor
    attendance.  As a consequence, the claimant's leave expired on 22  July
    2012.  On 7 July 2014, he claimed  asylum.   On  29  August  2014,  the
    Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum,  for
    humanitarian protection and under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.   On
    1 September 2014, the Secretary of State made a decision to remove  the
    claimant  to  Bangladesh  by  way  of  directions  under  s.10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

The Appeal

 3. The claimant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 9 February 2015,  Judge  James  allowed  the  claimant's
    appeal.  Although the Judge refers to allowing  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules, it is clear from reading the determination that  the
    judge allowed the appeal on  asylum  grounds  on  the  basis  that  the
    claimant's return to Bangladesh would breach  the  Refugee  Convention.
    The judge accepted that the claimant had been a supporter and member of
    the BNP in Bangladesh and had been subject to attack by  supporters  of
    the Awami League and that he was at risk from supporters of  the  Awami
    League on return and that the Bangladesh authorities would not  provide
    a sufficiency of protection from such attacks on return.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge had failed  to  give  any  or  any
    adequate reasons for his findings in favour of the claimant.

 5. On 4 March 2015 the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Parkes)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

 6. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

 7. The Secretary of State's challenge is on a single ground namely that in
    paragraphs 49-53 of his determination, the judge failed to give any  or
    any adequate reasons for his findings in favour of the claimant and his
    account of what he said had occurred in Bangladesh before coming to the
    UK.

 8. Under the heading "Findings and Conclusions," Judge James said this  at
    paragraphs 49-53:

         "49. I have looked at all the evidence in the round to include both
             written and oral evidence whether I have specifically referred
             to it or not and I make the following findings.

         50.  I am not satisfied that  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  is
             credible in all respects.  There are too many  inconsistencies
             to make  his  evidence  acceptable  without  question.   I  am
             satisfied that the Appellant is a supporter  of  the  BNP  and
             that he is following his family's political persuasion in this
             respect.  I am satisfied that he became a member of the Chatra
             Dal and later  the  Juba  Dal  being  the  youth  and  student
             branches of the BNP.  I am satisfied that  he  was  active  in
             promoting the BNP and was active in organising BNP events.   I
             am satisfied that he was appointed as a local official  be  it
             Organising Secretary of State or General Secretary for part of
             Chittagong and that he would have been  well  known  among  BP
             supporters and probably opponents of the BNP as well.

         51.  I am satisfied that he was subjected to an attack  from  Awami
             Legue supporters  on  7  November  2009.   I  have  noted  the
             inconsistencies in his accounts of this event but  accept  the
             core element of his evidence that he was attacked on that day.
              I  am  satisfied  that  he  received  injuries  on  that  day
             consistent with the scarring that he now has.  I am  satisfied
             that when this incident was reported to the police, whether by
             the Appellant or his brother, the police took no action.  I am
             unable to conclude that this was because  of  the  police  not
             taking action against Awami League personnel in general or the
             fact that the Appellant was unable to identify any  person  to
             the police.

         52.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  attack  on  the  Appellant   was
             politicised by the creation of a poster calling  for  revenge.
             While the Appellant was unaware of such a poster it  is  clear
             that the attack was  used  as  a  rallying  call  to  the  BNP
             supporters and brought his name into sharper political  focus.
             I am satisfied that as a result of this attack  the  Appellant
             and his family have made arrangements  for  the  Appellant  to
             travel to United Kingdom.  I have significant doubts that  the
             arrangements were entirely legitimate and it is clear that  on
             his arrival in the United Kingdom he was exploited by  whoever
             received him at the airport.  Since  arriving  in  the  United
             Kingdom he has been treated very poorly by many  of  those  he
             met   until   his   recent   involvement    with    charitable
             organisations.

         53.  I have read and reviewed the wealth of  documentary  materials
             supplied by the Appellant.   I  am  satisfied  that  political
             violence is well established in Bangladesh.  That violence has
             resulted in serious injuries and deaths.  I have noted  recent
             reports of the deaths of BNP supporters.  I am satisfied  that
             if the Appellant was returned to Bangladesh there  is  a  real
             risk that his history of support for the BNP  will  either  be
             remembered or will soon come to  light.   As  a  result  I  am
             satisfied that the Appellant would become a target  for  those
             opposed to the BNP and he would face  a  real  risk  of  being
             attacked for his political beliefs."

 9. Mr Richards, on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  submitted  that
    paragraphs 49-53 contained only "findings" but not any  "reasons."   He
    accepted that if the judge had given reasons elsewhere then that  might
    be sufficient but, he submitted, the judge had given no reasons earlier
    in his determination although  he  had  set  out  at  some  length  the
    evidence and the parties' submissions.  Mr Richards pointed out that in
    paragraph 50 in the first two sentences, the judge had stated  that  he
    was "not satisfied" that the claimant's evidence was  credible  in  all
    respects given that there were "too many inconsistencies" to accept his
    evidence without question.  Consequently, the judge  was,  Mr  Richards
    submitted, required to give reasons for his findings and in  paragraphs
    50-53 he had simply stated his findings.

10. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Neale made essentially three submissions.
     First, he accepted that the judge  was  required  to  give  sufficient
    reason and he drew my attention to the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in
    Shizad (Sufficiency of Reasons: Set  Aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)
    where it was stated in the head note that:

         "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which the appeal is determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
         makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge."

11. Mr Neale submitted that the judge's determination should be read  as  a
    whole.   He  had  set  out   the   evidence   including   the   claimed
    inconsistencies and  the  claimant's  explanation  in  some  detail  in
    particular in paragraph 28(a)-(x).  Further, the judge had set out  the
    submissions  of  both  the  respondent   at   paragraphs   33-38   and,
    importantly,  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the  claimant  at
    paragraphs  39-47  which  dealt  with  the  evidence  and  the  claimed
    inconsistencies in it.  Mr Neale drew my attention to paragraphs 14(a)-
    (f) of his skeleton argument for the hearing  before  me  in  which  he
    addressed each of the judge's findings in paragraphs 50 onwards and the
    evidence and submissions set out by the judge  which  entitled  him  to
    reach those findings.

12. I accept that the judge's determination has to be read as a whole.   Of
    course, as a matter of perfection a judge's  reasons  would  be  better
    placed in a single section of a determination leading to findings as  a
    result of reasons given. However, it is not necessary for  a  judge  to
    give reasons for his findings only in one place  and,  depending  on  a
    particular judge's style, sometimes reasons are dispersed throughout  a
    determination.  It is the adequacy or sufficiency of the reasons  given
    in the determination as a whole which is crucial.

13. Further, I accept, as Shizad points  out,  that  reasons  need  not  be
    extensive providing that they give a brief explanation on  the  central
    issues and conclusions or findings made by a judge.  As is often  said:
    a determination must  set  out  sufficient  reasoning  to  entitle  the
    parties (particularly the losing party) to know why they  have  won  or
    lost.

14. Despite Mr Neale's sustained arguments to the contrary, I am unable  to
    see any reasoning of significance in the  judge's  determination  as  a
    basis for his findings at paragraphs 50 onwards.  Certainly,  paragraph
    50 onwards contains only findings.  The case put by the respondent  and
    appellant respectively is set out in the determination at paragraphs 33-
    47.  However, the judge does not at any point explain  which  of  those
    submissions he accepts and which of those submissions he  rejects  and,
    importantly, why he did so.  It is not possible to say that  the  judge
    has simply accepted all  that  the  claimant  put  forward  by  way  of
    submission as the basis upon which positive findings of fact should  be
    made.  As the judge himself made clear in paragraph 50, he did not find
    the claimant credible in all respects because of inconsistencies in his
    evidence.   I  am  simply  unable  to  discern  any  reasoning  process
    indicating why the claimant's evidence has been accepted  or  rejected.
    Unfortunately,  reading  this  determination  neither  party  is  in  a
    position to know why they won or lost  and  I  am  in  no  position  to
    understand the basis of the judge's findings which, in essence,  emerge
    at paragraph 50 onwards in somewhat Delphic fashion.

15. Consequently, I am satisfied that the judge erred in law by failing  to
    give any or any adequate reasons for his  findings  in  favour  of  the
    claimant.

16. Mr Neale sought to retrieve the situation  by  relying  upon  something
    said by the Tribunal in Shizad.  That is set out in paragraph 2 of  the
    head note as follows:

         "Although a  decision  may  contain  an  error  of  law  where  the
         requirements to give  adequate  reasons  are  not  met,  the  Upper
         Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the  First-tier
         Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of  law,  the  fact-
         finding process cannot  be  criticised  and  the  relevant  Country
         Guidance has been taken into account, unless  the  conclusions  the
         judge draws from the primary data were not reasonably open  to  him
         or her."

17. Mr Neale relied upon  that  statement  and  submitted  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal could "perfect" the reasons by effectively stating that  Judge
    James' conclusions were ones reasonably open to him on the evidence.

18. Whilst I accept that the Upper Tribunal will not set aside  a  decision
    where the error was not material or could not have made  any  practical
    difference to the outcome of the appeal that is not the situation here.



19. In this appeal, the credibility finding of the  judge  is  flawed.   In
    order to apply the Shizad approach I would have to  be  satisfied  that
    the only factual  findings  open  to  the  judge  were  those  made  in
    paragraphs 50-53.  That would require the Upper Tribunal, in effect, to
    re-make the decision assessing the evidence in the  light  of  all  the
    submissions made.  It would not be a case where the  decision,  despite
    an error of law, would stand.  It  would  be  set  aside  and  re-made.
    Indeed, that was precisely what happened in Shizad where  the  Tribunal
    was considering an appeal where an error of law had already been  found
    and the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  had  been  set  aside.   The
    Tribunal in Shizad was re-making the decision.  Further, in doing so it
    was largely concerned with a factual matrix personal to  the  Appellant
    in that appeal which was accepted and was concerned with whether, given
    those facts, on the basis of the material the  Appellant  was  at  risk
    from the Taliban in Afghanistan.  Here there is no  underlying  factual
    basis because the error of law goes to the claimant's  credibility  and
    positive findings in respect of his account.

20. Despite, again, Mr Neale's reliance on Shizad, I do not  consider  that
    it can apply in this appeal in order  to  allow  me  to  "perfect"  the
    absence of reasons by the judge so as to conclude that his findings are
    necessarily the correct ones to make on the evidence.  A brief  reading
    of the evidence and the parties' submissions readily demonstrates  that
    the  fact-finding  is  nuanced  and  the  judge's  findings  were   not
    necessarily inevitable.  Consequently, I reject Mr Neale's submission.

21. Finally, Mr Neale submitted that if  I  did  not  accept  his  previous
    submissions, this was a proper case where the appeal should be remitted
    to the same judge to provide the reasons which  were  absent  from  his
    determination.  Mr Neale referred me to a decision of  the  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal in Hussein [2002] UKIAT 0469 in which he indicated  the
    IAT had done just that.  Unfortunately, I was not provided with a  copy
    of the IAT's determination and I have been unable to obtain  one  since
    the hearing.  But, in any event, even if I accepted that  in  principle
    remittal to the same judge is possible, as indeed it is in some  cases,
    it is not appropriate in this appeal.

22. I accept Mr Richard's submission that as  the  hearing  was  some  nine
    months ago on 8 January 2015, it would not be appropriate to ask  Judge
    James to revisit  the  appeal  and,  now  retrospectively,  supply  the
    reasons which led him to make the findings in paragraph 50  onwards  of
    his determination.  I agree that the passage of time has now made  this
    impractical and it is not in the interests of justice to  do  so.   The
    proper course in this appeal is that it should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo re-hearing before a different judge who can
    consider the evidence again and make appropriate findings with adequate
    reasons based upon that evidence.

Decision

23. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appeal on asylum grounds involved the making of an  error  of  law.
    That decision is set aside.

24. The proper disposal of the appeal, having regard to  paragraph  7.2  of
    the Senior President's Practice Statement, is that the appeal should be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo re-hearing  before  a
    judge other than Judge James.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
