

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07644/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 8 April 2015                       |                On 14 April 2015      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             GEBREMESKEL TESFAY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, of P G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination by a panel of the  First-
    tier Tribunal  comprising  Designated  Judge  Murray  and  Judge  Watt,
    dismissing on all available  grounds  his  appeal  against  refusal  of
    recognition as a refugee from Eritrea.

 2. The grounds firstly complain, in  a  rather  confused  way,  about  the
    panel's findings  on  whether  the  appellant  may  be  a  national  of
    Ethiopia.  Permission was not granted on that part of the grounds,  and
    Mr Bradley did not seek to pursue them.

 3. The grounds secondly assert error going to Article 8 of  the  ECHR,  by
    failing to realise the significance of the fact that by the time of the
    hearing the appellant's wife had been recognised as a refugee.

 4. The SSHD's response to the grant of permission says that  there  is  no
    error of law in the Article 8 outcome, but in generalised  terms  which
    fail to acknowledge the significance  of  the  refugee  status  of  the
    appellant's wife.

 5. The issue was raised before the First-tier Tribunal.   On the facts  as
    they stood at the date of the respondent's decision (18 September 2014)
    the appellant's case was hopeless under Article  8.   However,  as  the
    facts stood at the date  of  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (2
    December 2014) the appellant was entitled (subject to the usual checks)
    to a grant of status arising from his family life interests  and  those
    of his wife in accordance with the  respondent's  policies  on  refugee
    family members.  His removal to Eritrea could no longer be held to be a
    proportionate outcome.

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The appeal,
    as originally brought to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  is  allowed  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 7. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            8 April 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




