
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07514/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 April 2015                     |On 15 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                            MAYURESHAN KUGATHASAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mahmood counsel instructed by Oaks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N Malik promulgated on 15 December 2014 which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 27 October 1980 and  is  a  national  of  Sri
    Lanka.

 4. On 19 August 2013 the Appellant applied for asylum.

 5. On 31  July  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had been  arrested
         detained and beaten by the Sri Lankan authorities as claimed.

      b) It was not accepted that the Appellant was the subject of an arrest
         warrant in Sri Lanka.

      c) The Appellant did not fall within any of the risk categories as set
         out in GJ and others (post  civil  war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
         [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)

      d) Article 8 was considered and did not assist the Appellant .

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Malik ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision. The Judge found :

      a) The Appellant's account was  not  credible  due  to  discrepancies,
         inconsistencies and the implausibility of his claim.

      b) The Appellant's account of his detention  and  arrest  by  the  Sri
         Lankan authorities was not credible.

      c) At its highest she found his account of his dispute with  the  Vice
         Chancellor  of  the  University  where  he  worked   was   internal
         university  politics,  an  employment  dispute  falling  short   of
         persecution.

      d) It was incredible that given his claim to have  been  arrested  and
         detained and tortured that he would simply have been released.

      e) It was not credible that given his claim that he  was  of  interest
         because of repeated visits to the uK and his  brothers  links  with
         the LTTE the authorities would have waited so long to arrest him.

      f) The documents produced in relation to the strike at the  university
         did not name him.

      g) The email relied on from an academic colleagues did not support his
         claim.

      h) In making her findings the Judge took into account the report of Dr
         Smith the country expert. She noted that he felt unable to  comment
         on the plausibility of the Appellant's claimed release against  his
         claimed background in the absence of further  information  such  as
         police records. While he stated that the  authorities  had  made  a
         conscious effort to increase surveillance  of  the  Tamils  in  the
         diaspora there was no suggestion  by  the  Appellant  that  he  had
         engaged the sort of activities referred to. He also did not suggest
         that the Appellant would be of interest to the authorities  because
         of the time he had spent in the United Kingdom.

      i) She found the letter produced  from  his  father  and  the  Eastern
         Province Council member contained inconsistencies with his account.

      j) The Appellant's new evidence relating to being asked to deliver  an
         envelope to India for a well known member of the LTTE was  credible
         or supported by the photographic evidence he produced.

      k) The medical evidence  produced  in  relation  to  his  brother  was
         underpinned by a factual matrix  that  was  inconsistent  with  his
         claim.

      l) The GP records in so far as they recorded  that  he  suffered  from
         poor sleep, foot pain and stress and had reported PTSD in May  2014
         did not suggest that such  conditions  arose  out  of  the  claimed
         history in Sri Lanka.

      m)  She took into account the caselaw of GJ.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged which argued that :

      a) The Judge failed to direct herself as to the standard of proof that
         she applied to the evidence.

      b) The  Judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the  evidence  of  the
         Appellant's GP.

      c) The Judge failed to address the article by Dr Juliet Cohen who gave
         guidance in relation to the assessment of the credibility of asylum
         seekers.

      d) The Judge failed to give adequate weight to the expert report of DR
         Smith.

 8.  On 12 January 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Cheales  gave  permission
    to appeal.

 9. There was a rule 24 response from the Respondent in which they argued:

    (a)    The Judge directed herself appropriately.

    (b)    The Judge referred to the refusal letter in which  the  standard
         of proof is set out and also relied on the case of GJ in  which  it
         was  set  out.  Further  the  standard  of  proof   was   set   out
         unambiguously in paragraphs 61-63.

    (c)    The weight to be given to the experts report was  a  matter  for
         the Judge.

    (d)    The medical evidence did not impact on  the  credibility  issues
         referred to by the Judge. There was no rule of  law  requiring  the
         Judge to set the report out in any particular order. The report did
         not assist the Appellant.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Mahmood  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) He relied on the skeleton argument and the grounds  drafted  by  ms
         Rothwell of counsel dated 24 December 2014.

      b) It was not enough for the Judge to refer to the refusal letter  and
         a case in which the standard of proof was  set  out.  Something  as
         fundamental as the standard of proof must be  referred  to  in  the
         decision and if it was not set out it cannot be assumed that it had
         been taken into account.  This  was  the  case  even  where  as  he
         accepted it was a very detailed determination  written  by  a  very
         experienced Judge.

      c) Paragraphs 61-63 did not  include  the  standard  of  proof  to  be
         applied.

      d) In relation to the medical evidence the Judge in  this  case  found
         that the Appellant was not credible and only later referred to  the
         medical evidence. She should have looked at  the  medical  evidence
         first and then used it as a tool in the assessment of credibility.

      e) Paragraph 58 which deals with the medical  evidence  did  not  make
         sense and was difficult to follow.

11. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Harrison submitted that :

      a) He relied on the detailed Rule 24 response.

      b) It was clear that the Judge had the correct standard  of  proof  in
         mind at all times and it was in addition referred to in the caselaw
         on which she relied.

      c) In relation to the medical evidence when red as a  whole  Paragraph
         58 made sense.

12. In reply Mr Mahmood on behalf of the Appellant submitted :

      a) The Doctor did say at pages 161-163 of the bundle that the findings
         arose out of what happened to him in Sri Lanka.

The Law

13.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. In Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367, a  case
    relied on by the Appellant  ,  Buxton  LJ  said  this  in  relation  to
    challenging such findings:

         "Where, as in this case, complaint is made of the reasoning  of  an
         adjudicator in respect of a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
         credibility), particular care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
         criticism is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and
         does not merely reflect a feeling on  the  part  of  the  appellate
         tribunal that it might itself have taken a different  view  of  the
         matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."

15. I also remind myself of what was said in Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1
    WLR 1360 by Lord Hoffmann at p. 1372 that

         "The exigencies of daily court room life are such that reasons  for
         judgment  will  always   be   capable   of   having   been   better
         expressed...... These reasons should  be  read  on  the  assumption
         that, unless he has demonstrated the contrary, the judge  knew  how
         he should perform his functions and which matters  he  should  take
         into account.  This  is  particularly  true  when  the  matters  in
         question are so well known as those specified in section 25(2)  [of
         the Matrimonial Proceedings Act 1973]. An  appellate  court  should
         resist the temptation to subvert the principle that they should not
         substitute their own discretion for that of the judge by  a  narrow
         textual analysis which enables them to claim  that  he  misdirected
         himself."

Finding on Material Error

16. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

17. This appeal was against a refusal  of  an  asylum  claim  made  by  the
    Appellant a central feature of which was a claimed history  of  arrest,
    detention and torture by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  arsing  after  a
    dispute at the University where he worked and the  claimed  involvement
    of his brother in the LTTE.

18. Neither  Ms  Rothwell  in  her  grounds  or  Mr  Mahmood  in  his  oral
    submissions directed me to any authority which states  that  it  is  an
    error of law for the Judge not to include in his or  her  decision  the
    burden and standard of proof to be applied in an asylum case. There  is
    no part of the decision that I have been directed to that suggests that
    the Judge, who is as Mr Mahmood acknowledged a very experienced  Judge,
    has applied the wrong standard in assessing the evidence.

19. Moreover I am satisfied that the Judge has directed  herself  correctly
    as to the law in paragraphs 61-63 of her decision and those  paragraphs
    include a brief statement of the  standard  of  proof  in  relation  to
    asylum ('a well founded  fear'  in  paragraph  61)  ;  in  relation  to
    humanitarian protection ('a real risk' paragraph 62 and 63 ) . Moreover
    the Judge I am satisfied was well aware that she was looking at whether
    it was reasonably likely that what the Appellant said had  happened  to
    him had indeed occurred as she set out in detail the CG case of  GJ  at
    paragraph 60(ix) of her decision which includes the reminder  that  the
    standard is a reasonable degree of likelihood.

20. In relation to both In relation to the medical evidence which the Judge
    deals with in paragraph 58 I find the paragraph in question is clear as
    to the Judge's reasoning for finding that the medical evidence did  not
    assist her. The GP records which the Judge read record  claims  by  the
    Appellant of poor sleep pattern, stress and foot pain. The remit of the
    medical expert was making findings relating to a claimant's physical or
    psychological condition and establishing whether it was consistent with
    the claimant's account of events: the Appellant's  GP  simply  recorded
    the Appellant's symptoms and I have also read the records and reject Mr
    Mahmoods suggestion that anywhere the Doctor draws any conclusion as to
    whether those  symptoms  were  consistent  with  what  he  claimed  had
    occurred in Sri Lanka. Indeed the Judge may have drawn another  adverse
    inference from the fact that the Appellant told  the  doctor  that  the
    foot pain was a result of being beaten by the Police (page 165  of  the
    bundle) as opposed the military  intelligence  which  is  what  he  now
    claims.

21. In relation to the expert evidence of Dr Smith the  Judge  makes  clear
    that this has been taken into account and refers to it in paragraph  54
    and again at 59 in assessing the credibility of the Appellant's claimed
    history. She was entitled to note that Dr Smith felt limited in  making
    a detailed comment on the credibility of his  claimed  history  without
    sight of other documents such as police records.

22. The Judge did not refer to the article from Dr  Cohen  of  the  Medical
    Foundation. This was a generic article giving guidance in  relation  to
    the credibility of asylum seekers. There  is  no  requirement  for  the
    Judge to detail every piece of evidence that she considered.

23.  I remind myself of what was said in Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
    set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) about the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to  be  given  in  a  decision  in  head  note  (1):
    "Although there is a legal duty to give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
    conclusions on the central issue on  which  an  appeal  is  determined,
    those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes
    sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge."

24. I find that the reasons given were adequate and the Appellant cannot be
    in any doubt about why the appeal was dismissed: the Judge did not find
    his claimed history of arrest detention and torture was credible as  it
    was undermined by a number of inconsistencies  and  therefore  applying
    the country guidance he did not fall into any risk category on return.

CONCLUSION

25. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

26. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 10.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
