
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07807/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th May 2014                                |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                   mr h h
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pirotta promulgated on 12th December 2013, following a hearing at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 4th December 2013.  In  the  determination,
    the judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who applied  for,  and
    was subsequently granted, permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and thus the matter comes before me.




The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan who was born  on  6th
    May 1978.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent  Secretary
    of State dated 20th June 2013 to refuse to  grant  him  asylum  and  to
    refuse to grant him humanitarian protection.




The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that when he claimed asylum in September 2008,
    he did so on the basis that he had joined the Taliban in 1998, was paid
    to fight for them until 2001, but was now at risk after  escaping  from
    the Taliban (paragraph 14) putting him at risk both  from  the  Taliban
    and from the government forces who are looking  for  people  associated
    with the Taliban (paragraph 29).  In  Afghanistan,  the  Appellant  had
    been a village leader.  He was then selected as  a  commander  for  the
    Taliban in 1998.  This was after the Taliban had killed his  father  in
    1996, who was also a commander in the Taliban, leading to the Appellant
    then replacing his father as a commander.




The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge did not find the Appellant to be a credible witness of  fact.
    She held that it was simply implausible for  the  Appellant  to  assert
    that he was selected as a commander for the Taliban in 1998  after  his
    father had been killed by the Taliban in 1996.  There were two  reasons
    for this.

 5. First, there was a gap of two years between  1996  and  1998,  and  the
    suggestion that there would be a vacuum in the leadership of a fighting
    body for two years was simply not credible.   Second,  the  Appellant's
    appointment as a commander was not credible, not only because he had no
    combat or leadership experience, but also because to appoint a man as a
    commander whose father had been killed, was not plausible lest he  held
    some animosity towards the Taliban and harmed  their  cause  (paragraph
    28).

 6. The judge also was not satisfied that the Appellant had discharged  the
    burden of proof upon him that the government was attempting  to  arrest
    him (paragraph 29).  The two witnesses who appeared on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant at the hearing, namely Mr F and Mr N were  not  plausible  in
    the evidence that they gave (see paragraphs 30 to  35).   It  was  true
    that the Secretary of State had delayed some  four  years  between  the
    making of the application in 2008 and the giving  of  the  decision  in
    2013 "but  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  has  suffered
    disadvantage or prejudice  by  the  delay  and  he  had  no  legitimate
    expectation of being permitted to stay in the circumstances" (paragraph
    43).

 7. Finally, consideration was given to the Appellant's  Article  8  rights
    "but he has not submitted any evidence  of  private  and  family  life,
    though he has been in the United Kingdom since 2007" and "there  is  no
    evidence of family life, dependency other than  normal  adult  ties  or
    friendships" and "there is no evidence of current  education  or  work"
    (paragraph 48).  The appeal was dismissed.




Grounds of Appeal

 8. The Grounds of Appeal state that the judge erred in  her  consideration
    of the Article 8 claim  because  she  did  not  adopt  the  five  stage
    approach recommended in Razgar [2004] 2 AC  368,  and  failed  to  give
    proper consideration to the unexplained delay in the Respondent dealing
    with the Appellant's application.

 9. On 14th January 2014, permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that  consideration  of  the  alleged   delay   in   the   Respondent's
    consideration of the Appellant's application was arguably inadequate.

10. On 21st February 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that the Appellant's account  was  not
    credible and the judge had given several adequate  and  cogent  reasons
    for finding that the Appellant was  lacking  in  credibility.   In  any
    event, as far as Article 8 was concerned  the  case  of  Nagre  and  MF
    (Nigeria)  make  it  clear  that   there   have   to   be   "compelling
    circumstances" for an Appellant to succeed under Article 8.




Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 16th May  2014,  Mr  Bedford,  of  Counsel,
    appeared on behalf of the Appellant.  He handed up a very well compiled
    bundle of authorities, containing nine decisions,  which  he  carefully
    took me through.  Mr Bedford had three submissions before  me.   First,
    there was the manner in which the judge had made her final conclusions.
     She had ended with  the  statement  that,  "the  Appellant  is  not  a
    credible witness  and  I  reject  the  claim  that  he  was  sought  as
    implausible ..." (paragraph 39).  Mr Bedford submitted that it was  not
    enough for the judge  to  say  that  the  Appellant  was  "implausible"
    because proper reasons had to be  given  for  why  his  account  lacked
    credibility.  This had not been done in the preceding paragraphs of the
    determination from paragraph 31 onwards to paragraph  38.   Mr  Bedford
    relied upon the well-known judgment of HK [2006] EWCA Civ. 1037,  which
    appeared at Tab 4 of his bundle.

12. That was a case, submitted Mr Bedford, where the court had referred  to
    the determination  of  the  Tribunal  below  as  being  one  which  was
    described as being a "careful decision" (see  paragraph  31),  and  the
    court had gone on to consider  the  approach  to  credibility  finding,
    which was directly relevant to the instant case (see paragraphs  33  to
    41 in particular).  It had said that "the Tribunal has, quite  rightly,
    given its reasons for not believing HK's evidence, and it is  incumbent
    on us to see whether those reasons bear analysis" (para 33).  Yet,  the
    court has still found the determination below to be in error.

13. Second, submitted Mr Bedford, there were two witnesses in  the  present
    case who had appeared on behalf of the Appellant.  They  were  referred
    to in the determination by the judge as a "Mr F"  and  a  "Mr  N"  (see
    paragraphs 32 to 33).  Yet, the judge  dismissed  their  evidence  even
    though she was unable to say that their credibility was impugned in any
    way.  In HK there were lessons to be drawn in this respect as well (see
    paragraphs 46 to 48) as the Court had referred to cases such  as  these
    "will normally involve an appellant  from  a  very  different  cultural
    background from that of the Tribunal" (para 46).  What was important in
    the instant case was that the Appellant's story was not contradicted in
    any way by the background evidence.  Third, there was the  question  of
    Article 8 rights.

14. The judge had failed to follow the "Razgar principles", when making her
    decision at paragraphs 48 to 49, where she had simply  said  that  "the
    Appellant sought to engage Article 8  but  he  has  not  submitted  any
    evidence of private and family life though he has been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2007" (paragraph 48).

15. Mr Bedford submitted that it was accepted that the  Appellant  did  not
    fall under paragraph 276ADE(v), but he had applied  in  2008,  and  his
    application had only been rejected in 2013, several  years  afterwards,
    and corrective relief should now be given him (see  EA  (Afghanistan)),
    because the Appellant's claim had not been determined within one year.

16. In reply, Mr Smart submitted that  he  would  rely  upon  the  Rule  24
    response.  This was a case where the Appellant was simply not credible.
     In HK [2006] EWCA Civ.  1037  the  evidence  regarding  the  appellant
    concerned "some aspects of this evidence  which  might  otherwise  have
    seemed dubious (eg: the existence of the  Wunde,  the  initiation,  the
    scarring on the chest, the use of biting ants,  the  presence  of  body
    parts and three leaves of the path, the presence of a  Temne  speaker)"
    where cultural knowledge was essential (para 41). This is  because  the
    Appellant's case was that that some men had taken the Appellant  for  a
    walk, dug a hole in the ground, and forced him to put his private parts
    into the hole, thus enabling the ants in the forest to bite away at him
    - all of which was  designed  to  amount  to  some  character  building
    initiation ritual.  The judge disbelieved  this  account.   The  expert
    said it was plausible.

17. The Court of Appeal said that the judge should not have disbelieved  an
    improbable story from the advantage point of  a  judge  in  the  United
    Kingdom, but should have taken into account what was said in the expert
    report.  Here there  was  no  expert.   There  is  no  question  of  an
    improbable story.  There is simply the question as to the judge  making
    findings of fact on the basis of what the  witnesses  themselves  said.
    The fact was that the judge's findings were extremely  thorough.   This
    is clear from paragraph 28 of the determination.  At paragraph 32,  the
    judge makes findings that were entirely open to her.

18.  Two  witnesses  had  turned  up  at  the  hearing,  and  Mr  Bedford's
    submissions were that witnesses would not willingly perjure themselves.
     However, perjury was not the issue.  What the judge found  as  a  fact
    was that one of the witnesses  "gave  quantitive  descriptions  of  the
    location of the meeting" (paragraph 33).  It was difficult to  see  why
    this was not a finding that the judge could make.

19. Finally, as far as Article 8 was concerned there was a wealth of recent
    case law in the form of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640, Nagre, MF  (Nigeria)
    and others, which confirmed that the Immigration  Rules  on  Article  8
    were a complete code.  Only if there are compelling  circumstances,  is
    the case made out for going outside the Immigration Rules  and  looking
    at freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence.  In this case,  the  Appellant
    himself would offer no evidence at all  about  his  Article  8  rights.
    That left the question of delay alone.   However,  delay  was  relevant
    only insofar as it pointed to the existence and creation of  Article  8
    rights.  Delay in itself was not indicative of an Article 8  right  per
    se.

20. In reply, Mr Bedford submitted that he would summarise his arguments as
    follows.  First, if the Appellant's father was a commander then the son
    would be a commander regardless of the  experience  that  he  had  (see
    paragraph 32).  If the Secretary of State delayed in making a  decision
    then the judgment of Mr Justice Collins  in  FH  (at  paragraph  8  and
    paragraph 25) applied as did the case of MK (see Tab 5),  because  this
    was a case of unreasonable delay (paragraphs 34 and 35).  If the  delay
    was such as to be unacceptable and unreasonable then the direct  effect
    of this was that the decision  subsequently  reached  was  an  unlawful
    decision and on that basis alone it stood to be set aside.




No Error of Law

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside that decision.  I come to  this
    conclusion notwithstanding Mr Bedford's valiant efforts to persuade  me
    otherwise.  My reasons are as follows.  First, as far as  the  question
    of credibility findings were made by the judge, it is clear that  these
    findings were open to the judge, and were properly arrived at.  The nub
    of the claim is assessed at paragraph  28  of  the  determination.   Mr
    Bedford did not explain why the judge could not have concluded, as  she
    did, that if the Appellant's father died in 1996 as a commander of  the
    Taliban, there would be a gap of two years before the Appellant himself
    was made a commander.

22. The judge did not consider this to be plausible.  She did not  consider
    it to be plausible not least because, on the basis of  the  Appellant's
    case, the Taliban "then installed a man they did not know, who  had  no
    combat or leadership experience, when there are others who have already
    been members and had fought in the past, who  would  have  been  better
    suited to the task".  In fact, the judge also explains that, "nor is it
    credible that the Taliban would appoint a  man  as  a  commander  whose
    father they had killed, lest he held some animosity  towards  them  and
    harmed their cause" (paragraph 28).

23. In short, there is not one reason, but many  reasons,  that  the  judge
    gives for finding this claim to be inherently implausible.   The  judge
    was entitled to do so.  It has to be borne in mind that the Taliban had
    themselves killed the Appellant's father.  The judge held that  it  did
    not make sense for the Taliban to  then  appoint  the  Appellant  as  a
    commander in his father's place.

24. Second, there is a question of the  witnesses.   It  is  said  that  by
    analogy with what was said in HK, just because something is found to be
    unlikely, did not mean that it was not likely to have happened, and  my
    attention was drawn to the expert evidence in that case.  However,  the
    position here is markedly different.  There was the evidence of  Mr  F.
    It was said that this "witness  knew  his  father  but  the  only  link
    between the Appellant and M H is  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  the
    Appellant told the witness,  Mr  F,  that  that  man  was  his  father"
    (paragraph 32) and the judge held that, "it  is  not  credible  that  a
    commander would leave the scene of the fight and to  accompany  injured
    men to a clinic" (paragraph 32).  There was Mr N.  The judge  explained
    why his evidence was not credible (paragraph 33).  The  judge  referred
    to the "contradictory descriptions of  the  location  of  the  meeting"
    (paragraph 33).  The judge also  referred  to  the  fact  that  when  a
    description was given the "description was  completely  different  from
    the appearance of the man the witness met in the  mosque  in  Smethwick
    fifteen years later" (paragraph 34).

25. In any event, as the judge explains "the witness said he heard and  saw
    him only for a short time as the  other  man  was  doing  most  of  the
    talking, he did not pay much attention to the man who was not speaking"
    (paragraph 35).

26. Accordingly, it is not a question of a witness perjuring  himself.   It
    is simply a question of whether the judge can give decisive  weight  to
    the evidence given by such a witness.  In this  case,  the  judge  held
    that she could not give decisive weight in the manner required  by  the
    Appellant.

27. Finally, there is the question of Article  8.   There  are  two  points
    here.  First, the Appellant himself had "not submitted any evidence  of
    private and family life, though he has been in the United Kingdom since
    2007" and the judge held that "there is no  evidence  of  family  life,
    dependency other than normal adult ties or friendships" and  "there  is
    no  evidence  of  current  education  or  work"  (paragraph  48).   The
    Appellant could not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  was
    unnecessary for the judge to go outside the Immigration Rules  to  look
    at Article 8 jurisprudence from the Strasbourg court.

28. This is now clear following Nagre [2013] and  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  as
    well as most importantly Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640.  Second,  there  is
    the question of delay.  In this case, as Mr Smart submitted,  the  fact
    that the Appellant claimed to have been a commander in the Taliban  was
    something that possibly required a greater degree of  investigation  by
    the Secretary of State, than would otherwise have been  the  case,  and
    this led to some delay.  That may or not be true.  What is important is
    that this was not an  Appellant  who  previously  had  the  benefit  of
    falling under a particular policy, as would be  the  case  of  a  child
    whose family had to be traced under Regulation 6 by  the  Secretary  of
    State and where this had not happened.

29. This leaves simply the case of delay as a delay.  Delay per se  is  not
    evidence of Article 8 rights.  The logic of the argument in EB (Kosovo)
    by the House of Lords was to the effect that delay can enable a  person
    to cast down roots and to develop their Article 8 rights.

30. In this case the judge found that there was no such evidence  presented
    before her.  The judge was entitled to do so.  Delay in itself amounted
    to nothing.  Accordingly, there is no error of law.

Decision

31. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

32. Anonymity order made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 5th June 2014


