
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07913/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 April 2016                     |On 11 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                               mr Sajid Abbasi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V. Easty (Counsel instructed by Asylum Aid)
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, born on 2 August 1988, is a  citizen  of  Pakistan.   He
    appeals the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  R  J  N  B
    Morris) ("FTT") who in a decision and reasons promulgated on 2 February
    2016 dismissed his appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and  human
    rights grounds.



Background

2.   It was the appellant's claim that he was  at  risk  of  persecution  on
    return to Pakistan on the grounds of political  opinion  as  an  active
    member of the UKPNP.  He claimed that he was tortured by  the  Pakistan
    army in 2005. He claimed that there was a FIR  and  an  arrest  warrant
    issued following a UKPNP conference that he attended  in  May  2011  in
    Pakistan.

3.   The appellant's first appeal was dismissed in a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on  25  March  2013  by  Immigration  Judge  Batiste.   The
    appellant's account was found to  be  lacking  in  credibility  in  its
    entirety.

FTT hearing

4.   The appellant relied on new evidence including a  letter  from  Freedom
    from Torture counsellor /caseworker Ilana Bakal dated 8 May 2013, North
    East London Community care assessment dated 13  May  2013,  psychiatric
    report dated 13 May 2013, an expert  report  prepared  by  the  Medical
    Foundation dated 7 March 2014, and an expert report by Uzma Moeen dated
    13  September  2015  dealing  with  risk  on  return,  sufficiency   in
    protection and internal relocation.  At the hearing Mr Said Rafet Shah,
    a member of the UKPNP, gave evidence.  Further medical evidence  relied
    on was a letter dated 25 September 2015 from Dr Juliet  Cohen   of  the
    Medical Foundation and a further letter dated 25 September 2015 from Ms
    Ilana Bakal.

5.   At the hearing it was the appellant's case  that  he  had  adduced  new
    evidence in particular the medical  evidence  that  addressed  concerns
    raised by Immigration Judge Batiste and that evidence  was  capable  of
    displacing the negative credibility findings made.  Reliance was placed
    on the guidance in Devaseelan.

6.   In a lengthy and very detailed decision and reasons the FTT [35] found

         "(i) I have concluded that there are no events which have  occurred
             since the 2013  determination  which  are  to  be  taken  into
             account and therefore lead to a different conclusion;

         (ii) contrary to the submissions  made  in  the  skeleton  argument
             prepared on the appellant's behalf  that  there  is  now  good
             evidence in respect of the appellant's claim to be a victim of
             torture, for all the reasons set  out  in  this  decision  and
             reasons, I found that this was not the case;

         (iii)    whilst there is now further evidence such as  the  medical
             documentation and expert opinion,  for  the  reasons  set  out
             above, I find that these documents do not materially impact on
             the credibility findings in the 2013 determination;

         (iv) the additional evidence adduced by the appellant is either the
             same or does not change the position regarding the appellant's
             claim.  I therefore regarded the issues as settled in the 2013
             determination and I make my findings in  line  with  the  2013
             determination.  It is against this background that I  set  out
             below (for  the  avoidance  of  doubt),  my  findings  on  the
             appellant's claim."

7.   Thereafter the FTT assessed in detail the medical evidence  and  expert
    evidence and reached the conclusions as drawn by the Secretary of State
    in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  The FTT considered it to be  "bound
    by the findings of fact made by FTTJ Batiste".  The main  criticism  of
    the medical evidence was that it was based largely on  the  appellant's
    own account of alleged torture and that there was no  consideration  of
    alternative causes for the appellant's injuries.   The  FTT  approached
    the new evidence from the perspective that the appellant was found  not
    to be credible in the 2013  appeal  hearing  and  this  undermined  the
    "basis on which  the  medical  documentation  was  founded".   The  FTT
    further  found  that  whilst  the  Medico-Legal   Reports   constituted
    considerable weight of  evidence  compiled  by  two  clinicians  acting
    independently, "however it cannot be said to be  a  document  that  is,
    'corroborating the account of torture', because for all the reasons set
    out in the 2013  determination  and  as  set  out  further  below,  the
    evidence taken as a whole does not corroborate the appellant's  claimed
    political activities and history in Pakistan.  The fact  that  some  of
    his injuries could have been (but not  necessarily),  sustained  during
    torture does not render an untruthful account to  be  true."   The  FTT
    concluded that the new evidence did not change the findings made in the
    2013 determination.

Application for Permission to Appeal

8.   In lengthy grounds of appeal it was argued the FTT erred by failing  to
    consider the evidence in the round before reaching any conclusion as to
    credibility (Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367).  The FTT effectively  relied
    on the previous determination to undermine the medical evidence and had
    done so to the extent that it failed to consider the new evidence in  a
    fair and balanced way.  This  was  a  misreading  of  the  guidance  in
    Devaseelan.  The FTT erred by "a structural failing."  The  FTT  failed
    to consider the appellant's credibility based on the  medical  evidence
    before it that was not available to the Tribunal in 2013.

9.   Further the FTT  failed  to  make  findings  as  to  the  psychological
    evidence provided by Ilana Bakal which amounted to a material error  of
    law.

10.  The FTT failed to  apply  the  internal  guidance  2014  Asylum  Policy
    Instructions Helen Bamber and the Medical Foundation.

11.  The FTT failed to consider the expert country evidence as a  whole  and
    failed to  give  reasons  for  its  rejection  beyond  the  appellant's
    credibility.

Permission to Appeal

12.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Landes
    dated 18 March 2016.  Permission was limited  to  those  parts  of  the
    grounds headed "medical evidence" and "expert  country  evidence".   It
    was arguable that the judge  erred  in  her  approach  to  the  medical
    evidence by relying on the previous decision to undermine  the  medical
    evidence rather than considering that decision  in  the  light  of  the
    medical evidence now obtained.   It  was  arguable  that  the  Tribunal
    failed to consider at [21] the entirety of both doctors' reasoning  why
    the appellant's  injuries  had  not  been  caused  by  a  road  traffic
    accident.  It was arguable that the Tribunal erred in its  approach  to
    Ms Bakal's evidence on the grounds that the evidence was considered  in
    the light of the fact that the appellant's account of torture had  been
    found not to be credible rather than the  appellant's  account  in  the
    light of all the evidence including Ms Bakal's evidence which was  that
    the sexual assault had  been  in  the  context  of  the  other  torture
    inflicted on the appellant.  It was also  arguable  that  the  Tribunal
    erred in its approach to the country expert report;  the  Tribunal  did
    not appear to have considered the expert's conclusions about relocation
    when reaching her findings on this aspect.

Rule 24 Response

13.  In a response dated 29 March 2016 the  respondent  opposed  the  appeal
    arguing  that  the  Tribunal  correctly  followed  the  guidelines   in
    Devaseelan.  The first determination dated 2013 was the starting  point
    and it concluded that the Medico-Legal Reports  did  not  significantly
    assist the appellant's claim.  Further adequate reasons were  given  to
    support the findings made  in  respect  of  Ms  Bakal's  evidence.  The
    Tribunal gave adequate reasons for rejecting the expert evidence at [42-
    44].

Error of law hearing

14.  Both representatives made submissions which are set out in  the  Record
    of Proceedings.  Ms Eastey expanded on her skeleton argument before the
    First-tier Tribunal and  her  very  detailed  grounds  of  appeal.   Ms
    Fijiwala relied on the Rule 24 response and cited  the  following  case
    law HH (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 306, S v SSHD [2006] EWCA  Civ
    1153 and SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 155.

Discussion and decision

15.  I do not propose to set out the detailed submissions as  the  documents
    relied on more than adequately set out the relevant arguments.

16.  I am satisfied that the FTT materially erred in law in its approach  to
    the new evidence consisting of two medical  reports  from  the  Medical
    Foundation, reports from  the  Appellant's  counsellor  and  a  country
    expert report.  The FTT failed to    follow  the  correct  approach  in
    Devaseelan.  The FTT's  approach  is  fundamentally  flawed.   The  FTT
    considered the new evidence in the light of  the  negative  credibility
    findings made by the Tribunal in 2013.  The correct approach is for the
    Tribunal to consider the new evidence  and  assess  how  that  evidence
    impacts on the findings made by the first Tribunal.  The  decision  and
    reasons throughout shows the FTT's approach is flawed because  it  took
    the negative credibility findings made in 2013  and relied on the  same
    as reasoning for rejecting the medical evidence and in concluding  that
    the new evidence did not corroborate the appellant's account. In  other
    words the rejection of the new evidence was predicated on the  negative
    credibility findings.

17.  It was common ground that the guidance  dealing  with  expert  evidence
    given in SS and HH (cited  above)  is  correct  in  terms  of  how  the
    Tribunal is to assess expert evidence, however these judgments  do  not
    assist in addressing the particular errors made by the  FTT.   I  fully
    accept the submissions made by  Ms  Easty  that  the  FTT  committed  a
    "structural failing" as described in Mibanga.

18.  Accordingly I find that there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision and reasons.  The decision and reasons is set aside.   As  the
    FTT's approach goes to the core of  the  issues  under  appeal  and  in
    particular the credibility  of  the  appellant's  account,  it  is  not
    possible to preserve any of the findings of fact made.  The appeal must
    be heard before the First-tier Tribunal  afresh  (excluding  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Morris).

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.  The First-tier Tribunal decision is set aside.   The
appeal will be reheard before the Tribunal at Hatton Cross  on  a  date  and
time to be confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Dated 5th May 2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.


Signed   Dated 5th May 2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
