
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
AA/07848/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 August 2016                        |On 19 October 2016                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     a D
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Cole, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwcnyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 1 January 1990 and is a male citizen of Iraq.
     By a decision promulgated on 20 June 2016, I found that the First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that that decision fell to be set aside.
     My reasons for reaching that decision were as follows:

         1.   The appellant was born on 1 January 1990 and is a male citizen
         of Iraq.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  O'Hanlon)
         against the decision of the respondent to refuse his  asylum  claim
         and to make directions for his removal  to  Iraq.   The  First-tier
         Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 28 September 2015, dismissed
         the appeal.  The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the
         Upper Tribunal.




         2.   The judge gave his decision before  the  promulgation  of  the
         country guidance of the Upper Tribunal in AA (Article  15(c))  Iraq
         CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).  The Tribunal did,  however,  have  the
         benefit of an expert report from Dr Fatah (one of the  experts  who
         had given evidence before the Tribunal in AA).  In the appeal,  the
         judge was concerned with issues surrounding the appellant's lack of
         identity and travel documentation and the means by which  he  might
         obtain such  documentation.   He  recorded  [25]  Miss  Pickering's
         [Counsel for the appellant] submission,  drawing  upon  Dr  Fatah's
         report, that the appellant would be unable  to  obtain  replacement
         documents without travelling to Mosul the  city  in  which  he  was
         born.   This  would  involve  travelling  to  a  contested   region
         currently under  the  control  of  ISIS.   In  the  subsequent  two
         paragraphs [26 - 27] the judge makes no further  reference  to  the
         report of Dr Fatah  but  does  refer  to  having  "considered"  the
         evidence provided by the respondent, namely country information and
         guidance dated 24 December 2014.  At [27] the judge went on to find
         that,  whilst  appreciating  that  the  appellant  may  have   some
         difficulties in obtaining replacement documentation in either  Iraq
         or the UK I found that it would be possible for  the  appellant  to
         obtain the necessary documentation and that  this  would  therefore
         not indicate that it would be unreasonable on these grounds for the
         appellant to be relocated to Baghdad.

         3.   The difficulty with that finding is that  the  judge  has  not
         engaged in any real sense with the evidence of Dr  Fatah.   If  the
         judge wished to reject the evidence of  Dr  Fatah  he  should  have
         engaged with it and  given  reasons  for  preferring  the  evidence
         adduced by the Secretary of State.  It is not enough for the  judge
         simply to refer briefly to Dr Fatah's report (via the submission of
         Miss Pickering) and then to assert (as he does  at  [27])  that  he
         considered it would be possible for the  appellant  to  obtain  the
         necessary documentation.

         4.   The judge falls into further error at [29] where he  considers
         the test for  the  appellant  relocating  from  his  home  area  to
         Baghdad.  The judge states that the evidence "suggested that  there
         were no insurmountable barriers  preventing  Iraqi  nationals  from
         relocating to Baghdad although cases needed to be decided on  their
         individual facts."  At [30], the judge states that, "I do not  find
         any reasonable barrier preventing [the appellant]  being  relocated
         to Baghdad."  Although later in the same paragraph the  judge  does
         appear to refer to the correct test ("I do not find  the  appellant
         being returned to Baghdad would be unduly harsh and unreasonable.")
          it is unclear what he means by "insurmountable barriers."  Indeed,
         it  is  unclear  whether  he  has   applied   a   test   of   undue
         harshness/reasonableness or whether he has sought to  identify  the
         existence of "insurmountable barriers."

         5.   For the reasons I have given above, I find that the judge  has
         erred in law such that his decision falls to be set aside.  None of
         the  findings  of  fact  shall  stand  although  the  question   of
         credibility is of little significance; the respondent accepts  that
         the appellant cannot return to Mosul and the only  issue  remaining
         in the appeal  concerns  the  possibility  of  internal  flight  to
         Baghdad.

         Notice of Decision

         6.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 28 September 2015 is set aside.  The Upper Tribunal will  remake
         the decision following a resumed hearing at Bradford on a  date  to
         be fixed.  The hearing will be before Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Clive
         Lane.

 2. In  brief,  the  appellant's  circumstances  are  that  he  comes  from
    Nineveah.  The Secretary of State accepts  that  the  appellant  cannot
    return to live in Nineveah because there are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that he would come to serious harm were he  to  do  so.   The
    only question in the appeal is that whether it would be unduly harsh to
    expect the appellant to relocate to Baghdad.

 3. I am aware that the appellant may have relatives living  in  Iraq  but,
    given that they are living in Nineveh, I am  unable  to  conclude  that
    they are likely to be able to assist the appellant even assuming he was
    able to establish contact with them.  I do not consider  it  reasonable
    to expect such relatives to put their own lives at risk travelling to a
    government office where, in  the  light  of  the  appellant's  lack  of
    documentation, they are not likely to be  successful  in  obtaining  by
    proxy a  CSID  or  other  relevant  document  which  might  assist  the
    appellant in Baghdad.  Notwithstanding the appellant's youth  and  good
    health, Mr Cole's submits that his lack of local  contacts  in  Baghdad
    together with his inability to access government services  through  the
    agency or a CSID or to be accommodated by friends and relatives  whilst
    having no prospect even in the medium term of obtaining  any  of  those
    comforts, would expose him  to  conditions  rendering  internal  flight
    unduly harsh in his case.

 4. The appellant acknowledges  that  he  has  family  in  Iraq  but,  very
    significantly, he has lived in this country since he was a child  (aged
    17 years) having left Iraq more than eight years ago.  He says that  he
    has not been able to contact his family and, given the length  of  time
    that has elapsed, the fact that there are no other reasons for doubting
    the appellant's credibility (as identified by the First-tier  Tribunal)
    and in the light of the difficulties  currently  existing  in  Iraq,  I
    accept that evidence.  The appellant would, therefore, return  to  Iraq
    without any prospect of family or friends  assisting  him  in  Baghdad.
    Without a CSID, he is likely  to  face  the  prospect  of  destitution,
    having no job, accommodation or access to welfare benefits of any kind.
     I also accept Mr Cole's submission that, having not been in Iraq since
    he was a child, this adds to his vulnerability as a returnee; his  long
    residence in the United Kingdom is likely to obstruct  his  ability  to
    establish relationships with strangers in Iraq who may be suspicious of
    his connections with Europe.  Having considered  all  the  evidence,  I
    find that it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to  relocate
    to Baghdad.  It follows from that finding that  he  is  entitled  to  a
    grant of humanitarian protection.

Notice of Decision

 5. The appellant's appeal is allowed on the basis that he is entitled to a
    grant of humanitarian protection.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 1 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 1 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
