

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: AA/07518/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 January 2018                    |              On 19 February 2018    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

               THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ELISABETH LAING DBE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D K ALLEN

                                   Between

                                   MS MJK
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford instructed by Fadiga & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal from the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("the  FtT")  to  the
    Upper Tribunal ("the UT") with the permission of the FtT granted on  30
    November 2017.  On the appeal the appellant has been represented by  Ms
    Radford and the respondent ("the Secretary of State") by Mr  T  Melvin.
    We are grateful to both representatives  for  their  helpful  oral  and
    written submissions.  Ms Radford had expected the appellant to be  here
    for the hearing.  She did not in the event turn up, but Ms Radford  was
    content for the appeal to proceed in her  absence,  accepting,  as  she
    did, that the appellant had really no role to play in the appeal.

2.   The ground on which permission to appeal was  given  was  that  it  was
    arguable that in giving little weight to the report of Dr Beeks the FtT
    "failed to distinguish between permissible expert opinion"  about  "the
    types of psychological  trauma"  that  can  cause  "symptoms  of  post-
    traumatic stress disorder ("PTSD")" and  impermissible  opinion,  going
    beyond opinion as to  the  mechanism"  by  which  "particular  physical
    injuries are inflicted".  It was said to  be  arguable  that  this  was
    material to the outcome of the appeal.  The grounds of appeal on  which
    permission to appeal was refused were not renewed.

The Facts

3.   The appellant claims to be a national of Ivory Coast.  She was born  on
    1 January 1984.  She claims to have arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in
    2006, using a French passport, in the name of ML.  She  said  that  her
    husband gave it to her.  She has used, we think, four other pseudonyms.
     She claimed asylum on 27 August 2013.  That claim was  refused  on  18
    September 2014.  The FtT gave an account of the  appellant's  claim  in
    paragraphs 6 to 16 of the determination and of her immigration  history
    in paragraphs 17 to 21.

4.   The appellant married BY in 2000.  It was an  arranged  marriage.   She
    suffered female genital mutilation ("FGM") before  the  marriage.   The
    appellant's husband was a rich  man.   She  worked  as  a  hairdresser.
    Their daughter was born in 2003.  Her husband was violent.  He hit  and
    raped her.  She told her family but they did not tell the police.   Her
    friend S helped her to leave Ivory Coast.  She and  her  daughter  were
    taken to Ghana on a bus.  S gave the appellant a French passport  in  a
    false name.  S said that she would send the appellant's daughter to her
    two days later, but did not do so.  The  appellant  has  not  seen  her
    daughter since.

5.   The appellant was met at the airport by LB.  He took her to  his  house
    in Lewisham.  She lived there until 2012.  She married him in 2009  and
    separated from him in 2012.  LB beat the appellant.  She  has  problems
    with her left shoulder as a result.  She takes medication for her pain.
     She did not report LB to the police as he had said that if she did  so
    she would be removed  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  was
    arrested for fighting in 2010.  She gave a false name and said she  was
    from Senegal.  LB told her to do that.  She went to France in  2011  to
    meet LB's parents.  She tried to enter the United Kingdom using a false
    passport in the name of G.  She was refused entry but managed to  enter
    the United Kingdom later.  She has made five applications for leave  to
    remain on the basis of her marriage to LB.  The FtT recorded  that  the
    Secretary of State had refused the asylum claim.

6.    The  Secretary  of  State,  in  brief,  questioned   the   appellant's
    credibility on several points.  The Secretary of State did  not  accept
    the appellant was from Ivory Coast  (see  paragraph  23  of  the  FtT's
    determination).  She had stated in a previous appeal that she had  come
    to the United Kingdom on a trade visa which was inconsistent  with  her
    current account.  There were other discrepancies  between  her  current
    account and what  she  had  said  in  earlier  appeals.   She  had  not
    mentioned her fear  of  return  to  Ivory  Coast.   She  had  submitted
    applications in the name of someone other than LB.  Her account of when
    she got her Ivory Coast passport was not consistent with other parts of
    her account.  The appellant had asked the  Home  Office  twice  in  the
    course of 2014 to return to Ivory Coast because she could not  pay  for
    the flight.  In the FtT's view that was not consistent with a  fear  of
    serious harm on return.  The Secretary of State did not accept that the
    appellant had worked as a prostitute in the United Kingdom or that  she
    would have to work as a prostitute in Ivory Coast.   The  Secretary  of
    State did not consider that she would be at risk in Ivory Coast  or  in
    Senegal.

7.   The decision of the FtT in this case  was  the  third  decision  on  an
    appeal  in  relation  to  the  appellant.    There   are   also   other
    determinations dated 4 October 2010 and 15 March 2013.

The Report of Dr Beeks

8.   Dr Beeks had provided a report dated 22 March  2016.   She  interviewed
    the appellant, with an interpreter present.   Dr  Beeks  described  the
    appellant's account in paragraphs 1 to 29 of her report.  In  paragraph
    12 she mentioned the appellant's account that her husband BY  had  been
    violent to her and  had  pushed  her  into  the  edge  of  a  piece  of
    corrugated iron roof, that this had cut her skin on the  left  shoulder
    and that she has a scar there.  In  paragraph  24  she  summarised  the
    appellant's account of an attack on her by LB, the man she  married  in
    the United Kingdom.  The appellant said that he had kicked her  against
    a wall from the front and she had fallen onto the floor.  She had  gone
    to Lewisham Hospital and had had more than one  operation.  She  had  a
    scar on the front of her left shoulder.

9.   In paragraphs 63 and 64 of her report Dr Beeks described two  scars  on
    the appellant's left shoulder.  Dr Beeks said in paragraph  67  of  her
    report that the scar on the left side of the shoulder was  "consistent"
    with the appellant's account  of  being  pushed  into  the  edge  of  a
    corrugated iron  roof  and  that  the  absence  of  stitches  was  also
    consistent with the appellant's account that she was not allowed to  go
    to hospital for treatment so that the wound  healed  on  its  own.   Dr
    Beeks gave other possible causes of the scar in the same  paragraph  of
    her report.  In paragraph 68 Dr Beeks said that the scar on  the  front
    of the appellant's  left  shoulder  was  "highly  consistent  with  the
    history given of surgery to the shoulder following  the  injury"  which
    the appellant had suffered.  Dr Beeks said that there were stitch marks
    showing, that the appellant had had treatment.  The scar was not  in  a
    prominent part of the shoulder which was consistent  with  the  account
    the appellant had given of an operation.  An accidental fall would  not
    be likely to cause an injury in that non-prominent position.

10.  In paragraph 70 Dr Beeks said that the  appellant's  account  (reliving
    of painful events), flashbacks to being assaulted and  nightmares,  and
    her startle response to loud noise pointed to a diagnosis of PTSD.   Dr
    Beeks said in paragraph 71 that the appellant's "tearful  flat  affect,
    her sleep problems, her concentration problems  and  suicidal  ideation
    pointed to a significant depression".  In paragraph 73 of her report Dr
    Beeks said this:

         "[The appellant] said that she is not sure whether or not she was a
         victim of trafficking although one judge thought that she may  have
         been trafficked.  If she was exaggerating her problems I would  not
         expect her to say that she was not sure about her being  trafficked
         but to take every opportunity to claim that she was such a victim."

     In paragraph 75 of her report Dr Beeks said this:

         "[The appellant] told me that she had  never  been  to  school  and
         could not read or write and could not read or understand  documents
         which she handled.  I believe her inability to read or write in any
         language may explain some of  the  confusion  in  her  story.   The
         elements of confusion may also  be  explained  by  the  deleterious
         effect on memory caused by the traumatic past  events  reported  by
         [the appellant] such as the rapes, the female  genital  mutilation,
         the domestic violence and the disappearance of her daughter in  the
         hands of someone she  trusted  who  herself  has  disappeared.  [cf
         Juliet Cohen on memory problems and traumatic past events.  'Errors
         of Recall and  Credibility:  Can  Omissions  and  Discrepancies  in
         Successive Statements Reasonably be Said to  Undermine  Credibility
         of Testimony Dr Juliet Cohen']."


    In paragraph 76 of the report Dr Beeks said this:


         "The overall picture of past traumatic events with consequent post-
         traumatic stress disorder, evidence of  female  genital  mutilation
         and of assaults causing scars is highly consistent with the history
         given of childhood abuse, genital  mutilation,  rape  and  domestic
         violence."

The reasoning of the FtT

11.  The  appellant  gave  evidence  with  the  help  of  a  court-appointed
    interpreter.  She was cross-examined.  The FtT said that it had applied
    a holistic approach to the claim.  The  FtT  in  paragraph  53  of  the
    determination quoted paragraph 35 of the Court of Appeal in    KV  (Sri
    Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    119; [2017] 1 WLR 88.  In that case the Court of  Appeal  rejected  the
    submission by the appellant that  the  Istanbul  Protocol  required  an
    expert to express an opinion  on  the  wider  question  of  whether  he
    believes a complainant's story about whether they had been tortured  or
    not.  The Court of Appeal said  that  paragraph  187  of  the  Istanbul
    Protocol focuses on what is the likely immediate cause of a  lesion  or
    wound which is the proper subject of expert evidence.  A medical expert
    should confine his/her report to topics properly within  the  scope  of
    his/her expertise rather than expressing views on wider questions about
    the assessment of facts  and  evidence  overall  which  is  not  within
    his/her expertise but are for the Tribunal to  assess.   The  FtT  also
    quoted paragraph 39 of KV  (Sri  Lanka)  which  makes  the  point  that
    medical evidence may not be able to resolve issues  of  causation.   In
    paragraph 55 the FtT directed itself  correctly  about  the  burden  of
    proof.

12.  The FtT considered the report of Dr Beeks in paragraphs  57  to  64  of
    the determination.  The FtT said in paragraph  73  that  Dr  Beeks  had
    strayed into an assessment of credibility  by  opining  that  Dr  Beeks
    would not have expected the appellant  to  express  doubt  about  being
    trafficked if she was exaggerating her problems  and  in  paragraph  75
    where Dr Beeks had opined that the appellant's inability  to  read  and
    write in any language may explain some of the confusion in  her  story.
    The FtT did not in that paragraph of the  determination  criticise  the
    whole of paragraph 75 of Dr Beeks' report which we have already read.

13.  In paragraph 59 the FtT accepted Dr Beeks' evidence that the  appellant
    had suffered from FGM.  The FtT said, "I accept the  doctor's  evidence
    in this regard as this is from a medical examination of" the appellant.
     The FtT referred to Dr Beeks' comments  on  the  appellant's  shoulder
    scar.  The FtT observed  correctly  that  the  most  the  doctor  could
    legitimately say was that the scar provided support to confirm that the
    appellant had had a surgical procedure to her shoulder and not that the
    account behind the injury was as  the  appellant  claimed  to  be.   We
    observe in passing that that  is  exactly  what  Dr  Beeks  did  do  in
    relation to the appellant's scars.

14.  In paragraph 61 the FtT referred to Dr Beeks' view  that  the  scar  on
    the side of the appellant's left shoulder  was  consistent  with  being
    pushed into a sharp object of a corrugated iron  roof.   The  FtT  said
    that Dr Beeks noted that the scar could have other  causes  such  as  a
    fall onto a sharp object or a collision with a sharp  twig.   This  the
    FtT said indicated that the scar "could have been caused in other  ways
    which cannot be excluded rather than the way  in  which  the  appellant
    claimed it was caused".  The FtT here was doing no more than to endorse
    Dr Beeks' own analysis of the significance of that scar.

15.  In paragraph 62 the FtT quoted Dr Beeks' conclusion in paragraph 76  of
    her report which we have quoted above.  In paragraph 63 the  FtT  noted
    that Dr Beeks' report  had details from the appellant's  account  which
    were not found in other sources.  In paragraph 64 the FtT said that  it
    had noted the comments of the Court of Appeal in  KV  above.   The  FtT
    said:

         "I consider that  the  doctor  has  used  the  terminology  of  the
         Istanbul protocol to comments upon the credibility of  the  account
         and has trespassed beyond her  remit.   In  all  the  circumstances
         therefore I give limited weight to this report."

     We indicate at this point that the extent to which the FtT gave  weight
    to the report appears to be firstly in accepting that the appellant had
    suffered FGM which we observe on the evidence was incontrovertible, and
    secondly, in accepting Dr Beeks', we would observe, uncontentious,  and
    correct, analysis of the significance of the appellant's scars.

16.  The FtT dealt with the medical  evidence  and  with  two  other  expert
    reports in paragraphs 65 to 71 and with  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    paragraphs 72 to 84.  In summary the FtT noted that KM,  a  potentially
    important witness, had not given evidence.  The FtT noted that none  of
    the authors of letters of support had given evidence  at  the  hearing,
    that they included people living in France which was said to be curious
    because the appellant claimed not to have left the United Kingdom since
    2011.  These people did not say how they knew the appellant or for  how
    long they had known her.

17.  In paragraph 74  the  FtT  rejected  the  appellant's  account  that  a
    friend, L, who had never met the appellant's daughter, had  nonetheless
    spotted  the  appellant's  daughter  in  Mali  in  about   2012.    The
    appellant's photographs of her daughter dated from 2006.  In  paragraph
    75 the FtT recorded  that  the  appellant  had  been  asked  about  her
    evidence in the hearing of the appeal against the refusal  of  her  EEA
    application.  LB had told the judge that the appellant had  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 2009 whereas her evidence was she had arrived  in
    2006.  She had given evidence then that her parents  had  arranged  her
    marriage to LB.  She had explained that by saying that LB had told  her
    to say that.  The FtT observed that if that was right it was obvious LB
    had not given  instructions  about  basic  details  such  as  when  the
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom.  She had used false identities
    because she was in a controlling relationship.  It made no  sense,  the
    FtT said, if that was right that LB would, after the  EEA  appeal  draw
    attention to the appellant and himself by using false identities.   The
    FtT  recorded  that  the  appellant  denied  giving  instructions   for
    solicitors to apply for a residence card in 2012.  It made no sense for
    LB to do that if the appellant had left him and had run  away  and  was
    living on the street.  She denied having received  a  decision  on  the
    2013 EEA application and denied knowledge of  the  March  2013  appeal.
    She accepted telling the Secretary of State that she wanted  to  return
    in 2014.  The FtT did not accept that she would have done that  if  she
    had had a genuine fear.

18.   In  paragraph  82  the  FtT  described  the  appellant's  use  of  the
    identities G and FS.  The database note from 2014 records FS  returning
    to the United Kingdom in 2014.  The FtT took into account  as  damaging
    the appellant's credibility her  use  of  multiple  identities  in  the
    United  Kingdom  and  her  provision  of  false  information   to   the
    authorities (paragraph 84).

19.  In paragraph 85 the FtT concluded that the appellant  had  been  "party
    to various frauds and attempted frauds in the  use  of  false  identity
    documents".  Having looked at the application's account in  the  round,
    applying the lower standard of  proof,  the  FtT  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's account "at all" and decided that  she  had  "fabricated  a
    claim of asylum in order to stay in the United Kingdom".

20.  The FtT did accept that the appellant had suffered  FGM  but  that  was
    the only aspect the FtT accepted (paragraph 87).  Many  women  suffered
    FGM.  It did not mean that the appellant was at risk on return to Ivory
    Coast or to Senegal (paragraph 87).

21.  We note that there is no discussion of,  or  finding  about  Dr  Beeks'
    views in relation to PTSD or significant depression.

22.  The FtT also dismissed the Article 3 claim, the claim  to  humanitarian
    protection and the appellant's article 8 claim.

The arguments in the application for Permission to Appeal

23.  Ms Radford argued that in the passage criticised by the  FtT  Dr  Beeks
    was combining her psychological observations with her analysis  of  the
    lesions to give  an  overall  assessment  of  the  consistency  of  the
    appellant's clinical presentation with her overall account.   This,  it
    is argued, is not a misuse of the Istanbul Protocol.  It is  said  that
    the Istanbul Protocol positively requires such an  overall  assessment.
    The grounds of appeal quote paragraphs 177-8 and paragraph 288  of  the
    Istanbul Protocol.  Those show that a medical  expert  is  required  to
    consider the consistency not of each lesion but of the overall  pattern
    of lesions with the applicant's account of torture and the  consistency
    of the psychological findings and the extent to  which  they  correlate
    with the alleged abuse.  The relationship of consistency between events
    and symptoms should be evaluated and described.

24.  The Annex to the Istanbul Protocol  says  that  the  conclusion  should
    include:

         "A statement of opinion on the consistency between all  sources  of
         evidence  cited  above  (physical   and   psychological   findings,
         historical  information,  photographic  findings,  diagnostic  test
         results, knowledge of regional practices of  torture,  consultation
         reports etc.) and the allegations of torture or ill-treatment."

25.  It is said that the FtT  wrongly  interpreted  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in KV, if it thought that the Court  of  Appeal  "proscribe[d]
    this aspect of the Istanbul Protocol".  It is submitted  that  the  FtT
    "thus removed weight from Dr Beeks' report on an erroneous basis".  The
    FtT failed to give "proper effect to Dr Beeks'  conclusions  about  the
    appellant's vulnerability, effect of trauma on  her  evidence  and  the
    consistency of  her  presentation  with  a  history  of  severe  sexual
    torture".

26.  Ms Radford amplified the arguments in the  grounds  of  appeal  in  her
    oral submissions.  She accepted that the FtT  was  entitled  to  ensure
    that an expert who expresses a view does no more than to express a view
    about topics which that expert's expertise entitles him/or to express a
    view about, but  she  submitted  Dr  Beeks'  opinion  amounted  to  her
    fulfilling the duties imposed on her  as  an  expert  by  the  Istanbul
    Protocol and yet the FtT had criticised Dr Beeks for  doing  that.   An
    expert, she submitted, is required by the Istanbul Protocol to consider
    additional  facts  and  the  relationship  of  consistency  between  an
    applicant's account  and  his/her  symptoms.   She  accepted  that  the
    Istanbul Protocol did not tell the FtT how to  make  its  decision  but
    submitted that the expert's opinion should not  be  discounted  on  the
    grounds that the expert has done what the Istanbul  Protocol  requires.
    The expert must evaluate the  consistency  of  an  allegation  with  an
    applicant's symptoms, taking into account the  relevant  circumstances.
    She submitted that what the expert, Dr Beeks, had done  in  this  case,
    was precisely to evaluate the consistency of the allegations  with  the
    psychological  symptoms,  physical  symptoms  and  in  the   light   of
    additional factors such as the appellant's illiteracy.  By doing all of
    that the expert was not seeking to usurp the function of  the  FtT  but
    was simply doing what the Istanbul Protocol required her to do.

27.  She further submitted that the expert was required to consider  whether
    an applicant was exaggerating his/her symptoms and where such  symptoms
    include psychological symptoms it can be difficult  to  draw  the  line
    between symptoms and "problems" - see in particular paragraph 73 of  Dr
    Beeks' report and paragraph 58 of the FtT's determination.


28.  Finally, in this context, she submitted that the  expert  was  required
    to evaluate the consistency of an account with  observed  symptoms  but
    not the overall credibility of an applicant's account.   She  submitted
    that in the passages criticised by the FtT Dr Beeks was doing  no  more
    than what the Istanbul Protocol required.  Some of  that  material  was
    relevant also to the FtT's task but in doing  that  Dr  Beeks  was  not
    usurping that task of making the overall assessment of credibility.


29.  Mr Melvin in his submissions relied on the Rule 24  response  dated  22
    January 2018 which we and Ms Radford  were  provided  with  today.   In
    particular, he submitted, in paragraph 58 of the determination, the FtT
    was entitled to criticise Dr Beeks for acting as an  advocate  for  the
    appellant, not as  an  impartial  expert.   The  FtT  was  entitled  to
    conclude that Dr Beeks had strayed beyond her legitimate remit and  had
    attempted to assess aspects of the claim, namely  overall  credibility,
    which it was not open to her to  assess.   He  submitted  further  that
    there  was  a  plethora  of  points  which  damaged   the   appellant's
    credibility and that the FtT was entitled to conclude that it  did  not
    accept her account.


Discussion

30.  The FtT said that it would take a holistic approach to the  appellant's
    factual account. It purported to take such  an  approach  and  did  not
    accept that account.  We consider that there is some force in the FtT's
    criticism that Dr Beeks had overstepped the mark in some aspects of her
    report, by passing judgment on matters which affected  the  appellant's
    credibility - see in particular paragraph 8 - rather than by making  an
    objective diagnosis.  The FtT did not reject  the  conclusions  of  the
    report altogether but only accepted them in so far as  the  report  was
    based on incontrovertible physical evidence, that is the  diagnosis  of
    FGM, and to the  extent  that  the  report  coincided  with  the  FtT's
    analysis in relation to the scars.  The FtT was entitled, of course, to
    conclude that all Dr Beeks could say about the  appellant's  scars  was
    that one had been caused by surgery and the other by a wound made by  a
    sharp object  which  had  not  been  treated  promptly.   Neither  scar
    corroborated the appellant's account to any significant extent but,  as
    we have already observed, Dr Beeks was careful in those sections of her
    report not to go any further than this.  In that regard  Dr  Beeks  was
    being objective and complying with the Istanbul Protocol.  That is  not
    acknowledged by the FtT.

31. Moreover we are troubled by the FtT's overall  approach  to  Dr  Beeks'
    report.  The FtT does not seem to have appreciated  that  the  Istanbul
    Protocol required Dr Beeks to express a view about the  consistency  of
    the appellant's symptoms with the appellant's account.   That  led  the
    FtT, except to the extent that  we  have  described  above,  wholly  to
    discount Dr Beeks' report including those parts of the report which did
    not in any way suffer from the vice identified by the  FtT.   Moreover,
    as we have pointed out, there is no finding about  potential  diagnoses
    of PTSD and depression which are potentially significant to  the  FtT's
    task.  The FtT, if it dismissed those aspects of  the  report,  in  our
    submission gave flawed reasons for doing  so.   Those  aspects  of  the
    report are not in any way an example of the expert trespassing  on  the
    proper territory of the FtT.


32. We of course accept that there was a formidable array of  points  which
    damaged the appellant's credibility.  However, a proper analysis of  Dr
    Beeks' report might well  have  revealed  material  which  reduced  the
    impact of some, if not all, of those points.   We  are  very  far  from
    saying that the FtT, properly directing itself, was bound to  find  the
    appellant credible.  Nonetheless,  we  do  consider  that  even  in  an
    apparently open and shut case which the  FtT  considered  this  to  be,
    every point which weighs in the balance  in  favour  of  the  appellant
    should be properly considered.  We are not satisfied that the  FtT  was
    entitled, for the reasons which it gave, almost  entirely  to  discount
    the report of Dr Beeks.  In that situation we allow this appeal and  we
    remit the appeal to the FtT.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Elisabeth Laing   Date 13.02.2018


Mrs Justice Elisabeth Laing DBE



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Elisabeth Laing   Date 13.02.2018


Mrs Justice Elisabeth Laing DBE



