
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07585/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 March 2016                               |On 13 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                           mr asadullah oriakhail
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith, Counsel instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

Details of Appeal

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on [ ] 1996 and  is  now
    20 years old. (The date of his birth is not in issue; this was the date
    arrived at following an age assessment carried out by  Social  Services
    in 2008).  Although the appellant's nationality was at issue the First-
    tier Tribunal found that the appellant is an Afghan national.

 2. The appellant came to the United  Kingdom  as  an  unaccompanied  minor
    arriving on 2 December 2008 and claiming asylum on  30  December  2008.
    The respondent refused the appellant's asylum  claim  initially  on  15
    June 2009 and also  refused  his  claim  for  humanitarian  protection.
    However the appellant was granted discretionary  leave  until  14  June
    2012 when he reached 17� years.  The appellant submitted an application
    for further leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  16  June  2012.
    This was refused on 15 September 2014.

 3. The appellant appealed  and  his  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  Judge  Farmer,  on  29  September  2015.   In   a   decision
    promulgated on 5 October 2015 Judge Farmer  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant appeals with  permission  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    hearing came before me.

Ground 1:

 5. The appellant's first ground of appeal, in summary, was that it was not
    open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that the appellant had  contact
    with his mother and would be able to go back to her  given  the  foster
    carer's evidence and evidence from two social workers that they did not
    believe the appellant was in touch with his mother and  given  that  it
    was the Red Cross who were trying to trace the appellant's family.   It
    was the appellant's argument that the comments in  EU  (Afghanistan)  &
    Others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  about  a
    likely lack of co-operation from the family were not relevant.  It  was
    submitted that it was not correct to  assume  that  because  the  court
    claim was not believed that the appellant should  not  be  believed  in
    relation to contact with the family.

 6. Judge Farmer at paragraph [22] did not accept that  the  appellant  had
    provided a broadly consistent account and found that the appellant  had
    failed to give any real detail on the matters on which he relied, to an
    extent which damaged his credibility.  Judge Farmer found that  in  the
    appellant's oral evidence he was unable to  recall,  for  example,  any
    detail in relation to the  gun  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  been
    trained on.

 7. In relation to the specific issue of the  appellant  claiming  to  have
    lost touch with his family the judge noted at [23] that  this  happened
    after his uncle disappeared or was shot.  The appellant  had  confirmed
    that prior to this he was in touch with his mother who was  responsible
    for sending his Tazkera to him and that she also  had  her  own  mobile
    phone and her own telephone number.  The appellant told the  First-tier
    Tribunal that he did not know where his mother and brother are and that
    he had also told this to  Mr  Warner,  the  appellant's  former  foster
    parents who gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge accepted at [23] that Mr Warner had never witnessed
    the appellant being in touch with his mother.  However, the  judge  was
    of the view that this did not mean that the appellant was not in  touch
    with his family.

 8. Significantly, the judge found that the appellant  "was  able  to  have
    significant contact with his mother such that she could  send  him  his
    Tazkera and explain to him more about his background.  I do not  accept
    that he would have suddenly lost touch with her".

 9.  The  appellant's  representative  criticised  the  judge's  subsequent
    findings  that  Sir  Stanley  Burton's  comments  in  the  case  of  EU
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 32 at [10] were relevant.  It was noted that  where  a  family  had
    incurred considerable  costs  in  paying  for  an  appellant  to  leave
    Afghanistan, it would be unlikely that  they  would  be  happy  to  co-
    operate with an agent of the Secretary of State for  the  return  of  a
    person to Afghanistan.  However I am not satisfied that the judge  made
    any error of law in referring to this comment.

10. The judge went on to make her own findings that it was clear  that  the
    appellant's family had spent a considerable amount in paying  an  agent
    to bring the appellant to the United Kingdom and in  assisting  him  in
    getting documents to ensure  that  he  can  stay  here  and  "in  those
    circumstances it is clear that they would be likely to be unwilling  to
    co-operate in being contacted to consider arrangements for  the  return
    for the appellant".

11. I accept that EU is a "duty to trace case" and that the  focus  of  Sir
    Stanley  Burnton's  comments  were  on  how  a  family   might   react,
    uncooperatively, if tracing enquiries were made of them by an agent  of
    the Secretary of State.  I further accept that EU does not comment on a
    scenario where a young person has been to the Red Cross, such as is the
    case in the appellant's situation, or  how  a  family  would  react  if
    approached by the Red Cross or where  a  person  has  provided  contact
    numbers and has a number of witnesses stating that he has lost contact.
     In quoting from this case it is evident however that Judge Farmer  was
    aware of the differences between this case and the appellant's.   I  am
    not satisfied that the judge made any error in finding as she did  that
    it was clear that the  appellant's  family  had  spent  a  considerable
    amount of money in paying for the  appellant  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom and in assisting him in getting documents  to  ensure  that  he
    could stay here.  There was no error in her subsequent finding that  in
    those circumstances they would likely  be  unwilling  to  cooperate  in
    being  contacted  to  consider  arrangements  for  the  return  of  the
    appellant.

12. The judge did not base her decision on EU but rather came  to  her  own
    conclusions.  This included the judge's consideration of the fact  that
    the appellant's mother had her own mobile phone and her  own  telephone
    number and that the appellant's mother had been in a position  to  send
    documents to the appellant and  to  provide  him  with  information  in
    relation to his account.  I am satisfied therefore  that  any  arguable
    error in relying on the comments made in EU is not  material  as  I  am
    satisfied that the judge's findings in relation to not  accepting  that
    the appellant would have suddenly lost  contact  with  his  mother  can
    stand without this comment.  Although it was drawn  to  the  Tribunal's
    attention  that  the  judge  did  not   specifically   refer   in   her
    determination to the comments of the social workers which included that
    the appellant made references to not being in contact with his  family,
    the judge clearly set out the material before her.

13. For example, although  Ms  Smith  indicated  that  the  judge  made  no
    reference to the Red Cross information, I  note  that  at  [8(ii)]  the
    judge indicated that she had  sight  of  Red  Cross  documents.   I  am
    satisfied that the judge was aware of all the  circumstances  that  the
    appellant cited in relation to his claimed lack  of  contact  with  his
    family and considered this in the round.  I am not satisfied that there
    was any error of law in her consideration of this issue.

14. It is clear from [21], [23], [24] and [25] of the judge's decision that
    she had regard to all  the  evidence  before  her  including  from  the
    appellant's foster parent but remained not satisfied that the appellant
    had lost  contact.   The  judge  provided  adequate  reasons  for  this
    decision.  It was a decision which she was entitled to reach.  I am not
    satisfied that any error is disclosed.

Ground 2:

15. The appellant's second ground related to the conclusions of the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  regarding  the  alleged  blood  feud.   The   appellant
    contended that these were  not  tenable  as  they  did  not  take  into
    consideration relevant  expert  evidence  from  Dr  Giustozzi  and  the
    country of origin materials which  supported  the  credibility  of  the
    development of a risk from the feud.

16. Judge Farmer at [30] considered the evidence in relation to the claimed
    blood feud and gave clear reasons for rejecting this evidence.   In  so
    doing the judge considered the appellant's account and also  considered
    the expert evidence  of  Dr  Giustozzi.   The  judge  referred  to  the
    detailed report from Dr Giustozzi which confirmed that a blood feud can
    exist over years and if so motivated then the appellant's  cousins  can
    use their position within the Taliban  to  reach  the  appellant.   The
    judge considered this evidence in the round including  in  the  balance
    her general findings on the appellant's credibility.  It  was  open  to
    the judge to find as she did that the fact  that  the  blood  feud  was
    considered plausible by Dr  Giustozzi  does  not  make  it  a  credible
    account on the circumstances of this particular case.

17. Although Ms Smith indicated  that  the  judge  in  error  attributed  a
    comment by Dr Giustozzi to Ms Smith,  namely  that  whilst  his  father
    remained alive he was a protector as he himself was a  Taliban  member,
    it was clear that the judge took full consideration of  Dr  Giustozzi's
    account and would have been aware that  this  comment  originated  from
    him.  The fact that the judge recorded  that  this  was  also  made  in
    submissions by Ms Smith does  not  constitute  an  error.   Ms  Smith's
    arguments on this point represent no more than a disagreement with  the
    judge's findings.

18. Ms Smith also contended  that  the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to
    relevant background country information, in particular in  relation  to
    the fact that women and children would not generally be the subject  of
    a blood feud and that this might explain  why  the  appellant  was  not
    targeted even in the months  after  his  father  died  and  before  the
    appellant left.  I  have  considered  the  judge's  findings  in  their
    entirety.  In not accepting the blood feud the judge did not accept the
    appellant's general credibility and also noted that the  appellant  was
    unable to provide further details in relation to his father being shot,
    he  claims,  by  his  cousins.   The  judge  gave  clear  reasons   for
    disbelieving the appellant's evidence.  Whilst it may well be that  the
    background information indicates that blood feuds are normally  pursued
    against adult males, the judge was entitled to take  into  account  the
    fact that neither the appellant, or his  remaining  family  experienced
    any problems in relation to the blood feud, or  generally.   I  am  not
    satisfied that the judge made any material error.

Grounds 3 and 4:

19. Ms Smith made submissions in relation to the judge's  approach  to  the
    appellant's  age.   However  Ms  Smith  conceded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did specifically take into account the  appellant's  age
    in her decision.

20. The judge at [19] set out in some detail the guidance which was brought
    to her attention by Ms Smith in relation to assessing the evidence of a
    child and the general approach in terms of assessing credibility, which
    she set out at [20].  The judge also reminded herself at [27]  that  it
    is hard for children to remember dates.

21. Ms Smith took issue with the judge's finding at [27]  in  finding  that
    the appellant had been inconsistent in stating whether his  father  had
    been killed three or five years previously.

22. I am satisfied that  the  judge  correctly  directed  herself  and  was
    obviously fully aware of the relevant  guidance  and  the  approach  to
    children's evidence.  The judge was still entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant was not credible in this regard and gave adequate reasons for
    doing so, including indicating again at [29] that she  was  bearing  in
    mind the appellant's age at the time of answering the questions.

23. Ms Smith sought to impugn the judge's approach  to  Section  8  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act.   Whilst  Ms
    Smith accepted that any error would not  have  been  material  (as  the
    judge clearly stated at [39]) that the appellant was  an  unaccompanied
    minor and this factor "should not weigh too heavily against  his  claim
    for asylum in the UK") she suggested that this was  indicative  of  the
    appellant's approach in failing to properly take into account that  the
    appellant was a child.  I do not accept this is the case.  The entirety
    of the decision makes it clear that the judge was fully  aware  of  the
    appellant's age including  his  very  young  age  when  he  first  left
    Afghanistan and when the claimed events occurred.  She reminded herself
    throughout the Decision and Reasons of the appellant's  young  age  and
    gave clear reasons for not accepting his evidence.

24. In addition, as Ms Smith indicates, any error that the judge  has  said
    to have made at [36] and [37]  in  relation  to  her  consideration  of
    Section 8 is not material given that the judge went on to find that the
    appellant was under the control of an agent and this should  not  weigh
    too heavily against him.  In any event I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    judge did fetter her discretion in relation  to  her  consideration  of
    Section 8 as the judge clearly  stated  at  [37]  that  her  Section  8
    consideration was "not of itself determinative of the appeal".

25. In relation to ground 3, Ms  Smith  submitted  that  the  judge  unduly
    focused on, and  drew  adverse  inferences  against  the  appellant  in
    relation to, his description of a gun.

26. The judge addressed this issue at [22] and [29]  of  the  Decision  and
    Reasons.  The judge indicated that the appellant's account was not just
    of one visit by the Taliban but 'repeated  attempts  to  recruit  him'.
    The judge clearly accepted that the appellant would not be expected  to
    know the make and model  of  a  gun  but  found  that  the  appellant's
    evidence that the gun was black with something in the  middle  was  not
    consistent with his account of being shown how to use a gun.

27. In so doing the  judge  was  taking  into  account  all  the  evidence,
    including the  appellant's  own  statements;  at  paragraph  6  of  the
    appellant's 27 November 2014 witness statement the appellant  indicated
    that there was one man of the Taliban who spent a lot of time  with  me
    and 'he showed me his gun and showed me how to use it'.

28. As noted  above  the  judge  repeatedly  took  into  consideration  the
    appellant's age but gave adequate reasons  for  reaching  the  decision
    that she did that the appellant's account and the lack of  any  further
    information in relation to the gun was not credible.  No error has been
    identified in this ground.

29. In any event even if I am wrong in the above, the  judge  at  [33]  and
    [34] made alternative findings considering the appellant's claim at its
    highest and was satisfied that the appellant's appeal even if  credible
    would still fall to be dismissed in line with AK  (Afghanistan)  [2012]
    UKUT 163.  The judge made this  decision  in  line  with  the  relevant
    country  guidance  case  law  and  the  relevant   background   country
    information and was satisfied that it  would  not  be  unreasonable  or
    unduly harsh to expect the appellant to internally relocate  to  Kabul.
    Although Ms Smith indicated this could not be the case, for example  if
    it was accepted that the appellant did not have family, the judge  made
    clear alternative findings which would have taken this alternative into
    consideration.  In addition the appellant was an adult at the  time  of
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing and would be returning as such  and  it
    is clear that the judge had this in mind in  reaching  her  alternative
    findings.

Ground 5

30. Although Ms Smith submitted considerable additional  written  arguments
    in relation to ground 5 and  Article  8  and  the  respondent's  asylum
    policy, I indicated at the commencement of the hearing  that  paragraph
    80 of the respondent's Reasons for Refusal Letter  dated  15  September
    2014 specifically addresses the issue of  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions, Chapter 8, paragraph 2.3,  which  sets  out  transitional
    provisions for those applying for further leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom.  The respondent took into consideration that  those  who  were
    granted leave under the Discretionary Leave policy before 9  July  2012
    will continue to be considered under  the  Discretionary  Leave  policy
    through to settlement provided they continue to qualify for  leave  and
    their circumstances had not changed.

31. However, the respondent continued at paragraph 80 of  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter to indicate that  although  the  appellant  was  granted
    leave under the Discretionary Leave policy and consideration was  given
    to whether he continued to qualify for leave, the respondent considered
    that the appellant no longer continued to qualify as his  circumstances
    had changed, namely that he was  now  an  adult  at  the  time  of  the
    decision.

32. Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  specifically  set  out
    this policy the Decision and Reasons clearly had in mind  the  decision
    of the respondent dismissing the appellant's Article 8 claim  and  this
    would have included the respondent's consideration of the Discretionary
    Leave policy.

33. There can be no error in the judge's detailed approach to Article 8.

Conclusion

34. I am not satisfied that any error of law is disclosed in the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision.  The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Farmer shall stand.

35. The appeal by the appellant is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
