

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/07725/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent   | Determination Promulgated        |
|On Thursday 5 May 2016                   | On 16 May 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                           MRS S I (AND DEPENDENTS)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Moksud, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. However, as this is
a protection based claim and in light of my decision, I consider it
appropriate that an anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
      Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge J D L Edwards promulgated on 28 January 2015 ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 11 September 2014 to  remove  the  Appellant  and  to
       Pakistan and rejecting her protection claim.


    2. The background facts are set out in the  Decision  at  [2]  and  the
       Appellant's and her husband's evidence is recited at [17] to [25] of
       the Decision.  The Appellant and her family are Christians.  That is
       not  disputed  by  the  Respondent.   It  is  not  disputed  by  the
       Respondent  that,  as  Christians  in  Pakistan,  they   face   some
       discrimination but she says that this does not reach  the  level  of
       persecution.  That is in any event not the basis of the  Appellant's
       claim although it is relevant to the problems  which  she  says  she
       faces on return and she says that her claim is consistent  with  the
       background material which  exists  in  relation  to  the  plight  of
       Christians in Pakistan.


    3. The Appellant says that she was stalked by a Muslim man, Mr  K.   He
       proposed marriage to her notwithstanding she was already married and
       proposed that she convert to his faith.  When she refused, she  says
       that Mr K and his associates attacked her house.  Mr K is said to be
       a member of Sipah-e-Sabaha ("S-e-S").  The Appellant says that  when
       she and her husband reported the attack to the police, although  the
       police made a report, they did not follow it up and  she  says  that
       this is because of Mr K's position and his membership of S-e-S.  She
       also says that she has now been accused of blasphemy as a result  of
       comments she made to Mr K about his religion during his phone  calls
       to her.


    4. The Judge rejected the Appellant's protection  claim  on  the  basis
       that he did not find the Appellant credible. He did not accept  that
       the Appellant would be at  risk  in  Pakistan  because  he  did  not
       believe her  claim.   He  did  not  accept  that  the  treatment  of
       Christians in Pakistan amounted to persecution.  Even if her account
       were credible, the Judge found that she  could  internally  relocate
       within Pakistan to avoid being found by S-e-S.


    5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  on
       28 May 2015 on the basis that whilst the  Judge  indicated  that  he
       considered all evidence before him,  he  made  no  findings  on  the
       evidence of the Appellant's husband.  The Judge did  not  limit  the
       grounds of the Appellant's appeal. This matter comes  before  me  to
       decide whether the Decision contains an error of law and if so to re-
       make the Decision or remit the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal for
       re-hearing.


    Decision and reasons


    6. Mr Moksud focussed his submissions on the reason for the  permission
       grant.   He  did  however  deal  briefly  with  the  other   grounds
       concerning the credibility of  the  Appellant's  account.   He  also
       noted the  Judge's  refusal  to  hear  evidence  from  a  number  of
       witnesses who support the Appellant  and  who  are  members  of  her
       church in the UK.  He also noted the Judge's failure  to  deal  with
       the background material produced by the Appellant and the Respondent
       when reaching his conclusions about safety on return.
    7. In  relation  to  the  witnesses  from  the  Appellant's  church,  a
       challenge to the Judge's treatment of that evidence is not  strictly
       part of the Appellant's grounds.   There  are  though  a  number  of
       letters from the witnesses complaining  that  the  Judge  would  not
       permit them to be heard. There were about ten such  witnesses.   The
       Judge indicated at [25] of the Decision that he would not have found
       it helpful to hear from them.  He  indicated  however  that  he  has
       taken their evidence in the form of their testimonials into account.




    8. I pointed out to Mr Moksud that  the  evidence  of  these  witnesses
       could only  be  of  limited  value  in  supporting  the  Appellant's
       account.  They support her assertion that she  and  the  family  are
       genuine Christians but that is not in dispute. They  also  point  to
       various press articles and other media accounts  of  the  plight  of
       Christians in Pakistan.  No doubt they are genuinely concerned about
       that issue as committed Christians themselves but they do  not  live
       in Pakistan and cannot give evidence first hand as to the  treatment
       suffered by those Christians who  do  live  there.   The  Judge  had
       background  evidence  before  him  as  to  the  difficulties   faced
       generally by Christians in Pakistan which is the sort of material on
       which these witnesses have formed their view.  It was for the  Judge
       to form his own view on that same material.


    9. If the  Respondent's  representative  had  no  questions  for  those
       witnesses, their evidence stands unchallenged  and  the  Judge  says
       that he has taken that into account.  The Appellant does  not  point
       to specific evidence which it is said that the Judge  did  not  take
       into account from those witnesses.  Insofar as it is  asserted  that
       there is an error of law by the Judge in refusing to hear from those
       witnesses, I am not satisfied that  there  is.   For  the  foregoing
       reasons, the evidence which those witnesses could give is of limited
       value in relation to the issues which the Judge had to consider.


   10. The  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  husband  though  falls  into  a
       different category.  Although much of the evidence which he was able
       to give is, as the Judge records at [24], similar  to  that  of  the
       Appellant, his evidence supports  the  Appellant's  account  in  two
       crucial aspects.  Firstly, he confirms that Mr K phoned his wife  at
       home.  Secondly, he was present when Mr K  and  his  associates  are
       said to have attacked his and the Appellant's home.


   11. Although the Judge has noted as I have indicated the general  nature
       of the evidence which he received from the Appellant's  husband,  he
       has not made any findings about that evidence at [32] where he  sets
       out his  reasons  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's  account  as  not
       credible.


   12. Mr McVeety accepted that  the  Judge  should  ideally  have  made  a
       finding on this issue but said that any error of law in that  regard
       is not material. Mr Moksud submitted that it is material when viewed
       in the context of the other credibility  findings  which  the  Judge
       made and which Mr Moksud  criticised.   I  was  unpersuaded  by  his
       submissions in relation to some of those criticisms.   For  example,
       he criticised the Judge's comments about  the  FIR  at  [32(e)]  but
       could not explain why there was any error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
       finding.  The Appellant said that the police did not record  Mr  K's
       name in the FIR because  he  was  a  member  of  S-e-S  whereas  the
       translation very clearly shows that the police did include his  name
       albeit they said that the attacker was  unknown  but  the  Appellant
       named him as Mr K.  That surely reflects only the general  principle
       that a person is entitled to be treated  as  innocent  until  proven
       guilty.  That finding also overcomes the Appellant's ground that the
       Judge failed to make a finding about the  FIR.   It  is  clear  from
       [32(e)] and [32(f)] that the Judge there implicitly accepts the  FIR
       but does not accept that it shows that the Appellant is at  risk  on
       account of her religion or that she would continue to be at risk  on
       return, particularly when the  police  had  made  a  report  of  the
       complaint (and would be unable to pursue it  due  to  the  departure
       from Pakistan of the Appellant and her husband who were the main  if
       not the only witnesses).


   13. Nor is there any substance to the  complaint  that  the  Judge  held
       against the Appellant her failure to claim asylum  on  arrival.   Mr
       Moksud submitted that the delay was only of one  day  and  that  the
       Judge should not have viewed that as detrimental to the  Appellant's
       credibility.  However, firstly, the delay was not of one  day  only.
       As the chronology at [2] of the Decision shows the  delay  was  over
       two weeks (the  Appellant  and  her  dependents  having  arrived  as
       visitors).  Secondly, the Judge did not hold the delay  against  the
       Appellant.  He  noted  that  she  had  failed  to  complain  to  her
       employers about Mr K.  Her employers are a large  US  based  company
       who might well have taken an allegation of stalking  seriously.   He
       also noted that she and her dependents arrived as visitors and noted
       an inconsistency in her and her husband's evidence at [32(h)]  about
       when they decided to claim asylum.  Those were findings open to  him
       on the evidence however and  there  is  no  material  error  of  law
       disclosed in that section.


   14. I am however concerned that the failure to make any finding  on  the
       Appellant's husband's evidence is a material error.  His evidence is
       capable of corroborating two main planks  of  the  Appellant's  case
       namely Mr K's pursuit of the Appellant  and  her  rejection  of  him
       which she says led to the blasphemy allegation  and  the  attack  on
       their house which, if accepted, may also show the targeting  of  the
       Appellant and the reasons for that allegation.


   15. I am therefore satisfied that there is a material error of law  made
       by the Judge namely his failure  to  make  any  findings  about  the
       evidence of the Appellant's husband.  I am fortified in my  decision
       by Mr McVeety's very  candid  acceptance  that  if  the  Appellant's
       husband's evidence is capable of corroborating the  Appellant's  (as
       opposed to simply reciting what he was told by her) then  the  error
       is material.


   16. I record for completeness that I am also satisfied that there  is  a
       material error of law in the Judge's  treatment  of  the  background
       material.  Although the material on which the  Appellant  relies  is
       limited to the risk to Christians generally in Pakistan and some  of
       it is clearly unrelated to the Appellant's case, it  does  form  the
       background to why the Appellant says that she was targeted by Mr  K.
       It was therefore incumbent on the Judge to deal with it.


   17. I was also told by Mr Moksud that the Country of Origin  Information
       Report was before the Judge but is not  mentioned  (although  it  is
       fair to note that it does not appear to be on the file).   I  accept
       in any event Mr Moksud's submission that the one sentence at [33] of
       the Decision that the Appellant could internally relocate  to  avoid
       the attention of S-e-S required further reasons to be  given  as  to
       why this was so based not only on the background material  but  also
       taking into account  whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
       Appellant and her family to move elsewhere in Pakistan.


   18. Mr Moksud and Mr McVeety were agreed that, if I found there to be  a
       material error of law in relation to the credibility  findings,  the
       appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  none  of
       the credibility findings preserved.  Having regard to  the  Practice
       Direction and since the issue in relation to which I have  found  an
       error of law undermines the credibility findings at first  instance,
       I am satisfied that this is the appropriate course.




    DECISION
      I am satisfied that the  Decision  contains  an  error  of  law.   The
Decision of      First-      Tier Tribunal  Judge  J  D  L  Edwards  is  set
aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First- Tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing
by a different Judge.
      Signed           [pic] Date 11 May 2016


      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
