
[pic]
IAC-AH-sar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07958/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th January 2015                             |On 20th January 2015       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ma
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant Secretary of State:   Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office
                                 Presenting Officer
For the Respondent MA: Mr V Madanhi of Genesis Law Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal by the Secretary of State initially came before me on  11th
    December 2014, following which I reached a decision that there had been
    a material error of law in the decision at first instance made by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Camp.  His decision  was  set  aside  and  I
    issued directions for a further hearing identifying the  issues  to  be
    decided.  As was pointed out in my  earlier  decision,  I  continue  to
    refer to MA as the Appellant and to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent, the titles by which they were known before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. In the interests of clarity I set out here the first of the  directions
    made on 12th December 2014 which reads as follows:

         "The decision of Judge  Camp  has  been  set  aside.   However  the
         credibility findings he made concerning the  Appellant's  potential
         treatment in his home area are preserved.  At the  resumed  hearing
         the issues to be decided will be whether the Appellant would face a
         real risk of persecution or treatment in breach of Article 3 in any
         other part of Pakistan away from his home area, whether it would be
         reasonable to expect him to move to such an area if no such risk is
         made out (having regard to  his  psychological  condition  and  the
         position of his wife  and  children)  and  issues  generally  under
         Article 8 ECHR".

 3. At the commencement of the resumed hearing Mr Madanhi said that he  had
    only received notice of the resumed hearing on the previous day and was
    he clearly not in a position to proceed.  He produced  a  copy  of  the
    letter which showed that notice of hearing had been sent  to  his  firm
    and to the Appellant on 22nd December 2014.  Unfortunately that  letter
    appears to have been very seriously delayed in the Christmas post.

 4. I had highlighted in the directions the  issues  that  remained  to  be
    decided, all relating to potential relocation to a  different  part  of
    Pakistan.  The Appellant has a wife and three  children  all  dependent
    upon his appeal. The children were born respectively in 1995, 1996  and
    2003.  I was conscious of the guidance given  by  the  President  in  a
    determination reported  on  4th  August  2014,  namely  JO  and  Others
    (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC) concerning  the  best
    interests of children.

 5. Mr Smart said it was difficult for him to argue against  what  was  set
    out in JO and he accepted that in the refusal letter there had been  no
    consideration of issues under Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.

 6. Both representatives concurred that in the light of the decision in  JO
    the sensible course would be for the  matter  to  be  remitted  to  the
    Secretary of State to  consider  Section  55.   It  was  accepted  that
    matters under Section 55 had not been considered in the refusal letter.
     I was grateful  to  Mr  Smart  in  particular  for  that  constructive
    approach  which  meant  that  the   hearing   had   not   been   wasted
    notwithstanding the short notice given.  I confirmed to Mr Madanhi that
    the findings of Judge Camp as to risk to the Appellant in his home area
    (which had not been challenged) would stand, as  was  confirmed  in  my
    earlier decision.  He would be at liberty to  submit  further  evidence
    and representations to the Respondent for consideration in the  context
    of the family relocating to a different part of Pakistan.

Notice of Decision

The initial decision made by the Secretary of State was  not  in  accordance
with the law for the reasons set out above and the  Appellant's  application
therefore remains outstanding.

The anonymity order made in my decision of 12th December 2014 is continued.



Signed        Date 13 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French


IAC-AH-SC-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07958/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th December 2014                           |On 20th January 2015       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MA
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant Secretary of State:   Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent MA: Mr V Madanhi of Genesis Law Associates


                          Decision on Error of Law

 1. An appeal by MA (whom I shall continue to refer to as the Appellant, as
    he was known before the First-tier Tribunal) against refusal of  asylum
    and removal to Pakistan was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Camp  on
    13th March 2014.  The appeal was allowed on asylum grounds and also  on
    human rights grounds.  The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to
    appeal in respect of one aspect  of  Judge  Camp's  decision.   In  the
    application it is said that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons
    for  his  conclusion  on  a  material  matter.   The  judge  found  the
    Appellant's account  credible  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof  and
    accepted that he was at risk of targeted persecution from  the  MQM  in
    his home city of Karachi where the  MQM  were  the  dominant  political
    party.  It was said that the refusal letter, at paragraphs  38  to  43,
    expressly raised the possibility of internal relocation and sufficiency
    of protection from the non-MQM affiliated authorities in other parts of
    Pakistan.  The Presenting Officer had relied upon that  letter  in  her
    submissions.

 2. At paragraph 42 of the determination the judge has stated as follows:

         "The option of internal relocation was not urged (except by way  of
         reference to the refusal letter) on the Respondent's behalf at  the
         hearing.  I note the evidence that MQM has been  trying  to  extend
         its influence to  the  Punjab.   Moreover  the  Appellant  and  his
         family, as Mohajirs, would be noticeable in any  part  of  Pakistan
         where Mohajirs are not settled.  A real risk of  persecution  would
         exist anywhere in Pakistan."

    The grounds go on to submit that the judge had given wholly  inadequate
    reasons for concluding that there was no realistic opportunity for  the
    Appellant to seek safety in another part of Pakistan.  The grounds then
    go on to give reasons why that view is thought to have validity, points
    which arose in the course of the hearing before me.  On 16th April 2014
    Upper Tribunal Judge Deans, sitting in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  gave
    permission to appeal on the grounds as lodged.

 3. A new representative had been appointed shortly before the hearing.  He
    submitted a response under Upper Tribunal Procedure Rule  24  which  Mr
    Mills had the chance to consider.  That response had been  served  very
    late but I appreciated that there had been a change of  representative.
    It appeared to me that the matters covered in the notice were likely to
    be points which would be argued in any  event  in  the  course  of  the
    hearing and I saw no objection to the notice being received.

 4. Mr Mills, for the Secretary of State, made the point that the MQM was a
    majority party in Sindh province and in particular  in  Karachi  but  a
    minority party elsewhere.  He referred to election results and  to  the
    background material which had been before the  judge.   The  background
    evidence pointed to the  MQM   being  resented  elsewhere  in  Pakistan
    outside Sindh province and the idea that they would be able to act with
    impunity to harm the Appellant was not supported by  the  evidence,  he
    contended.  What the judge said did not  justify  the  conclusion  that
    internal relocation was not  available.   It  was  not  the  case  that
    internal relocation had not been relied upon.  It  was  dealt  with  at
    some  length  in  the  refusal  notice  which  the  Presenting  Officer
    expressly referred to.  There was no evidence that the MQM was actually
    able to extend its influence and he referred to  an  article  from  the
    Express  Tribune  newspaper  appearing  in  the  Respondent's   bundle.
    Elements of the MQM had planted bombs  which  generated  antipathy  and
    there was no evidence that they had any  significant  influence  beyond
    Karachi.

 5. He continued saying that Pakistan was a very large  country  and  there
    was a general sufficiency of protection.  He submitted that  the  judge
    had not addressed sufficiently the question of  whether  the  Appellant
    would be at risk in Punjab province.   Secondly,  he  said,  the  judge
    appeared to be saying that it would not be reasonable for the Appellant
    to relocate out of Karachi because his family were Mohajirs  but  there
    was no substantial evidence to support that.  The refusal letter  noted
    some discrimination but not of a serious nature.   The  response  under
    Rule 24 argued that the Appellant would be recognised but  it  had  not
    been explained how that would occur.   He  spoke  Urdu  which  was  the
    national language and it was not logical that he would face problems in
    that regard.  The Appellant did have health problems but the judge  had
    not found that these involved a potential breach of Article 3.  He  had
    previously been a successful businessman.  There was nothing  to  point
    to it being unreasonable to expect him to live elsewhere.

 6. In response to those submissions Mr Madanhi relied  upon  the  Rule  24
    response, he had put in.  The points he made were that  the  judge  had
    indicated that he had read the objective evidence and the reasons given
    were sufficient.  There was no need for the objective evidence to  show
    overwhelming evidence of risk or that the MQM  had  established  actual
    influence in the Punjab province.  The response then  went  on  to  say
    that in fact the judge was not making a finding on internal  relocation
    but rather that the Appellant would be at risk wherever he went and  it
    was unnecessary to  consider  the  reasonableness  of  relocation.   He
    continued that the MQM was the fourth largest party in Pakistan and was
    not necessarily confined to Sindh province.  If the Appellant  returned
    his first port of call would be to his home area.  Relocation would  be
    difficult because of  his  ethnic  background.   His  family  had  been
    targeted.  There were also significant medical issues.

 7. Having considered those submissions I came to the view that  there  had
    been an error of law on the part of the judge.   There  was  background
    evidence before him supporting the view that persons of Mohajir  origin
    would not be at a real  risk  of  persecution  in  Punjab  province  on
    account of their background.  There was also evidence as to the limited
    reach of the MQM in areas other than around Karachi.  The judge had not
    addressed these issues and  had  not  given  express  reasons  why  the
    Appellant would face a real risk if he moved to another  province  such
    as Punjab.  The finding made was inadequately reasoned having regard to
    the background evidence. It was not  possible  for  the  Respondent  to
    ascertain from the determination  the  reasoned  basis  on  which  that
    element of the appeal succeeded

 8. Having reached that view I asked for submissions on  the  questions  of
    risk and internal relocation.  It was also the case that the  Appellant
    had pleaded that his removal would be in breach of Article 8 ECHR.   As
    the judge had allowed the appeal on other grounds this  issue  was  not
    specifically addressed in the determination (see  paragraph  47).   The
    Appellant was present but there was no interpreter so that he  was  not
    in a position to give evidence.  There was a reference to the prospects
    for relocation contained at paragraph 34  of  his  original  statement.
    Having considered the submissions made and  bearing  in  mind  that  in
    addition to himself I am also having to have regard to the position  of
    the Appellant's  wife  and  children  in  this  country  and  that  the
    Appellant appears to suffer  from  psychological  difficulties  I  have
    decided not to make a final decision at this stage but  that  the  best
    course is for the appeal to be relisted before me when  if  so  advised
    the Appellant and his wife may give oral evidence and I  will  consider
    any  further  documentary  evidence  submitted  by  either   party   in
    accordance with the directions below.

 9. As an anonymity direction was made in the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  is
    appropriate that it should be continued in this Tribunal and I make  an
    order to that effect in the following terms.  Pursuant to  Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make
    an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  court  directs
    otherwise no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of  publication
    thereof shall directly or indirectly identity the original Appellant or
    any member of his family.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others,
    all parties.  Any failure to comply with this direction may  give  rise
    to proceedings for contempt of court.



Signed        Date 12 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French


Directions for Resumed Hearing

 1) The decision of Judge Camp has been set aside.  However the credibility
    findings he made concerning the Appellant's potential treatment in  his
    home area are preserved. At  the  resumed  hearing  the  issues  to  be
    decided will be whether  the  Appellant  would  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or treatment in breach of Article 3 in any  other  part  of
    Pakistan away from his home area, whether it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect him to move to such an area if no  such  risk  is  made  (having
    regard to his psychological condition and the position of his wife  and
    children) and issues generally under Article 8 ECHR.

 2) Any further witness statements or other documents relied on are  to  be
    served upon the Tribunal and upon the other party at  least  five  days
    before the resumed hearing.

 3) The hearing is listed before me at Birmingham on 8th January 2015.   An
    Urdu interpreter will be required.  The time estimate is one and a half
    hours.



Signed        Date 12 December 29014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
