
IAC-AH-SC-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07462/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20th March 2015                       |On 9th April 2015                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                        mr joe terrance frank stephen
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on  23rd  September  1985.
    The Appellant's  immigration  history  according  to  the  Home  Office
    records is the Appellant was granted an extension of his leave on  15th
    September 2009 which was subsequently extended until 30th October 2014.
     However within the course of that time the Appellant returned  to  Sri
    Lanka and returned using his own national passport and a valid visa  on
    29th April 2014 claiming asylum on arrival.  The Appellant claimed that
    if he returned to Sri Lanka  he  feared  he  would  be  killed  by  the
    government  due  to  what  they  would  perceive   as   anti-government
    activities on his part.  The Appellant's application was refused by the
    Secretary of State by detailed Notice  of  Refusal  letter  dated  12th
    September 2014.

 2. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal.  The appeal came  before  Judge
    O'Garro  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  1st  December  2014.    In   a
    determination promulgated on 2nd January 2015  the  Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds and the Appellant  was
    found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  16th
    January 2014.  On 2nd February 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Pooler noted that the  application
    for permission submitted that the judge had  erred  in  law  by  making
    errors of fact; failing  to  consider  the  evidence  before  her;  and
    doubting the authenticity of a document without  giving  the  Appellant
    the opportunity to have it verified.  The judge concluded  all  grounds
    were arguable.

 4. On 13th February 2015 the Secretary of State responded by way  of  Rule
    24 response.  The Rule 24 response opposed the Appellant's  appeal  and
    noted that the Respondent would submit inter alia that the judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal directed herself appropriately.  It  was  noted  in
    the  determination  and  the  refusal  letter  that   the   Appellant's
    nationality and ethnicity was accepted and that  irrespective  of  this
    the judge did not find the Appellant to be credible  in  his  account..
    It was contended that on the evidence provided,  and  in  consideration
    with the background provided, the  judge  was  entitled  to  make  such
    findings and to take  account  of  how  the  Appellant's  evidence  had
    changed from when he claimed asylum to the statement and  evidence  for
    the appeal hearing (paragraph 52).

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law.  The Appellant appears
    in  person.   The  Appellant  had  solicitors  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.  He advises that they have within the past two  weeks  ceased
    to act for him.  I explained the process to him and  acknowledged  that
    his Grounds of Appeal were settled by Counsel and  that  I  would  give
    them full and due consideration.  The Secretary of State appears by her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Jarvis.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Jarvis states that there are  no  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and he addresses the concerns
    expressed by Ms Allen in her Grounds of Appeal.  Mr  Jarvis  starts  by
    addressing  the  grounds  paragraph  by  paragraph.   He  submits  that
    paragraph 6 is incorrect and  that  at  paragraph  49  of  the  judge's
    determination she has not given purported  leave  from  Wattala  Police
    Station any evidential weight for reasons that she  has  set  out.   He
    points that the judge has quite rightly not concluded that  the  letter
    was a forgery  but  that  she  was  merely  not  prepared  to  give  it
    significant weight and that she has applied a proper test and  approach
    and that no procedural unfairness can stem from it.  He further  points
    out that the additional reference to letters to be found  at  paragraph
    13 of the Grounds of  Appeal  misses  the  point  completely  and  that
    unreliable documents can be obtained without difficulty.

 7. So far as the allegation at paragraph 7 of the grounds is concerned  he
    submits that being a Tamil alone would not put the  Appellant  at  risk
    and that paragraph 18 so far as the burns on the Appellant's  back  are
    concerned the judge has noted that at  questions  193  to  196  of  his
    substantive interview the Appellant was specifically asked about  those
    marks.  He comments at paragraph 52 of her determination the judge  has
    noted clearly that no mention is made of the Appellant having his  back
    burned in the manner described in his interview record.

 8. Mr Jarvis takes issue with paragraph 49 of the Grounds of Appeal  which
    contends that there is a failure to consider photographs  submitted  by
    the Appellant pointing out that GJ at paragraph 351  is  authority  for
    stating that merely being involved in demonstrations is not enough  and
    that it would have to be the Appellant's own profile that  exposed  him
    to risk.  Mr Jarvis points out that the Appellant of his  own  volition
    returned in 2012 to Sri Lanka and that there is no suggestion  that  he
    was stopped by the authorities because he had  returned  and  therefore
    that anything that took place in a  demonstration  in  2009  could  not
    possibly be construed as to put him at risk as he further submits  that
    there is nothing in the argument at paragraph 11 relating to the letter
    from Wattala Police Station and that this has actually been  previously
    addressed by him in submission.

 9. Mr Jarvis turns next to paragraph 14 of the Grounds of Appeal  and  the
    suggested criticism of  the  judge's  conclusions  in  respect  of  the
    letter.  He contends that this is mere argument  and  disagreement  and
    that the judge has given lawful reasons.  The same he contends is  true
    of paragraph 15.  So  far  as  the  contentions  of  paragraph  17  are
    concerned he again takes me back to the authority of GJ and points  out
    that mere association with the  LTT  is  insufficient  basis  to  claim
    asylum and that the judge has fully addressed this in her determination
    and goes further to point out that the Appellant's  claim  is  that  he
    took pictures and that there is no suggestion that  he  has  ever  been
    involved with the Diaspora and that what  he  did,  he  submits,  could
    never fit in with any of the risk factors.

10. Finally Mr Jarvis addresses paragraphs 18 to 21 of the grounds pointing
    out that the Appellant took no issue on his  return  and  that  in  any
    event the judge has found the Appellant's evidence  to  be  vague  (see
    paragraphs 43 and 48 of the decision).  He further  contends  that  the
    witness statements of the Appellant's father and wife were not ignored.
     They were considered by the judge and that the judge  has  focused  on
    actually what happened to the Appellant.  He submits that there are  no
    material errors of law and asked me to dismiss the appeal.

11. I therefore invited the Appellant if there was anything further that he
    wished to say.  He merely stated and I quote verbatim:

         "If I want to live in the UK why should I go back to Sri Lanka.   I
         want to earn money in the UK."

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

14. I have taken some trouble within this determination especially  as  the
    Appellant is a litigant in person before  me  and  not  represented  to
    ensure firstly that he fully understood the  process  and  secondly  to
    give him the opportunity to respond.  I have  adopted  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal as his submissions as to why there is a material error  of  law.
    I am very grateful to Mr Jarvis for the detailed approach which he  has
    adopted in attacking and addressing each and  every  Ground  of  Appeal
    that has been put forward  by  the  Appellant's  previously  instructed
    Counsel.  I acknowledge that the response of  the  Appellant  does  not
    effectively seek to challenge them but I do take into account  that  he
    is a litigant in person and I understand his desire to  remain  in  the
    UK.

15. Mr Jarvis has addressed all the Grounds of  Appeal  and  having  cross-
    referenced them to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  I  am
    satisfied that there is no material error  of  law  disclosed  in  this
    determination.  What the judge has done is very carefully analysed  the
    facts and given appropriate weight  to  documents  and  evidence  where
    appropriate.  The First-tier Tribunal's judge's determination  is  well
    constructed and the submissions either disclose no errors of law or  at
    their minimum level amount to disagreement  and  argument.   I  endorse
    within this determination as good reasons not rebutted the points  made
    by Mr Jarvis and in all the circumstances and looking at the matter  in
    the round I am quite satisfied that there is no material error  of  law
    disclosed in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   In
    such circumstances the Appellant's appeal must fail and the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal of the Appellant is dismissed and the decision of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 20th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 20th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

