
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07971/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2016                   |On 19 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                          Muraliganan Purushothaman
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Butterworth, instructed by Ravi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka who appealed  to  a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision of 23  August
    2013 to remove him as an illegal entrant from the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant's history while in Sri Lanka is common  ground.   He  was
    never a member of the LTTE but became a  supporter,  supplying  medical
    products in 2005 and helping to transport LTTE members from Colombo  to
    Omantha.  He came to  the  United  Kingdom  on  19  November  2008  for
    purposes of study.  He had been granted a visa which was valid until 28
    February 2012.  He travelled back to Sri Lanka in 2010 for his wedding.



3.   He said that in March 2011 the army started going to his house  looking
    for him and continued to hassle his parents and search for  him.   Most
    recently in January 2013 his mother told him they came looking for  him
    and his wife and they threatened his parents.  His father was  arrested
    and beaten and his knee was broken but  he  was  released  after  seven
    days.  This had occurred in April 2011.  In addition his wife  had  put
    in a statement that she was detained on  19  September  2012  and  ill-
    treated and released the following day after her uncle paid  money  and
    she came to the United Kingdom to be with the appellant.

4.   The judge noted the detailed country guidance set out in GJ and  Others
    [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC), and concluded that the appellant  did  not  come
    into any of the relevant categories of risk set out in that decision.

5.   With regard to credibility the judge noted that the appellant had  made
    a substantial delay in claiming asylum.  His claim was made on  2  July
    2013.  He gave different reasons for claiming late.  In  oral  evidence
    he said it was because he  was  waiting  for  his  wife  who  had  been
    arrested and he was trying to get a visa, whereas at interview he  said
    he was not thinking about anything and just thought it was safe in this
    country and did not think about anything else  and  had  a  visa  until
    February 2012.  It was put to  him  that  he  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom illegally for over a year after his visa expired and he said he
    did not attend the college so he did not  know  what  to  do  and  just
    wanted to stay in the United Kingdom  safely.   As  a  consequence  the
    judge  considered  that  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and   Immigration
    (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  was  of  relevance.   This
    provision states that a deciding authority shall take into  account  as
    damaging the claimant's credibility any behaviour to which that section
    of the Act applies and that includes delay in applying.  The judge said
    that the argument was that the appellant did not  perceive  himself  as
    being at risk and therefore did not claim asylum.  He  considered  that
    this damaged his credibility.   His  wife  had  claimed  that  she  was
    tortured.  The fact that a person has scars is no longer a risk profile
    according to GJ.  The judge said  that  also  the  fact  that  previous
    family members had been detained was not a strong factor which  on  its
    own indicated there  was  a  risk  profile  and  noted  that  this  was
    disputed.  He went on  to  say  that  therefore  it  was  a  reasonable
    conclusion that the delay in claiming asylum did damage the appellant's
    credibility as to his subjective fear of persecution.  He believed that
    the appellant had not claimed asylum due to the fact that  he  did  not
    perceive himself  to  be  at  risk  which  was  consistent,  the  judge
    considered, with his findings that he would  not  face  persecution  on
    return.  He went on to say that he did not find  that  the  appellant's
    family had been detained and even if it was true he did not  find  that
    this created a risk profile.  The judge saw  similarities  between  the
    second appellant in GJ and the appellant in the appeal before  him  and
    concluded that he had not shown that he faced a real risk on return  to
    Sri Lanka both in respect of the Refugee Convention  and  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

6.   Permission to appeal the decision was refused  by  a  First-tier  Judge
    and on renewal by a Judge of the Upper Tribunal.  However on a judicial
    review challenge to the refusal Mrs Justice Andrews granted  permission
    on the basis that it was strongly arguable that, although the order  of
    the Court of Appeal in MP and NT (C5/2013/2603 and C5/2013/2607,  which
    stated that individuals  falling  outside  the  country  guidance  risk
    categories should not for that  reason  alone  have  their  claims  for
    asylum rejected, had not been before the judge, nevertheless there were
    strong arguments for it being taken into account and in any  event  she
    considered that it was strongly arguable that the judge  had  erred  in
    the context of the country guidance.

7.   The essential basis upon which it is argued that  the  appellant  comes
    within the country guidance is with reference to paragraph 7(A) of  the
    guidance set out at the start of the determination in  GJ,  itself  set
    out in full at paragraph 356 of the determination in that  case,  which
    states:

         "(a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to  the
             integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or
             are perceived to have a significant role in relation to  post-
             conflict Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and/or  the
             renewal of hostilities within Sri  Lanka  are  a  category  of
             persons at real risk of detention or serious harm on return to
             Sri Lanka."

8.   The argument in this regard essentially centres  on  the  claimed  ill-
    treatment of the appellant's family as an aspect of adverse interest in
    him.   I  have  set  out  above  the  judge's  conclusions   on   this.
    Essentially, as was pointed out  by  Mr  Butterworth  in  his  skeleton
    argument, the judge's disbelief in this  aspect  of  the  claim  was  a
    consequence of his findings under section 8.  In JT  (Cameroon)  [2008]
    EWCA Civ 878 the Court of Appeal noted that it  is  necessary  to  take
    account of the categories stated in section 8, but that it is  no  more
    than a reminder to fact-finding Tribunals that  conduct  coming  within
    the category stated in the sections is to  be  taken  into  account  in
    assessing credibility.

9.    In  my  view  the  difficulty  with  paragraphs  31  and  32  of   the
    determination in this regard  is  that  they  have  not  addressed  the
    evidence as a whole.  As I have noted above, the appellant's activities
    in Sri Lanka were essentially common ground.  There is his evidence  at
    interview as to what happened and his wife's  witness  statement  which
    were  relevant  matters  that  required  to  be  borne  in  mind   when
    considering the evidence as a whole.   Given  that  there  is  credible
    evidence with regard to other aspects of the claim, and where  evidence
    in some detail  set  out  in  the  appellant's  interview  and  in  his
    statement and in his  wife's  statement,  the  judge  was  required  to
    consider these pieces of evidence and assess the matter in  the  round.
    Essentially the judge  took  the  delay  in  claiming  asylum  and  the
    different reasons given for that as  a  reason  for  disbelieving  this
    aspect of the claim.  In my view that is a matter of clear materiality.
     Had the judge given coherent reasons for disbelieving this  aspect  of
    the claim then I  do  not  see  that  it  could  have  succeeded.   The
    appellant's profile was a low one and it is difficult on the face of it
    to see why interest in him would suddenly revive in 2011  when  he  had
    been out of the country for several  years.   But  given  the  kind  of
    adverse interest that was indicated in the evidence, this was enough in
    my view potentially to bring him within the country guidance or if  not
    then as indicated in the grant of permission in  MP  and  NT  it  is  a
    matter potentially requiring consideration even if  it  does  not  fall
    within the guidance.  I am satisfied that this level  of  interest,  if
    found to be credible, is such that it could show risk  under  paragraph
    7(A) of the guidance in GJ and Others.  Accordingly there will need  to
    be  a  rehearing  of  this  appeal,  although  the  positive   findings
    summarised at paragraph 22 of the judge's determination are  preserved.
    In the circumstances this is a proper case for rehearing before a First-
    tier Judge, and accordingly I direct that the matter  is  remitted  for
    rehearing on the basis set out above by a First-tier Judge  other  than
    Judge Parker at Bennett House.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

