

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07947/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th  May 2016                      |On 17th May 2016                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between
                                   MR R K K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Syed-Ali, Counsel instructed by Vasuki
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. However, as this is
a protection based claim, I consider it appropriate that an anonymity
direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
      Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Gladstone promulgated on  16  January  2015  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 22 September 2014 to  remove  the  Appellant  to  Sri
       Lanka and rejecting his protection claim.


    2. The basis of the Appellant's protection claim  is  set  out  in  the
       Decision at [13] to [25] and his evidence (written and oral)  is  at
       [40] to [65].  The Appellant submitted a medical report prepared  by
       Dr Moulson.  That was not considered by the Respondent as  it  post-
       dated her decision.  The Judge sets out the  main  elements  of  the
       report at [73] to [102] in the context of  her  findings  about  the
       Appellant's credibility.  The Judge did not believe the  Appellant's
       claim  ([106]).   The  Judge  also  concluded  that  even   if   the
       Appellant's account were true, he would not be at risk on return  to
       Sri Lanka ([107] to [108]).


    3. The Appellant's criticism of the Decision  as  set  out  in  written
       grounds and expanded upon  by  Mr  Syed-Ali  can  be  summarised  as
       follows:-


           .      The Judge, when  assessing  the  Appellant's  credibility,
             took into account trivial inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
             account;
           .      The Judge questioned Dr Moulson's expertise  and  findings
             and reached  conclusions  different  to  those  of  the  expert
             concerning the Appellant's comprehension and memory;
           .      The Judge's reasoning concerning  the  Appellant's  escape
             from detention was unreasoned;
           .      The Judge  ignored  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
             Appellant that he would  be  at  risk  on  return  due  to  the
             paranoia of the Sri Lankan authorities concerning the LTTE  and
             Tamils more generally; it is plausible that the Appellant would
             be on a stop list at the airport.


    4. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Macdonald on the  basis  that  the  Judge  may  have  minimised  the
       importance of the medical evidence and the reasons given by her  for
       not accepting that evidence are "lightweight".


    5. This matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision  contains
       an error of law and if so to  re-make  the  Decision  or  remit  the
       appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal for re-hearing.


    Discussion


    6. At the start of the hearing,  Mr  Syed-Ali  sought  to  introduce  a
       letter from Dr Juliet Cohen of the Medical Foundation which was said
       to address some of the Judge's criticisms about Dr Moulson's report.
        Mr Syed-Ali accepted however that if there were no  application  to
       adduce this further evidence (which there was not) he could not rely
       upon it.  Mr McVeety had  no  prior  notice  of  this  evidence.   I
       refused to admit this further evidence.   An  application  could  be
       made to adduce this evidence in the event that I  found  a  material
       error of law.  If I did not, it would be open to  the  Appellant  to
       make further submissions to the Respondent if the  evidence  remains
       relevant following my decision.


    7. The focus of Mr Syed-Ali's submissions was the Judge's treatment  of
       the medical evidence.   He  pointed  me  to  [70]  where  the  Judge
       accepted that the Appellant had been consistent about  the  core  of
       his claim.  However,  as  is  clear  from  that  paragraph  and  the
       Respondent's refusal letter, the Appellant has not  been  consistent
       in the details of his account.


    8. It is notable  that  Dr  Moulson  himself  recorded  inconsistencies
       between the Appellant's accounts ([73] of the  report).  Dr  Moulson
       provides possible explanations for why those  inconsistencies  might
       exist at [74] and why in his opinion the Appellant's  account  might
       still be true [75].  At [76] of the report, Dr Moulson suggests that
       several factors ought to be taken into account when considering  the
       apparent discrepancies.  Those factors are repeated by the Judge  in
       summary form at [78] of the Decision.  It cannot be  said  therefore
       that when assessing the credibility of the Appellant's account,  the
       Judge was not aware that there might be alternative explanations for
       the inconsistencies and that she  should  consider  the  Appellant's
       evidence against that background.  However, as she then records,  it
       is for her to assess credibility [80].  In  so  doing,  she  rejects
       some of the explanations put forward  by  Dr  Moulson  but  provides
       reasons for doing so.


    9. Mr Syed-Ali then  referred  me  to  Dr  Moulson's  analysis  of  the
       scarring and the doctor's conclusions that of the  sixteen  relevant
       lesions one was highly consistent with the Appellant's account, nine
       were typical of the report given and six were  diagnostic  of  their
       attributions ([83] of the report).  Again,  the  Judge  has  recited
       those conclusions at [76] of her Decision.  The Judge however  casts
       some doubt on the doctor's conclusions at [84] where she points  out
       that, according to the case of KV  (scarring-medical  evidence)  Sri
       Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC), it would  not  be  possible  to  date
       scarring which is over two years old.  In the Appellant's  case,  he
       claimed that the injuries were sustained in the first six months  of
       a period of detention of eight years which on his account  ended  in
       2014.  In light of the findings in KV the Judge was entitled  to  be
       sceptical about the possibility of dating the scars (as  Dr  Moulson
       appears to do at [84] of his report).


   10. Nonetheless the Judge considers the content of the medical report in
       relation to the scarring and other injuries at some length  at  [84]
       to [96] of the Decision.  The Judge observes  however  that  medical
       evidence concluding that injuries are consistent with reports may or
       may not add credence to the claim.


   11. The  Judge  does  not  there  or  elsewhere  question  Dr  Moulson's
       expertise.  Although the Judge notes at [75] of the Decision that Dr
       Moulson does not state whether he has carried out the minimum number
       of reports required by the Medical Foundation to maintain expertise,
       she accepts that he has.  The Judge also notes  that  she  does  not
       know from Dr Moulson's report whether the Tribunal has accepted  his
       reports in other cases but that is noted as a matter of fact and not
       as criticism of his expertise.  She  does  note  at  [100]  that  Dr
       Moulson does not have qualifications in relation  to  psychiatry  or
       psychology but that does not then lead to  any  adverse  finding  in
       relation to his opinion.  Instead, at  [106],  the  Judge  indicates
       that she has taken account of that medical report and  the  findings
       in relation to scarring but  does  not  consider  that  the  medical
       evidence means that the Appellant is credible.


   12. Another matter which Mr  Syed-Ali  raised  in  submissions  was  the
       inconsistency in relation to the length of  the  medical  interviews
       between what was said by  Dr  Moulson  and  what  was  said  by  the
       Appellant.  The Appellant was interviewed on three occasions  by  Dr
       Moulson over a six hour period.  The Appellant by  contrast  thought
       that he had been interviewed by the doctor for three to  four  hours
       on each occasion.  This  inconsistency  is  noted  at  [73]  of  the
       Decision but no finding is reached in that  regard  and  it  is  not
       relied upon by the Judge in the section dealing with her credibility
       findings.


   13.  As  Mr  McVeety  pointed  out  in  his  submissions,  although  the
       Appellant's core claim  was  found  to  be  consistent,  there  were
       inconsistencies in the detail which were remarked upon not  just  by
       the Respondent but also by Dr Moulson.  Whilst Dr Moulson  did  give
       an opinion about why this may be so, the  Judge  was  not  bound  to
       accept that opinion and gave reasons why she did not do so  at  [80]
       of the Decision.


   14. Mr McVeety pointed out that  the  Appellant's  case  amounted  to  a
       submission that the Judge was  obliged  to  accept  as  binding  the
       opinions expressed in a medical report produced  on  behalf  of  the
       Medical Foundation.  He pointed out that the Judge had not  rejected
       the evidence but found that it  did  not  alter  her  views  on  the
       Appellant's credibility and gave reasons why that was so.


   15. Mr McVeety pointed out that the Judge's reasoning on credibility was
       based not on minor inconsistencies but significant implausibility in
       the Appellant's account particularly for example in how he had  been
       able to escape capture by the LTTE when guarded by ten  persons  all
       of whom had fallen asleep whilst they were supposed to  be  guarding
       him ([70]).  In reply Mr Syed-Ali pointed out  that  those  guarding
       him were LTTE members who  were  not  imprisoning  those  they  were
       guarding and would assume that they did not need to guard Tamils who
       they would assume to be on their side.  However, that submission  is
       inconsistent with the evidence given by the Appellant ([53]  of  the
       Decision).


   16. In fact, as noted by Dr Moulson  himself,  far  from  resolving  the
       inconsistencies in the Appellant's account to which  the  Respondent
       had already drawn attention, his  report  served  to  add  to  those
       inconsistencies.  As I note above, Dr Moulson was of course entitled
       to offer an opinion about why this may be so.  However, it  was  for
       the Judge having heard the Appellant's evidence  to  decide  whether
       she  accepted  that  opinion  or  found  that  the   inconsistencies
       undermined the Appellant's account.




   17.  The  Judge  also  drew  attention  to  other  inconsistencies   and
       implausibility which form her reasons for rejecting the  Appellant's
       credibility.  Those are as follows:-
               . The Appellant said at his  asylum  interview  that  he  was
                 taken by  five  people  at  gunpoint  and  described  their
                 uniforms in some detail but told Dr Moulson that they  were
                 in civilian clothing [81];
               . The Appellant had not mentioned some  of  the  injuries  he
                 claimed  to  have  sustained  during   detention   by   the
                 authorities until he was interviewed by Dr Moulson [85];
               . The Appellant gave different accounts of the  work  he  was
                 required to do in detention in the  course  of  his  asylum
                 interview, to Dr Moulson and to the Judge [101];
               . The Judge finds implausible the Appellant's account of  how
                 he was able to secure better treatment from the cook at the
                 camp [102] and  that the cook had been able to contact  his
                 family easily as the Appellant claimed [103];
               . The Appellant did not mention until later that it  was  his
                 father who bribed the authorities to release  him,  stating
                 in initial interview that "someone" had done so [104];
               . At the time when the Appellant says  that  his  father  was
                 detained by the authorities in Sri Lanka, the Appellant was
                 on his account in their detention - there would be no  need
                 for them to ask about the  Appellant's  whereabouts  [105].
                 This led to a further inconsistency between the Appellant's
                 answers at interview and in oral evidence  at  the  hearing
                 ([59] and [64]).


   18. It is not the case that the Judge held minor inconsistencies against
       the Appellant.  She notes at [69] of the Decision that she does  not
       find the Appellant's delay in claiming asylum  as  damaging  to  his
       credibility.  The Judge accepts at  [71]  that  the  LTTE  did  take
       people by force so  that  the  objective  evidence  was  capable  of
       supporting the Appellant's account.  She also notes  inconsistencies
       between the  answers  given  by  the  Appellant  during  the  asylum
       interview and those given to Dr Moulson  regarding  capture  by  the
       army but does not consider those to be of major significance.


    Decision and reasons


   19. The Decision  contains  a  very  careful  analysis  of  the  medical
       evidence.  The criticisms made of  the  Judge's  treatment  of  that
       evidence are not borne out on a careful  analysis  of  the  relevant
       paragraphs  of  the  Decision.   The  Judge  does  not  question  Dr
       Moulson's expertise.  She does not criticise the report  other  than
       in very minor regards and there is  no  suggestion  that  she  finds
       those matters to undermine the report.  As she points  out,  though,
       the medical  evidence  can  only  go  so  far  in  establishing  the
       credibility  of  an  account.   As  Mr  McVeety  points   out,   the
       Appellant's submission  amounts  to  requiring  a  Judge  to  accept
       opinions expressed in a report as binding.  The Judge has given  her
       reasons for not accepting the expert's  opinion  on  certain  issues
       (for example as to the Appellant's recall).


   20. The Judge was of course required to take account of the  opinion  of
       Dr Moulson in reaching her views on credibility.  That she has done.
        She has however rejected the evidence as  establishing  credibility
       when balanced against the inconsistencies in the Appellant's account
       (and  taking   account   of   the   possible   reasons   for   those
       inconsistencies).  As the Judge notes, however, it  is  for  her  to
       decide whether the Appellant's account is credible and that she  has
       done at [106] taking account of  all  evidence  which  includes  the
       medical evidence.


   21. For completeness, I add that even if I had accepted that  there  was
       an error of law in relation to the  findings  about  credibility,  I
       would not have found this to  be  material  when  coupled  with  the
       findings on the issue of risk on return.


   22. The Judge deals with this issue at [107] and [108] as follows:-
            "[107]     Nonetheless, even if I consider the alternative  and
           find that the appellant's account is credible  and  truthful,  I
           refer to the country guidance case of GJ and Others (post  civil
           war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).   This  is
           referred to in KK  included  in  the  appellant's  bundle.   The
           headnote in KK states 'There is no merit in  the  argument  that
           the country guidance  given  by  this  tribunal  in  GJ  is  not
           rational or that it is inconsistent with the  evidence  accepted
           by the tribunal'.  The headnote in GJ is reproduced at  the  end
           of KK  setting out those at risk on return.  I do  not  consider
           that this appellant falls into any  of  the  categories  listed,
           without setting them out here.  For example, there has been   no
           suggestion
            that his is the subject of an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
           warrant.  On the basis of accepting his account, despite signing
           a document confirming that he was a terrorist,  with  his  photo
           attached, the appellant was  still  able  to  pass  through  the
           airport, with a false passport but with his photo.  He explained
           that the agent had arranged this, directing him  to  a  specific
           counter.  Yet GJ  refers  to  the  Sri       Lankan  authorities
           having sophisticated intelligence.  It continues that,  in  post
           conflict Sri  Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  would  be
           relevant only to the extent that it was  perceived  by  the  Sri
           Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to  the  unitary
           Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government.
            [108]       On his own evidence  the  authorities  appeared  to
       lose interest in the       appellant after the first six  months  of
       his  detention.   The  respondent  noted  that  the      Sri  Lankan
       government had gradually released many, but not  all,  of  the  more
       than      11,000 suspected LTTE members detained, indicating a  lack
       of  concern,  and  I     consider  the  same  would  apply  to  this
       appellant. He has a family to whom he can   return."


   23. The suggestion at [19] of the  Appellant's  grounds  that  "the  Sri
       Lankan government remains  paranoid  about  the  LTTE  and  suspects
       Tamils generally" is not borne out by the findings in  GJ  ((7)  and
       (8) of the headnote).  Those findings were upheld by  the  Court  of
       Appeal in MP (Sri Lanka) and NT (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for
       the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 829.   The Court of Appeal in MP
       (Sri Lanka) expressly upheld KK and  rejected  the  submission  that
       previous LTTE connections without more  would  lead  to  a  risk  on
       return.


   24. There is no suggestion that  the  Appellant  has  been  involved  in
       separatist activities whilst in the UK.  In fact, his case  is  that
       he has never been a LTTE sympathiser.

   25. There is no evidence that the Appellant is the subject of an  arrest
       warrant.  Although Mr Syed-Ali appeared to question in  his  closing
       submissions whether there was an arrest warrant in being against the
       Appellant, there is nothing in the Appellant's bundle  or  statement
       to suggest that there is.  Absent an arrest warrant, the  submission
       in the grounds that it is "plausible" that the  Appellant  is  on  a
       stop list is  nothing  more  than  supposition  and,  as  the  Judge
       remarks, appears inconsistent with his ability to leave the  airport
       unchallenged and his  family  remaining  in  Sri  Lanka  without  it
       appears any problems.  In any event, the  Appellant  would  need  to
       show a "real risk" that the Appellant would be on a  stop  list  and
       not simply that it was plausible.


   26. Even if the  Appellant's  account  were  accepted  to  be  credible,
       therefore, there is no error of law in the Judge's finding that  the
       Appellant would not be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.


   27. I am therefore satisfied that there is no material error of  law  in
       the Decision and I uphold it.


    DECISION


    The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an error
    on a point of law. I therefore uphold the First-tier Tribunal  Decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gladstone promulgated on 16  January  2015
    with the consequence that the appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.




    Signed [pic] Date: 10 May 2016




      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
