
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07796/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 August 2016                        |On 31 August 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     TaO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Manley instructed by NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya.  She arrived in the United Kingdom
    on 20 November 2010 with a visit visa valid until 25 April 2011.

 2. On 6 December 2012 the appellant claimed asylum.  Although  her  asylum
    claim  was  refused  on  4  October  2013  the  appellant  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain for twelve months until 4 October 2014 on
    the basis  that  she  was  considered  to  be  a  potential  victim  of
    trafficking.

 3. On 2 October 2014, the appellant applied for further leave  to  remain.
    She claimed that she would be at risk  on  return  to  Kenya  from  her
    husband as he had discovered that she was a lesbian  and  further  that
    she was at risk of FGM from the Mungiki.

 4. On 23 April 2015, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claim
    for asylum and humanitarian protection and also refused  to  grant  her
    leave under Article 8 or on a discretionary basis.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. Following a hearing on 21 October 2015, Judge A D Troup  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds in a determination dated  29  October
    2015.  Judge Troup made an adverse credibility  finding.   He  did  not
    accept that the appellant was a lesbian and so  was  at  risk  on  that
    account from her husband in Kenya.  Further, he rejected her account to
    be at risk of FGM.  Finally,  Judge  Troup  dismissed  the  appellant's
    claim under Article 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 8. In her grounds, the appellant did not challenge  the  judge's  findings
    (1) that she was had  not  established  that  she  was  a  lesbian  and
    consequently was not at risk from her husband  and,  further,  and  (2)
    that she was not at risk of FGM because of  her  husband's  association
    with the Mungiki.

 9. The grounds solely challenged  the  judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under Article 8.  In essence, the grounds argue that  the  judge
    failed to consider whether the appellant's circumstances on  return  to
    Kenya were "unduly harsh" as she would be returning as a  single  woman
    with no support network and may be subject  to  destitution.   Reliance
    was placed on the Home Office OGN (December 2013) at para 3.16.30 which
    stated that: "It should be noted  that  women,  and  especially  single
    women, with no support network are likely to be vulnerable and  may  be
    subject to destitution."  Reliance was also placed upon the appellant's
    particular circumstances, namely that she had been adopted from Rwanda,
    her husband was abusive, she had no other family or  friends  in  Kenya
    and she had a serious ongoing mental health problem.

10. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but on 21 December 2015, the Upper Tribunal (DUTJ Mailer)  granted  the
    appellant permission on the ground that the judge had  arguably  failed
    to consider whether it would be "unduly harsh"  for  the  appellant  to
    return to Kenya as a single woman in assessing her claim under  Article
    8.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

12. On behalf of the appellant, Mr  Manley  relied  upon  the  grounds  and
    submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  properly   consider   the
    circumstances of the appellant on return to Kenya.  Mr Manley submitted
    that the judge had failed to make any  finding  whether  the  appellant
    would return as a single woman.  Further he relied upon paras 61 and 62
    of the respondent's decision letter where, he submitted,  it  had  been
    accepted  that  the  appellant  would  be  unwilling  to  continue  her
    relationship with her husband and would not be returning  to  him.   Mr
    Manley submitted that the judge had failed to consider the  appellant's
    claim under Article 8 as a returning single woman.

13. Mr Richards, on behalf of the Secretary of State submitted  that  there
    was no evidential basis for the judge to find that the appellant  would
    be returning as a single or lone woman. Mr Richards submitted that  the
    judge had made comprehensive adverse credibility findings  against  the
    appellant rejecting her claim that she was a lesbian and at  risk  from
    her husband as a result of that and, in addition, that she was at  risk
    on return of being subjected to FGM.  Mr Richards  submitted  that  the
    judge had, in effect, found that the appellant would  be  returning  to
    Kenya where she had a husband and was not therefore  someone  who  fell
    potentially within the category of a returning single or lone woman.

Discussion

14. The judge's decision and reasons in relation to Article 8 are  set  out
    at paras 40 - 41 of his determination as follows:

         "40. The representative agreed that the Immigration Rules  relating
             to family and private life are not engaged in this appeal.

             As  appears  from  the  Appellant's  bundle  however,  she  is
             receiving treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder at  the
             Links Centre of the Cardiff Royal Infirmary.  I find from  the
             Respondent's  'Response  to  Country  of  Origin   Information
             Request' dated 24 April 2014 however that medication for  that
             condition is available in Kenya.

         41.  As to private and family life outside the Rules, there  is  no
             evidence before me that the Appellant  has  a  private  and/or
             family life in the UK, despite Counsel's submission  that  she
             has.  She does not claim to be in a relationship of  any  sort
             here, and there is simply no evidence  before  me  of  private
             life.  Bearing in mind however that  the  Appellant  has  been
             resident in the UK since 2010, it can be inferred that private
             life of some sort has been established but  I  find  that  the
             Appellant's removal to Kenya  does  not  reach  her  protected
             rights.  The Respondent's  decision  may  interfere  with  the
             enjoyment of that right, but the decision is made  in  pursuit
             of  the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration   control   and   is
             proportionate.  I have taken account of  the  public  interest
             considerations applicable in all case at section 117B  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  I note that the
             maintenance of effective immigration control is in the  public
             interest and, further, that little weight should be  given  to
             private life established at a time when a person's immigration
             status is precarious.  Thus, when  balancing  the  Appellant's
             interests against those of the public, I find when taking  all
             applicable  considerations  into  account  that   the   public
             interest prevails and I dismiss the appeal under Article 8."

15. It is clear that in para 40 the judge dealt with the  appellant's  case
    under Article 8 in respect of her PTSD.  His conclusion that medication
    for that condition is available in Kenya is not challenged.

16. Equally, it is clear that in para 41 the judge did not directly address
    the case put to him by the appellant's (then) representative  that  she
    would be returning as a single or lone woman and, based upon  the  Home
    Office's  own  OGN,  would  be  vulnerable  and  might  be  subject  to
    destitution in the absence of a support network.

17. The failure to do so is,  of  course,  at  the  heart  of  Mr  Manley's
    submissions on behalf  of  the  appellant.   The  difficulty  with  the
    submission is, however, that the judge clearly  found,  in  making  his
    adverse credibility findings, that the appellant's account based upon a
    risk emanating from her husband was simply not established.  The judge,
    in effect, rejected any basis put forward by the appellant  upon  which
    she claimed she could not return to Kenya to be with her husband.  None
    of those findings are challenged.

18. Mr Manley placed reliance upon para 62  of  the  refusal  letter  which
    states,

         "... therefore, it is not unreasonable to accept that  you  are  no
         longer willing to continue your relationship with your husband  and
         will no be returning to him."

19. Mr Manley submitted that the Secretary of State had accepted  that  the
    appellant would return to Kenya but not to her husband.

20. That submission cannot, however, be sustained when para 62 is  seen  in
    context.

21. At para 62 of the  RRL  and  thereafter,  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    considering whether the  appellant  could  internally  relocate  within
    Kenya.  Previously in her decision letter, the Secretary of  State  had
    rejected the appellant's claim to be at risk  from  her  husband.   The
    context is, therefore, one in which the Secretary of  State  is  taking
    the appellant's claim "at its highest".  The only basis upon which  the
    appellant claimed that she would not return to her husband was that she
    was at risk from him.  That is a premise  which  was  rejected  by  the
    Secretary  of  State  (and  subsequently  by  Judge  Troup)   and   the
    consideration of internal relocation para 62 is based upon the  counter
    factual premise that the appellant  is,  in  fact,  at  risk  from  her
    husband.  It is not an acceptance by the Secretary of  State  that  the
    appellant will not be able to return to her husband.

22. Consequently, when considering Article 8 Judge Troup had  rejected  any
    basis put forward by the appellant as to why she could  not  return  to
    her husband.  Self-evidently, therefore, she would not be returning  as
    a single or lone woman despite the case put forward on  her  behalf  at
    the hearing.  Whilst it might have been clearer if Judge Troup had made
    an explicit finding, there can be no doubt, given his rejection of  the
    appellant's evidence and credibility, that the  factual  matrix  relied
    upon by the appellant and repeated in her grounds of appeal simply  did
    not arise.  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is  the  implicit  (and  indeed
    inevitable) premise upon which Judge Troup approached  the  appellant's
    claim under Article 8.

23. As a result, there was simply no basis upon which the  appellant  could
    succeed under Article 8 returning to a country where her husband  lived
    given the judge's rejection of her account of his ill-treatment  or  of
    any risk to her of ill-treatment by him. There was no  reason  why  she
    could not return to him and hence was not properly seen as a  returning
    loan or single woman.  No other challenge is made  in  respect  of  the
    judge's reasoning in paras 40 and  41  in  dismissing  the  appellant's
    claim under Article 8.

24. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that the judge's decision did not
    involve the making of an error of law and his decision stands.

Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and  under  Art  2
    and 3 of the ECHR is not challenged.

26. Further, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal under Article 8 did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law.

27. Accordingly, the judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal  on
    all grounds stands.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                       Date 31st August 2016

