
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07094/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 13 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|Prepared 28 November 2013                     |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

                                     S V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, Counsel, instructed by Luqmani Thompson
                    & Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   Following a hearing at Field House on 2 October 2013 I decided  to  set
    aside a determination dismissing the appellant's appeal, and I  decided
    that the decision needed to be re-made, with no findings preserved.  My
    reasons for doing so are set out  in  an  error  of  law  decision  and
    directions, signed on 15  October  2013,  which  is  attached  to  this
    determination.

2.   The hearing took place on  the  same  day  that  the  Court  of  Appeal
    granted permission  to  appeal  in  GJ  and  Others  (Post  Civil  War:
    Returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  Neither side made any
    application for an adjournment as a result of this, and  there  was  no
    suggestion that this prevented me from following the  country  guidance
    set out in that case.  I  have  noted  the  comment  in  the  grant  of
    permission regarding the need to avoid limiting consideration  of  risk
    only to whether any of the headnote risk categories were applicable.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, of Tamil  ethnicity,  born  in
    1990.  She comes from Jaffna.  She came to  the  UK  with  leave  as  a
    student on 25 March 2012, and claimed asylum on 14 June 2012.  She went
    through an asylum interview on 4 July 2012, and her claim  was  refused
    on 13 July 2012.  A notice of appeal was then completed.

4.   In a discussion at the start of the hearing the issues  to  be  decided
    were identified as follows.  The first issue was credibility, which was
    challenged by the respondent; the second was  risk  on  return  in  the
    light of GJ and the background evidence; the appellant's case was being
    argued primarily on  asylum  grounds,  but  also  under  Article  3  in
    relation to mental health and suicide risk, and under Article 8 for the
    same reasons.

The Relevant Law

5.    The  refugee  or  person   in   need   of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 (the Protection Regulations) came into
    force on 9 October 2006, along with changes to  the  Immigration  Rules
    (HC 395 as amended).  These  changes  principally  inserted  paragraphs
    339A  to  339Q  into  the  Immigration  Rules.   Both  the   Protection
    Regulations and the new paragraph 339 gave effect to Council  Directive
    2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 (the Qualification Directive).

6.   To qualify as a refugee the burden is on the appellant to show a  well-
    founded fear of persecution for one of the Refugee  Convention  reasons
    (race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social  group,
    or political opinion) as at the date of the hearing.

7.   If not entitled to recognition as  a  refugee  the  burden  is  on  the
    appellant to show that he is entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  in
    accordance with paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules  (enacting  the
    subsidiary protection provisions of the Qualification Directive).   The
    applicant must show that there are substantial  grounds  for  believing
    that he would face a  real  risk  of  suffering  serious  harm  without
    sufficient protection.  (Serious harm is defined in  the  Qualification
    Directive and at paragraph 339C as consisting of the death  penalty  or
    execution, unlawful killing, torture or inhuman or degrading  treatment
    or punishment of the person in the country of return,  or  serious  and
    individual  threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or  person  by  reason  of
    indiscriminate violence in  situations  of  international  or  internal
    armed conflict.)

8.   For Article  3,  which  prohibits  torture  or  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment,  the burden in the appeal is on the appellant to  show  that
    there are substantial grounds for believing there to be a real risk  of
    a violation of that Article.

9.   Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004 sets out factors that are to be  treated  as  damaging  to  an
    applicant's credibility.

The Evidence and the Hearing

10.  The evidence was contained in two appellant's  bundles  (marked  A  and
    B).  Bundle A was paginated from A1 to B167, and bundle  B  from  1  to
    121.  The  respondent's  bundle  contained  records  of  the  screening
    interview and asylum interview.  In addition to the  documents  in  the
    bundles the respondent provided a document describing  the  process  of
    applying for a student visa in Sri Lanka.  Ms Smith, for the appellant,
    produced a comprehensive skeleton argument (thirteen pages; 12 November
    2013).  In addition to the statements in the main bundles there was  an
    additional witness statement for the appellant (11  November  2013);  a
    letter from a counsellor at Freedom from Torture  (11  November  2013);
    and an additional witness statement by the  appellant  prepared  before
    the October error of law hearing (statement dated 19 September 2013).

11.  The appellant was the only witness at the  hearing.   She  adopted  her
    four witness statements.  In addition to  the  two  witness  statements
    mentioned above there were also witness statements prepared in July and
    August 2012, one after the asylum interview, and the  other  after  the
    refusal letter.

12.  I do not intend to list all of the evidence in  the  bundles,  but  the
    following items are of particular significance.   There  is  a  country
    expert report  by  Professor  Anthony  Good,  dated  3  December  2012,
    prepared for this appellant's appeal; there is a report  by  Dr  Rachel
    Thomas, a clinical psychologist, dated 20 August 2012; and in  addition
    there are letters from  Ilana  Bakal,  a  Counsellor  at  Freedom  From
    Torture (Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of  Torture)  dated
    27 March 2013, and 11 November 2013.

13.  The appellant's bundle B contains a letter from the Sri  Lankan  police
    (Terrorist Investigation Unit), dated 30 June 2012, ordering the arrest
    of the appellant.

14.  The appellant's account can be summarised, in brief terms, as  follows.
     She was an only child, and her father ran  a  shop.   She  obtained  A
    levels in 2009.  Her family supported the LTTE with donations of  money
    and food.  They lived a few minutes' walk from  a  University  and  her
    parents rented rooms to students.  The rooms were in an annex  next  to
    the house.  Some of the students were visited by an LTTE journalist and
    TV presenter, known as Isaipriya.  She came to know the family,  and  a
    friendship developed.  The appellant distributed LTTE leaflets  in  her
    own school and at other schools,  to  encourage  people  to  attend  an
    annual cultural event called Pongu Tamil.  The  appellant  visited  the
    LTTE media centre, at Isaipriya's invitation, in 2008.

15.  The appellant was first arrested by the Sri Lankan army  in  May  2008.
    Previously she had been stopped at checkpoints, but on  this  occasion,
    with school friends, she was picked up by the  army,  blindfolded,  and
    taken to an army camp.  She was ill-treated and  interrogated.   A  USB
    stick was found in her school bag.  The  ill-treatment  included  being
    dragged by the hair, being slapped, punched, and kicked.  She was  also
    sexually assaulted, questioned about her connection with the LTTE,  and
    about the identities of people in photographs on the USB.  She was left
    for a day without food and water.  Photographs of  an  LTTE  first  aid
    training programme were found on the USB stick.  During questioning her
    head was forced into a water tank  three  times.   She  was  forced  to
    kneel, and was beaten with a pole  and  metal  bars.   She  refused  to
    identify people in the photographs, although she knew that some of them
    were part of the LTTE.  She was forcibly stripped and left naked.   She
    was also struck with a gun barrel.  After  several  weeks  her  parents
    obtained her release through payment of a bribe.  The appellant remains
    traumatised from this detention.

16.  Soldiers searched the house and the annex about two  months  after  her
    release.  The appellant returned to her studies,  and  had  no  contact
    with Isaipriya.

17.  In September 2011 there were further searches by the Sri  Lankan  army,
    and two  student  lodgers  in  the  annex  were  taken  away.   Shortly
    afterwards a further search revealed family photographs  that  included
    Isaipriya,  and  included  some  photographs  of  the  appellant   with
    Isaipriya.  The appellant was taken away by  the  soldiers,  who  again
    blindfolded her.  She was held in one camp  for  a  week  before  being
    transferred elsewhere.  She was given little  food  and  little  water.
    She was interrogated and ill-treated daily.  The interrogation  centred
    on her connections with the LTTE and her  connections  with  Isaipriya.
    Her hands were tied; she was forced to shuffle on her knees; pins  were
    put under her nails; a torch was flashed in her eyes; she was  left  in
    the hot sun; she was kicked  with  boots,  and  hit  with  sticks;  she
    sometimes lost consciousness; her head was held down in a  water  tank;
    and she was kept in unpleasant conditions.

18.  She was released in February 2012, again on payment of  a  bribe.   Her
    parents had arranged to send her out of the country.  She was  kept  in
    Colombo for around a month, and then sent to  the  UK,  where  she  was
    taken to stay with her aunt, who is a German citizen.

19.  She has retained limited contact with her  parents.   Her  father  sent
    her the police letter ordering that she surrender herself in 2012.   In
    her  statement  of  11  November  2013  the   appellant   describes   a
    conversation with her father about whether he could obtain documents to
    show that he had remortgaged the house to secure her release.  She also
    asked questions about where she had been held, and how her release  had
    been obtained.  She also describes a telephone  call  from  her  mother
    about a further search of the house and annex.  There had also  been  a
    search of the nearby university hostel, and other houses in  the  area.
    This may have followed a documentary broadcast on an Indian  television
    channel about Isaipriya.

20.  The appellant's witness statement of 19 September 2013 deals  with  her
    experiences since arriving in the UK.  For various reasons she  had  to
    leave her aunt's house and is now  in  NASS  accommodation.   She  then
    describes being  referred  to  Freedom  from  Torture  by  the  Refugee
    Council, and  starting  ongoing  individual  and  group  therapy.   She
    continues  to  take  antidepressant  medication,  and   a   number   of
    supplements.  She has difficulties eating, difficulties  sleeping,  and
    has  felt  like  killing  herself.   She  continues  to  have   regular
    counselling sessions at Freedom from Torture, and regular visits to the
    Refugee Council, the Red Cross, and her  GP.   She  also  mentions  the
    impact on her of the determinations dismissing her appeal.

Credibility Challenges and Cross-examination

21.  The cross-examination at the hearing was concerned primarily  with  the
    application made for a student visa, and whether the appellant  did  in
    fact study on arrival.  She was asked  about  what  the  level  of  her
    actual involvement with the LTTE was, and what she knew about the first
    aid course shown in the photographs.  She was also questioned about the
    delay in her claim for asylum,  the  medical  treatment  that  she  had
    obtained in Sri Lanka, and the extent of her injuries.

22.  In his submissions at the hearing Mr Walker, for the  respondent,  made
    the following points.  It was not credible  that  the  appellant  would
    have been arrested, but her  parents  had  never  been  detained.   The
    student  application  form  showed  that  various  documents  had  been
    produced, including bank statements and a  CAS.   If  the  entire  visa
    application had been fabricated this would have needed a lot of work by
    an agent.  The fact that she actually attended college for a few  weeks
    after arrival suggested that she was in fact intending  to  study,  and
    that the application process had been legitimate.  Given her  level  of
    education and intelligence, and the fact that she was  living  with  an
    aunt, it was not credible that she would not have known how to make  an
    asylum application earlier.

23.  The credibility challenges in the refusal letter can be  summarised  as
    follows.  It  was  not  plausible  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    questioned  about  a  connection  with  Isaipriya  during   her   first
    detention.  It was not accepted that she did have any  connection  with
    Isaipriya because of the vagueness of her account.  It was not credible
    that she could not remember the exact dates of  her  first  arrest  and
    release, and neither was it credible that she did not  know  where  she
    was being held.  Neither was it credible that she  did  not  know  more
    about how her father had  obtained  her  release.   There  was  also  a
    discrepancy as to whether the release from her second detention was  in
    February or March 2012.  It was implausible that her father  had  never
    been arrested.  The account of the way that she was able to  leave  the
    country was also implausible.

24.  The submissions as to credibility by Ms Smith, for the appellant,  were
    as follows.  The alleged inconsistencies in the refusal letter did  not
    add up to much.  The account  as  a  whole  had  been  consistent.   No
    inconsistencies had emerged in cross-examination.   The  report  by  Dr
    Thomas indicated that the appellant had memory difficulties due to  the
    trauma that she had experienced.   The  country  guidance  case  of  GJ
    supported  her  credibility,  in  that  corruption  and  bribery   were
    widespread; being able to leave the country did not  prove  a  lack  of
    interest; being released on payment of a bribe did not indicate lack of
    interest; and  it  was  accepted  that  the  use  of  torture  remained
    widespread.  Her account of having been subjected to sexual  abuse  and
    sexual humiliation was also consistent  with  the  Human  Rights  Watch
    Report considering the ill-treatment of female detainees,  and  Amnesty
    International's report on the same subject.  The report  by  Dr  Thomas
    also supported the appellant's claim to  have  been  through  traumatic
    events.

25.  The appellant could  not  be  expected  to  know  why  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities had not arrested her parents, but it may have been  because
    many LTTE activists were young.  The authorities have come to know that
    she had distributed leaflets, and attended a first aid programme, which
    may have been seen as a propaganda front for the LTTE; they  knew  that
    she had attended the Pongu Tamil celebrations; and by the time  of  the
    second detention they knew that she had a personal link  to  Isaipriya.
    The level of  interest  in  Isaipriya  was  considerable.   The  recent
    Channel 4 documentary had included footage of her dead body.   She  had
    been a highly visible and vocal LTTE supporter, and there was no reason
    to doubt that the appellant had known Isaipriya in  the  way  that  she
    claimed.

26.  The account of the  student  visa  being  obtained  through  an  agent,
    without much involvement from the appellant, was  quite  credible.   It
    was likely that the father had arranged all of these matters,  and  had
    obtained a passport for her in 2011 as a precaution.   Preparations  to
    obtain all the relevant documents could have started when the appellant
    was still in detention, without her knowledge.  The delay between March
    and June was not huge.  As a German citizen the appellant's aunt  would
    have had no experience of claiming  asylum.   The  appellant  had  been
    traumatised and would have been relieved to have  reached  a  place  of
    safety.  It was reasonable to allow her some time to recover and  think
    about her position.

Findings

27.  Having considered all of  the  evidence  presented  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, in the context of the background evidence  and  the  current
    country guidance, I have decided that the appellant has established the
    entire account set out above to the relevant standard.  My reasons  are
    as follows.

28.  The starting point, in my view, is the appellant's mental and  physical
    health.  There is strong evidence that  she  is  severely  traumatised.
    None of this evidence has been  challenged.   Dr  Thomas,  a  chartered
    clinical psychologist, concluded that the appellant met the  diagnostic
    criteria for a moderate episode of major depressive disorder, with a co-
    morbid diagnosis of post traumatic stress disorder.   She  referred  to
    the appellant as a depressed and traumatised young woman.   The  report
    is lengthy and detailed.  It considers and rejects the possibility that
    she was feigning her symptoms.  Dr Thomas also gave  the  opinion  that
    her traumatised state impacted on her ability to  remember  details  of
    her experiences.  In addition there was a discussion of post  traumatic
    avoidance.

29.  In addition to this detailed report which, as  I  have  said,  has  not
    been challenged in  any  respect,  I  have  noted  the  fact  that  the
    appellant continues to receive  an  unusually  high  level  of  support
    through a number  of  different  organisations,  all  of  whom  clearly
    continue to identify her as a person who is vulnerable and in  need  of
    ongoing support.

30.  All of the above lends strong support to the notion that the  appellant
    is a woman who has suffered considerable  trauma.   There  remains  the
    possibility, of course, that  the  trauma  that  she  has  suffered  is
    different to that that she has described in her asylum claim, but I can
    see no reason in this case to come to such a conclusion.  I accept  the
    submission made on her behalf that the challenges put  forward  in  the
    refusal letter have little force to them.  The points  made  about  the
    student application do not appear to me to detract to any  extent  from
    her account.  It is not implausible that the appellant knew  little  of
    the arrangements that were being made.  It is not implausible that  the
    appellant's father, through an illegal agent, would have  been  advised
    that this was a sensible way to  get  her  out  of  the  country.   The
    question of the delay in her asylum claim has to be considered  in  the
    context of the level of trauma and the impact of this on  her  that  is
    described above.  It appears to me that the idea that she in fact  came
    here as a genuine student, but then  decided  to  fabricate  an  asylum
    claim, is very difficult to fit with the facts.

31.  Another point in the appellant's favour, in terms  of  credibility,  is
    the police letter/summons.  This  is  a  document  that  has  not  been
    challenged in any way, either as to authenticity or provenance.   There
    is nothing in the document that renders it inherently  implausible.   I
    would accept, although no such submission has been  put  forward,  that
    such documents could be obtained by corrupt means, given the background
    evidence about Sri Lanka.  If there were other reasons to doubt overall
    credibility then this would, as a result, be  a  document  on  which  I
    could place limited weight.  As it is, however, nothing in the  overall
    context points to doubts as to its  authenticity,  and  it  does  offer
    support to the account given.

32.  I accept the submission made on her behalf as to  the  clear  level  of
    interest by the Sri Lankan authorities in Isaipriya.  There is  ongoing
    interest in the circumstances surrounding the end of  the  conflict  in
    Sri Lanka, and I accept that Isaipriya's death was a matter  raised  in
    the recent Channel 4 documentary.  Again this has not been  challenged.
    Having considered all of the evidence I can see nothing to justify  the
    view taken in the refusal letter that there was  anything  vague  about
    the appellant's account of  her  connection  with  Isaipriya.   On  the
    contrary it appears to me that the appellant  has  given  an  unusually
    detailed account, and that this has remained consistent.   It  is  also
    the case that the appellant  has  not  overstated  the  extent  of  her
    involvement,  and  neither  has  she  overstated  the  extent  of   her
    connection to Isaipriya.

33.  I found the highly detailed description given by the appellant  of  her
    experiences during her two detentions to be compelling.   If  this  had
    been a fabricated claim it is unlikely that the  appellant  would  have
    been able to provide such telling detail, including detail  as  to  her
    own reactions to the ill-treatment.  It is  also  significant  to  note
    that the appellant's highly detailed account of the ways in  which  she
    was  ill-treated  has  not  been  challenged  as  to   consistency   or
    plausibility, either in the refusal letter or at the hearing.  I  would
    also accept the submission made on her behalf that the account that she
    has given of  the  ill-treatment  is  consistent  with  the  background
    evidence.  This is the  core  of  her  account,  and  it  is  therefore
    particularly  significant  that  it   remains   unchallenged   by   the
    respondent.

34.  I therefore find, for all of  these  reasons  that  the  appellant  has
    established the account set out above.  The key  points  are  that  her
    family were LTTE supporters, that  they  developed  a  friendship  with
    Isaipriya, who was an LTTE TV presenter and journalist; that  Isaipriya
    had connections with various students who  were  lodgers  at  different
    times; that  the  appellant  was  involved  in  attending  Pongu  Tamil
    celebrations, and persuading others to do so; that she was involved  in
    a first aid course organised by the LTTE, and that she had  photographs
    of the course, and of her with Isaipriya, both on a USB stick that  was
    discovered in her bag, and also in family photographs in her home; that
    she was detained twice, first for  about  three  months  in  2008,  and
    second for about five months in 2011/2012; that she was seriously  ill-
    treated in both detentions in the ways described above, which  included
    beatings, other forms of physical violence, deprivation of food, water,
    and sleep, and sexual abuse/humiliation;  and  that  she  was  released
    through payments of bribes on both occasions; that she was sent out  of
    the country by her father using an illegal agent; and that a  Terrorist
    Investigation Unit demanded  that  she  should  be  handed  over  in  a
    document dated June 2012, in which she is described  as  having  "aided
    and abetted" terrorist activities with the LTTE in the  north.   In  my
    view the ill treatment that she has suffered is sufficiently serious to
    amount to torture within the meaning of Article 3; as well as amounting
    to persecution for reason of political opinion.

Decision and Reasons

35.  Having reached the above findings I have decided that  the  appeal,  in
    being re-made, falls to be allowed on asylum grounds and, for the  same
    reasons, under Article 3.  I have also decided that the appeal falls to
    be allowed on Article 3 grounds given the appellant's mental health and
    suicide risk, for similar reasons to those put forward by the panel  in
    GJ in relation to the third appellant that they were considering.

36.  The submissions by Mr Walker on risk on return  were  as  follows.   He
    submitted that the appellant  did  not  fit  within  any  of  the  risk
    categories at paragraph 356(7) of GJ.  This was because she  had  never
    been an LTTE member, none of her relatives had ever been  members,  she
    had not been involved in any political demonstrations in  the  UK,  she
    was not a journalist or human right activitist, and it was hard to  see
    how she could be regarded as undermining the Sri Lankan government.  In
    addition he submitted that she would be  returning  on  her  own  valid
    passport, and even if her account were true she  had  a  low  level  of
    association with the LTTE and was of no significance.  Even if she  was
    on a watch list she would not be  detained  at  the  airport,  and  the
    interest in her would be limited.

37.  Ms Smith,  for  the  appellant,  submitted  that  she  would  be  on  a
    computerised stop list  accessible  at  the  airport,  because  of  her
    outstanding police arrest order/warrant from 2012.  She would therefore
    fall within the risk category at paragraph 356(7)(d).   This  had  been
    considered by Professor Good at paragraphs 54 to 60 of his report.   It
    was also likely that she would be on a watch list as well.

38.  Having considered both sets of submissions, and having  considered  the
    country guidance, I prefer  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  There is no  definition  of  arrest  warrant  in  paragraph
    356(7)(d), there does not appear to be  any  court  order  against  the
    appellant, and the exact status of the police document is not clear  in
    legal terms, but nevertheless it appears to me that the  document  does
    show that the appellant is wanted as a suspect, accused of  aiding  and
    abetting terrorist activities.  It appears to me that there is  a  real
    risk that this information would have been transmitted in  such  a  way
    that the appellant's name would appear on a stop  list.   The  evidence
    for this particular appellant does not indicate that  interest  in  her
    would have been removed or significantly  reduced  by  the  passage  of
    time.  Isaipriya was a well-known figure, and her  death  continues  to
    attract current attention.  The Sri Lankan authorities appear, based on
    their past behaviour, to have become persuaded that the appellant had a
    significant connection with Isaipriya, and that she had  a  significant
    level of involvement with the LTTE.  Despite lengthy interrogation  the
    authorities appear not to have accepted that  the  appellant  was  only
    involved at a relatively low level.  Given my findings above as to  the
    extent of the appellant's detentions, one of which postdates the ending
    of the conflict, it appears to me that the  past  persecution  in  this
    case points to a risk that the appellant would suffer similar detention
    and questioning on return.  Given the nature of  the  past  detentions,
    and the indication that they give of the view taken of  the  appellant,
    however wrongly, by the Sri Lankan authorities, it appears to  me  that
    the  overall  circumstances,  and  the  document  from  the   Terrorist
    Investigation Unit from June 2012, do  justify  the  finding  that  the
    appellant does fall within the risk category at 356(7)(d).

39.  In addition it appears to  me  that  there  is  a  risk,  even  if  the
    Terrorist Investigation Unit document does  not  amount  to  an  arrest
    warrant, and is not recorded on a  computerised  stop  list,  that  the
    appellant would be on a computerised intelligence-led watch list.   The
    interest of the authorities appears to have continued.  There will be a
    concern to prevent a resurgence of Tamil separatism amongst students in
    particular.  If the appellant were to be returned it appears to me that
    there is a real risk that checks would be made on her when she  reached
    her home address.  Given the past experiences, and the records that are
    likely to be held, there is a real risk  that  she  would  be  detained
    again and, in view of the background evidence and the comment in GJ  as
    to ill-treatment in detention (356(4)) there is a real  risk  that  she
    would again face ill-treatment or harm of a nature that would call  for
    international protection.  In assessing the risk on asylum  grounds  it
    is also of significance that she is traumatised  and  vulnerable.   The
    Sri Lankan authorities are unlikely, in view of the overall  background
    evidence as to the human rights position, to take this into account  in
    deciding whether she should be detained or not.

40.  There was no challenge at the hearing to the evidence of Dr  Thomas  in
    relation to suicide.  Neither was there any challenge to the submission
    made on her behalf that her appeal fell to  be  allowed  on  Article  3
    grounds for the same reasons as set out at paragraphs 453 to 457 of GJ.
     Given my conclusion above this is not the main focus of  my  decision.
    The issue of whether the appellant has an Article  3  claim  on  mental
    health and suicide risk grounds would only become  determinative  if  I
    had decided that there was no asylum risk (or Article 3 risk  connected
    to it).  I will therefore say little on this point, but I do accept the
    submissions set out in the skeleton argument, and made at the  hearing.
    There is a clear opinion in Dr Thomas' report  (paragraph  55),  as  to
    suicide risk on return.  The medical  evidence,  as  I  have  said,  is
    strong, and the appellant is in receipt of  a  considerable  amount  of
    support in the UK.  Her case does appear to me to be as serious as that
    considered by the Tribunal in GJ, and  the  appeal  would  fall  to  be
    allowed on Article 3  grounds  for  similar  reasons,  amounting  to  a
    combination of the appellant's poor mental health,  her  suicide  risk,
    and the very limited psychiatric services available in  Sri  Lanka,  as
    discussed in GJ.  In the circumstances I do not intend to give separate
    consideration to the alternative submissions made under Article 8.

41.  From the file it appears that no fee was paid for the appeal and  there
    can therefore be no fee  award.   I  have  decided  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to make an anonymity order.  This is because the  appellant
    has suffered serious trauma and is  in  a  vulnerable  condition  as  a
    result, and also because her close relatives remain in Sri Lanka.

Decision

35.  The previous decision is set aside for the reasons given  in  my  error
    of law decision and directions of 15 October 2013, which is attached.

36.  The decision is re-made as follows.

37.  The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

38.  The appeal is  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds,  under  Article  3.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date



Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb



