
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07327/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th February 2016                      |On 21st March 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                mrs Ya Yun Ni
                          (no aNONYMITY DIRECTION)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal, that is Mrs Ya Yun Ni as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.  The  Secretary
    of State applies, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge who dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds and humanitarian protection grounds but allowed the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds under Article 8.

 2. The appellant did not attend the hearing and  representatives  did  not
    attend on her behalf on the basis that she had not put them  in  funds.



 3. The Secretary of State asserts that there was a  material  misdirection
    of law in that the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  mandatory  public
    interest  considerations  under  Section  117B  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act. 2002.

 4. Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Manuell  granted  permission  to
    appeal who stated that the judge's mention of the statute  at  [21]  of
    her decision was by way of summary of submissions  and,  arguably,  was
    not revisited sufficiently at paragraph 38 in the conclusions.

 5. The background to the appeal is that the appellant is a citizen of  the
    People's Republic of China, born on 21st August 1975  and  she  entered
    the UK illegally on 15th February 2006 and was served with an IS151A on
    12th September 2013.  She claimed asylum on 1st October 2013  and  then
    applied for leave to remain outside the  Rules  on  16th  October  2013
    which was rejected.  She renewed her application for  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules and on 14th October 2013 this was also  rejected.   A
    further application for leave to remain outside the Rules was  made  on
    7th March 2014 and refused and the appellant now appeals under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act against the  decision
    to refuse her protection on 9th April 2015.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  appellant's  husband  who
    was operating a Chinese restaurant in the UK did  not  have  protection
    based leave as he was granted ILR outside  the  Rules  and  his  asylum
    claim was refused.  The appellant has two children in China.  The judge
    at paragraph 34 found that the appellant would not be at risk on return
    to China and that she did not have a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    for a Convention reason.  For similar reasons she had  no  claim  under
    humanitarian protection or protection under the European Convention  in
    relation to Article 3.

 7. The judge found [36] that the appellant could not comply with paragraph
    276ADE(1) and proceeded then to consider the  application  outside  the
    Rules.  The judge turned, at paragraph 36 of her decision,  immediately
    to Article 8 but failed, contrary to SS Congo v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    317 to consider any of the provisions under Appendix  FM  and  did  not
    engage with the financial requirements.

 8. The judge at paragraph 38 states

    "she would almost certainly be able to make  a  successful  application
    for leave to enter as a spouse given that her husband's income from his
    takeaway  restaurant  is  more  than  sufficient  to  meet  the  income
    threshold in Appendix FM".

    The judge, however, did not grapple with the detailed  requirements  in
    relation to Appendix FM or the  remainder  of  the  requirements  under
    Appendix FM.

 9.  Additionally,  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  the   question   of
    proportionality but failed to address Section 117B of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act.  Consideration  of  those  requirement  are
    mandatory and failure to do so constitutes an error of law.

10. I therefore find there is a material error of law and owing to the lack
    of relevant findings the matter should be returned  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

11. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.





Signed                                  Date 10th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

