
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07281/2014
     AA/07288/2014
     AA/07289/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1 March 2016                          |On 16 March 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between


                            TO (FIRST appellant)
                           AOO (SECOND appellant)
                           ZOAO (THIRD appellant)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Leonie Hirst, of Counsel instructed by JCWI
For the Respondent:    Mr Paul Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first appellant is the mother of the second and  third  Appellants.
    They are citizens of Nigeria, the first  appellant  being  born  on  14
    February 1988 and the other appellants, her children, being born on  14
    October 2012 and 8 June 2014.  The  first  appellant  claimed  to  have
    arrived in Britain in 2003, an  arrangement  having  made  between  her
    grandmother with whom she was living  in  Nigeria  and  the  woman  who
    brought her to Britain.  She claimed that on arrival she worked  for  a
    Nigerian family here.  She applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  on
    compassionate grounds in  October  2005  and  an  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed in 2009.  In May 2009 she  was  served  with  an
    IS151A as an illegal entrant.

2.   In April 2014 she applied for asylum and was referred to  the  National
    Referral Mechanism and in September that year a decision  was  made  to
    refuse to grant her asylum.

3.   The appellant's appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Britton on 19 December 2014.  He did not find credible the  appellant's
    claim that she had been trafficked to this country.  He  gave  detailed
    reasons for finding that  her  story  was  not  in  any  way  credible.
    However, in paragraph 76 of his determination he stated:-

         "I find the appellant was not trafficked and will not be at risk on
         return from traffickers.  She voluntarily came to this  country  to
         work with the family".


4.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  that  decision.
    Her application was refused in both the First-tier Tribunal and in  the
    Upper  Tribunal.   An  application  for  judicial  review  against  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal Judge was made and in  August  2015  the
    Honourable Mr Justice Goss granted permission.  In his observations  he
    stated that:-

         "Neither the First Tribunal or the  Upper  Tribunal  addressed  the
         consequences flowing from the finding that  the  Claimant  came  to
         this country to work aged 15 years  in  the  context  of  the  ECAT
         definition of trafficking and Article 2 of the EU  Anti-Trafficking
         Directive".


5.   Following that decision  the  Vice  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    granted permission to appeal.  In these circumstances the  appeal  came
    before me.

6.   Mr Duffy on behalf of the Secretary of State and Ms Hirst on behalf  of
    the appellant asked that I determine this appeal by remitting it to the
    Secretary of State to make a further decision on  the  basis  that  the
    Council of Europe Convention against trafficking  defined  trafficking,
    at Article 4, as:-

         "(a) 'Trafficking in human  beings'  shall  mean  the  recruitment,
             transportation,
              transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by  means  of  the
             threat or  use  of  force  or  other  forms  of  coercion,  of
             abduction, fraud, of a deception, of the abuse of power or  of
             a positional or vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of
             payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having
             control over another person, for the purpose of  exploitation.
             Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, exploitation of  the
             prostitution of others or other forms of sexual  exploitation,
             forced labour or services,  slavery  or  practice  similar  to
             slavery, servitutde or the removal of organs;
         ...


         (c)   the  recruitment,  transportation,  transfer,  harbouring  or
             receipt of a child for the purpose of  exploitation  shall  be
             considered 'trafficking in human beings' even if this does not
             involve any of means set forth in sub-paragraph (a) ...".


    and that therefore it was agreed by both representatives that the judge
    had found that the appellant had been trafficked because he  had  found
    that she had come to work for the family here.


7.   I was asked to remit the application to the Secretary of State to  make
    a further decision in the light of that finding.

8.   I accede to the request made by  both  representatives  and  now  allow
    this appeal to the extent that it is remitted back to the Secretary  of
    State to make a further decision based on the finding of the  judge  to
    which I have referred.

9.   I would add that I consider that the  findings  of  the  judge  in  the
    First-tier were fully open to him apart, of course, his conclusion that
    the first appellant had not been trafficked and that I would trust that
    the Secretary of State  would  now  make  a  further  decision  on  the
    applicant's claim to asylum and a claim that her rights under the  ECHR
    (Articles 3, 4 and 8) would be infringed by her removal.  It  would  be
    appropriate for the decision made, if it is against the appellant,   to
    carry a further right of appeal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  to  the  Secretary
of State to make a fresh decision in the light of the findings of the  judge
in the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

