
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07210/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Crown Court            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 September 2016                        |On 13 September 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     VEC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Davies, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  By a decision dated 21 April 2015, the  respondent  refused
    the appellant asylum and refused him leave to enter the United Kingdom.
     The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  M  Davies)
    which, in a decision promulgated on 7 April 2016, allowed the appeal on
    asylum and human rights (Articles 2 and 3) grounds.  The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds challenge the judge's decision asserting a failure  on  the
    part of the judge to give adequate reasons  for  findings  on  material
    matters.  It is submitted that the judge failed to engage  with  issues
    as to the appellant's credibility but instead relied  entirely  upon  a
    letter (which appears at page 27 of the appellant's  bundle)  dated  23
    February 2016 sent by the US Department of  Justice  (Drug  Enforcement
    Administration) to the appellant's  solicitor.   This  letter  confirms
    that the appellant was a confidential source for the  drug  enforcement
    administration between 2013 and 2014.  It is absolutely clear from  the
    Record of Proceedings and the decision of the judge that the Presenting
    Officer  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Mr  Richardson)  not  only
    accepted the genuineness of that letter but also (as the  judge  states
    at [21]) "chose not  to  make  any  submissions  or  indeed  place  any
    reliance  on  the  refusal  letter."  In  those  circumstances,  it  is
    difficult to see why the judge was required to  give  detailed  reasons
    for finding, as he did, that (1) the appellant's account  was  truthful
    and (2) in the light of the background material indicating the level of
    the threat to Colombians in that country who  may  have  cooperated  or
    colluded with the drug enforcement agencies, that he faced a real  risk
    of ill-treatment on return to Colombia.  The grounds do  not  challenge
    the judge's findings [26]  that  the  Colombian  authorities  were  not
    reasonably likely to be in  a  position  to  offer  protection  to  the
    appellant from those who may wish to harm him.

 3. The grounds also assert that the judge failed to consider the  evidence
    holistically, failing in particular to consider the  US  Department  of
    Justice letter as part of the totality  of  the  evidence.   I  do  not
    consider that ground has any merit.  Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the Presenting Officer did not invite the judge to make any finding  to
    the effect that the appellant was not credible; indeed, the  Presenting
    Officer did not choose to cross-examine the appellant who  was  present
    at court.  Most tellingly, the Presenting Officer told the  judge  that
    he placed no reliance on the  refusal  letter  which  had  contained  a
    number of challenges  to  the  appellant's  credibility.   It  is  also
    significant that the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  do  not
    assert that, if the appellant is, as he claims, a former  "confidential
    source" of the US Drug Enforcement Administration, then he would not be
    exposed to the real risk of persecution or ill-treatment on  return  to
    Colombia. It is clear that the Secretary of State accepts that,  if  he
    is what he claims to be, then the appellant would be at  real  risk  on
    return to Columbia.

 4. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal, Mr McVeety did no more than  rely
    upon the  grounds  of  appeal.   Candidly,  he  acknowledged  that  the
    Secretary of State was not in a position to submit anything which might
    suggest that the First-tier Tribunal decision should be set aside.   In
    the circumstances, the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 12 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


