
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA076182015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 May 2016                       |On 10 June 2016                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                   GEETH SAMAN KUMARA HAWANE WATTA GEDARA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Loughlin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Sri Lanka,  has  permission  to  challenge
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge  Robson  sent  on  19
    August 2015 dismissing his appeal against a decision refusing to  grant
    him asylum and  to remove him from the United Kingdom.

2.   It is unnecessary to set out in any  detail  my  reasoning  because  Mr
    Harrison was in agreement with the view which I expressed at the end of
    Mr Loughlin's submissions, that the judge demonstrably  erred  in  law.
    This was case in which the judge had accepted as credible that:

    (1)  The appellant had been  detained and ill-treated by the Sri Lankan
         authorities in July 2010 - the judge found the medical report  from
         Professor Lingam dated 25 May 2015 finding the  appellant  to  have
         been  "a victim of violence as he claimed" to be one  on  which  he
         could  place reliance (paragraph 65).  The appellant claimed he had
         been arrested and ill-treated on suspicion of helping the LTTE.

    (2)  Subsequent to the appellant's departure from the UK on 18 December
         2012 the appellant's parents had been visited  at  their  home  and
         threatened by two men with a gun.

3.   In light of these findings it was  irrational  of  the  judge  to  have
    concluded that the appellant's claim to have been  accused  of  helping
    the LTTE was "without foundation" (paragraph  90).   In  light  of  the
    positive findings noted above at (1) and  (2),  the  judge's  principal
    reasons for arriving at this conclusion were  seriously  flawed  for  a
    number of  reasons.  First,  in  disbelieving  that  the  two  men  who
    threatened the appellant's parents in 2013 were CID officers, the judge
    appears to have applied too  high  a  standard  of  proof  ("I  am  not
    prepared to say they were necessarily CID officers" - paragraph 56).

4.   Second, there is an evident difficulty with  the  judge's  reasons  for
    attaching adverse weight to the appellant's claim to have been involved
    in transportation of people (claimed to include LTTE  members)  between
    2006-2008. The  judge  found  that  it  was  "not  credible"  that  the
    authorities should wait until June 2010 to take any action against him.
     However the judge does not appear to have borne in mind  that  he  had
    accepted the appellant's evidence  that  after  the  end  of  2008  the
    appellant was in Korea for all but a few months, until 2010.

5.   Third, having accepted Professor Lingam's finding  that  the  appellant
    was a "victim of violence  as  he  claimed  and  as  diagnosed  by  the
    doctor", it was illogical for the judge to conclude that  his  scarring
    could not be attributed to the claimed detentions (para 80).

6.   Fourth, even though the judge was correct to count against  the  report
    by Dr Robin Lawrence dated  17  June  2015  that  it  erroneously  made
    reference to a sexual assault  (which  the  appellant  had  never  made
    reference to), that did not justify the judge in discounting the report
    entirely. Given the judge's acceptance that the appellant had  suffered
    ill-treatment in detention  in  2010,  a  report  finding  PTSD  had  a
    stronger evidential foundation than  if  it  was  based  simply  on  an
    assumption of the truth  of  such  ill-treatment.   The  judge  himself
    stated that Professor Lingam's report (which he accepted)  referred  to
    "mind scars" (para 63).

7.    Fifth,  the  other  reasons  given  by  the  judge,  for  example  the
    unlikelihood that  the  appellant  would  not  have  been  stopped  and
    searched on his various trips to army camps and Colombo  (paras  76-78)
    is difficult to reconcile with the appellant's witness statement  which
    clearly acknowledges that he was stopped and checked on visits to  army
    camps (see paragraph 5  of  this  statement),  thus  leaving  the  only
    possible credibility point his transportation of  three  Tamil  men  to
    Colombo. Against the backdrop of the evidence as a  whole,  I  consider
    this (or the reason relating to the failure to claim asylum on  arrival
    or soon thereafter), as wholly insufficient to warrant a  rejection  of
    the appellant's claim and wholly irrational to justify a  finding  that
    the appellant's claim was "without foundation".

8.   For the above reasons I conclude the judge materially erred in law.   I
    set aside his decision.

9.   Given the judge's flawed credibility findings I do not consider  I  can
    safely preserve some parts, but discount others.  Additionally  I  have
    difficulties understanding why such a positive assessment  should  have
    been made of Professor Lingam's report which has evident shortcomings).
     The effect of these errors is to undermine the overall assessment.  In
    such circumstances the upshot is that the appellant has not yet  had  a
    fair assessment of his claim. As such, his case falls  squarely  within
    the Senior President's Practice Statement governing remittals.

Notice of Decision

10.  I remit the case to be heard by a judge other than Judge Robson.

11.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed   Date: 9 June 2016


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

