
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07589/2015
                                                               AA/07592/2015
                                                               AA/07596/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21st March 2016                       |On 14th April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          ms CR (first respondent)
                          MR MM (second respondent)
                        MASTER JMM (third respondent)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr B Mutebuka, Solicitor

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellants
CR,MM and JMM are granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bircher) which in a decision promulgated
    on 14th October 2015 allowed the appeals of Ms CR, Mr MM and Master JMM
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 8th April 2015 refusing to
    grant Ms CR asylum and making a decision to remove all three Appellants
    by way of Section 10 directions to Zimbabwe. Mr MM is the husband of Ms
    CR and Master JMM is their son. They are in the UK as dependants of  Ms
    CR and therefore their cases stand or fall with hers.

 2. For the sake of clarity throughout this decision I shall refer to Ms CR
    as "the Appellant" and the Secretary  of  State  as  "the  Respondent".
    This  reflects  their  respective  positions  before   the   First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The Appellant, a citizen of Zimbabwe born [ ] 1984, entered the  UK  in
    2008 in possession of a student visa.  Following completion of  a  BTEC
    diploma she applied for an extension of  her  visa  to  enable  her  to
    complete a BA social work degree at Leeds Metropolitan University.  Her
    visa was extended to October 2014 and in 2013 her husband joined her in
    the UK as her dependant.  Their son then  joined  them  in  2013.   The
    Appellant's husband and son remain here as her dependants.

 4. In October 2014, on expiry of her student visa and some six years after
    she arrived here, the Appellant claimed asylum.

 5. The basis of her claim is that she worked as a  polling  clerk  in  the
    March and June 2008 elections. She was employed by the  National  Water
    Authority, a quasi governmental organisation and  polling  clerks  were
    drawn from that organisation as well as others.  Her claim is that  she
    was targeted by ZANU-PF activists  who  told  her  that  she  must  use
    "influence" to ensure illiterate/disabled/aged voters, voted for  ZANU-
    PF.

 6. She did not follow those instructions and in April 2008  following  the
    March  election,  she  was  visited  at  home  by  ZANU-PF  youth  wing
    supporters who abducted her, placed her in a van and drove off  to  the
    bush area outside Harare.  Here she was repeatedly raped, put  back  in
    the van and then dropped off at a traffic  circle  intersection,  where
    she made her way home with the help of another woman.

 7. She tried to report this  matter  to  the  police  but  they  were  not
    interested.  She contacted her father  in  the  UK  and  he  agreed  to
    sponsor her as an international student.

 8. Before arriving in the UK however, the June elections took place.   She
    was informed by her manager at work that she would have to complete her
    duties, by acting as a polling clerk once more.  She did not wish to do
    so but was informed that she had no choice but to comply.

 9. By her own account however she  did  not  experience  any  difficulties
    whilst working in the June 2008 elections.

10. She travelled to the UK in August 2008.  Her claim now rests on  saying
    that there is ongoing interest in  her  following  her  departure  from
    Zimbabwe.

11. The Respondent refused her claim on three counts:

       . The delay and the timing in claiming raised a large  question  mark
         over her credibility.

       . This in turn raised doubts over the credibility of the  Appellant's
         claim to be of continuing interest to the authorities,  considering
         she had been in the United Kingdom six  years  before  she  claimed
         asylum.

       . It was not accepted that the Appellant's account of  the  rape  and
         the subsequent failure of the police to investigate this  could  be
         substantiated.

12. The Appellant appealed the Respondent's refusal decision  to  the  FtT.
    That Tribunal allowed her appeal on Refugee Convention grounds.

13. The Respondent sought and was granted permission to  appeal  the  FtT's
    decision. The grant of permission was framed in the following terms:

         "It  is  arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  internal
         relocation as CM is referred to in paragraph 77 but the  judge  did
         not indicate why the Appellant would be at risk now in Matabeleland
         by virtue of having been a polling officer in 2008".

    Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether the FtT's decision
    discloses an error of law such that the decision must be set aside  and
    re-made.

Error of Law Hearing

14. I heard submissions from both parties representatives.  Mr  Diwnycz  on
    behalf of the Respondent adopted the grounds  seeking  permission.   He
    submitted that the grant of submission was quite  correct  in  that  it
    focused on what is a narrow point. That point shows that the judge  has
    completely misdirected herself effectively by failing to recognise  the
    latest country guidance case of CM (EM  country  guidance:  disclosure)
    Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC).  Instead the judge had relied upon
    the outdated case of SM and Others which was good  law  back  in  2005,
    over ten years ago but did not now reflect  the  current  situation  in
    Zimbabwe.

15. Mr Diwnycz further submitted that the judge had sought  to  distinguish
    the current country guidance case of CM but had failed to do so because
    she had simply not given any reasons why she concluded as  she  did  in
    [79] that the Appellant would be at  risk  some  six  years  after  the
    events which she claimed forced her to flee. He emphasised that nowhere
    in the current country guidance case of CM, does it  say  that  polling
    officers are a special risk  category.  The  judge  concluded  however,
    without reasons, at [82] that the Appellant somehow fell into a special
    risk category. This was apparently because of reliance on  an  outdated
    CG case. Since these errors are fundamental ones, they taint the  whole
    of the fact-finding process  of  the  FtT.  In  the  circumstances  the
    appropriate course must be to set aside the FtT's  decision  and  remit
    the matter to that tribunal for a full and fresh rehearing.

16. Mr Mutebuka in response relied upon his Rule 24 reply.  In addition  to
    that response he sought to emphasise that each appeal must turn on  its
    own individual unique facts.   This  is  what  had  happened  in  these
    appeals.   The  judge  had  looked  at  internal  relocation  but   the
    Appellant's case was distinguishable on its own facts as per  SM.   The
    judge decided the Appellant fell into an enhanced risk category on  the
    particular facts  found  here.   The  judge's  fact-finding  concerning
    credibility was unimpeachable and therefore the decision should  stand.



Error of law?

17. I find there is force in Mr Diwnycz's submissions that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside for legal error.  I say  this
    for the following reasons.  It is clear from  a  full  reading  of  the
    decision that the FtT has misdirected itself by  relying  on  case  law
    guidance which is now over ten years old and which has been replaced by
    several other country guidance cases; most notably the  recent  one  of
    CM.

18. If one looks at [77] and [78] of  the  decision,  the  judge  seemingly
    takes on board CM by setting out that a returnee  to  Harare  (as  this
    Appellant would be) will in general face no  significant  difficulties.
    She also sets out as per CM that in general a returnee to Bulawayo will
    not  suffer  the  adverse  attention   of   ZANU-PF.    Then   somewhat
    inconsistently with that, the judge says at [79]:

         "For the reasons above  I  am  satisfied  that  because  the  first
         Appellant worked as a polling officer and did not comply  with  the
         instructions she received from ZANU-PF she  will  be  perceived  as
         having engaged in political activity likely to attract the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF".

19. She then sets out at [80], her seeming justification for departing from
    CM and relies on the case of SM [2005] to show that because of her role
    as a polling officer it is  accepted that the Appellant falls  into  an
    enhanced risk category.  Nowhere do I see any reasoned consideration of
    why the judge fails to follow the more recent country guidance case  of
    CM.  Nor is there any reasoned consideration of why internal relocation
    is not a viable option for this Appellant.

20. I have considered whether  remittal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as
    requested  by  Mr  Diwnycz,  is  the  appropriate   course.    In   the
    circumstances I am satisfied that this is the  correct  approach.   The
    criticisms of the FtT's approach means that the case has not been fully
    and fairly considered by that Tribunal and any credibility findings are
    tainted by the incorrect approach  to  the  relevant  country  guidance
    case.

21. In these circumstances remittal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  full
    fresh hearing is the correct course.  In these  circumstances  none  of
    the findings made by the FtT shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of law.   The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge  Bircher)  for  a
full rehearing.  No findings  of  fact  are  preserved  but  at  this  stage
anonymity is preserved.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts

