

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA073172014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 June 2016                        |On 15 June 2016                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                     CST
                         (ANNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Chelvan (of Counsel), instructed by South West
Law.
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

   1. The appellant was born on [ ] 1983 and is a national of Cameroon. On 4
      March 2014 she arrived in the United Kingdom from South  Africa  on  a
      business visa valid until 6 August 2014. Shortly after her arrival she
      took unwell and came  to  be  admitted  to  hospital,  where  she  was
      diagnosed  as  suffering  from  HIV  and  tuberculosis.  She  has  had
      treatment and currently appears to keep reasonably good health.

   2. On 7 July 2014, having been discharged  from  hospital,  she  made  an
      application for asylum on the basis of  her  fear  of  persecution  if
      returned to  Cameroon  on  account  of  her  sexual  orientation.  The
      appellant claimed that she identified herself as a lesbian.  She  also
      sought humanitarian protection and claimed that her return to Cameroon
      would be contrary to the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.  By
      letter dated 2 September 2014, the Secretary of State rejected all  of
      the appellant's applications and made a decision to remove her.


   3. The appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  was
      heard before the First-tier Tribunal on 27 October 2014.  By  decision
      promulgated on 21 November 2014  that  appeal  was  dismissed  on  all
      grounds. Permission to appeal having been refused  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on 16 December 2014, her renewed  application  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal was successful. Permission was granted on 13 April 2015, upon
      the view that it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal may have erred in law in her assessment  of  the  appellant's
      credibility.

   4. At a hearing on 1 July 2015, before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Martin,  it
      was held that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did err in her  assessment
      of the core of the appellant's claim, namely that she was  a  lesbian,
      and the decision was set aside in its entirety. As directed,  the  re-
      hearing of the appellant's appeal took place in the Upper Tribunal.


Background

   5.    It may be helpful to set out something of  the  background  to  the
      appellant's claim for asylum before turning to the evidence led at the
      hearing before us.

   6.    The appellant was interviewed in connection  with  her  application
      for asylum on 25 July 2014.  In  the  course  of  that  interview  she
      explained that she was born in Cameroon and had lived with her father,
      mother and twin sister until she was aged around 14, when  her  father
      arranged for her to be forcibly married to a local tribal  chief.  She
      was then regularly forced to have intercourse with the chief  and  his
      brother and subsequently gave birth to a daughter. Her husband already
      had four other wives and the appellant  explained  that  from  shortly
      after her marriage to the  chief  she  had  embarked  upon  a  lesbian
      relationship with one of his other wives.


   7. The appellant's account was that after living in  these  circumstances
      for around 10 years she and her daughter were able to escape in  2007,
      with the assistance of the other wife. They took that wife's son  with
      them as she died during the course of the  escape  and  the  appellant
      thereafter treated the boy as her adopted son. Having  succeeded,  the
      appellant said that she met another woman called Stephanie  and  moved
      to live with her in a village outside the city of  Douala.  In  around
      2008 they moved to live in the city. Throughout this time she  claimed
      that they had lived together in a lesbian  relationship.  She  claimed
      that they were the subject of public abuse whilst living in Douala and
      matters became worse in around 2010 when a photograph of them  kissing
      together was taken surreptitiously and distributed to members of their
      respective families. Her account was that  as  a  consequence  of  the
      reaction to disclosure of their relationship Stephanie moved to France
      and, around the end of 2011, the appellant  moved  to  live  in  South
      Africa. She left her daughter and her adopted son with her sister.

   8. After  moving  to  South  Africa  the  appellant  explained  that  she
      maintained contact with  her  sister  and  the  two  children.  On  an
      occasion in September 2013 when she was visiting them in Cameroon  she
      claimed that she was attacked by a  group  of  men  who  came  to  her
      sister's home with the intention of detaining her on  account  of  her
      sexuality. Having assaulted her, they were persuaded to  desist  by  a
      local woman who interceded on her behalf.

   9. The appellant also explained that her husband  had  arranged  for  her
      father to be attacked because she was a lesbian and that she was aware
      from ongoing contact with her sister that  her  husband,  and  others,
      were trying to ascertain her whereabouts. The appellant explained that
      she and Stephanie remained in a relationship, maintained  contact  and
      that they planned to try and live together again in due course.


The Secretary of State's Decision

  10. As mentioned above, the appellant's application for asylum was refused
      by the  Secretary  of  State  on  2  September  2014.  In  the  letter
      explaining the reasons for  refusal  the  factual  background  to  the
      appellant's claim was summarised.  Many  aspects  of  the  appellant's
      claim  were  characterised  as   being   internally   consistent.   In
      particular, at paragraphs 14 and 16 of the letter,  the  Secretary  of
      State summarised the appellant's account of the  appreciation  of  her
      own sexuality and  characterised  this  as  an  internally  consistent
      account. Despite these observations, it was noted that the appellant's
      account of her sexuality had not been externally  verified  and  would
      therefore require to be considered in the context of paragraph 339L of
      the Immigration Rules.

  11. At paragraph 41 of the letter, the Secretary of State  turned  to  the
      paragraph 339L considerations. She accepted  that  the  appellant  had
      made a genuine effort to substantiate her asylum  claim  and  accepted
      that all  material  factors  at  the  appellant's  disposal  had  been
      submitted. Despite this, the Secretary of  State  concluded  that  the
      statements which the appellant had provided throughout her  interviews
      had not been coherent and plausible, that the conditions of  paragraph
      339L had therefore not been met, and that the appellant had failed  to
      substantiate  the  relevant  aspects  of  her  claim,  including   her
      sexuality. The Secretary of State then set  out  that  notwithstanding
      this conclusion consideration had been given to whether or not it  was
      appropriate to afford "the benefit of the doubt"  in  the  appellant's
      case. She then explained that as there were: "numerous inconsistencies
      throughout all the accounts that you provided" it was  not  considered
      appropriate to do so and the  material  elements  of  the  appellant's
      case, including her sexuality, were rejected.

  12. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant  testified
      in support  of  her  earlier  statements  and  gave  evidence  of  her
      relationship with Stephanie, which she sought to support by relying on
      two letters from her. The  Judge  took  the  view  that  the  evidence
      concerning  her  relationship  with  Stephanie  was  crucial  to   the
      appellant establishing her case in relation to sexual orientation. For
      various reasons, principally in relation to what she saw as  the  lack
      of appropriate detail  concerning  the  relationship  in  the  letters
      provided, the  Judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
      substantiate her claim concerning her relationship with Stephanie  and
      therefore held that she had failed to establish her case that she  was
      a lesbian. In these circumstances the whole basis of  the  appellant's
      claim fell away.


The re-hearing before the Upper Tribunal

  13. In advance of the hearing before us Mr Chelvan  submitted  a  skeleton
      argument setting out a number of grounds of attack on the Secretary of
      State's decision which focussed on the manner in which the appellant's
      claim to be a lesbian had been rejected. These included an overarching
      legal proposition, based upon the duty  of  co-operation  set  out  in
      Article 4 of the Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC, arguing that  the
      Secretary of State's approach to credibility decision-making,  through
      the prism of paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules, was incompatible
      with European Union law. Separate  arguments  addressing  how,  in  an
      asylum claim, an applicant could properly be  expected  to  externally
      verify sexual identity and asserting that  in  the  circumstances  the
      respondent  was  bound  to  accept  the   appellant's   account   were
      identified, along with a general proposition  that  the  Secretary  of
      State was  factually  incorrect  in  asserting  that  there  had  been
      numerous inconsistencies in all of the accounts  which  the  appellant
      had provided.

  14. In addition though, there had been a development  in  the  appellant's
      personal circumstances. In a statement  dated  30  January  2016,  the
      appellant set out further details of her background circumstances  and
      explained that,  as  a  consequence  of  learning  that  she  was  HIV
      positive, Stephanie had broken off their relationship.  The  appellant
      went on to explain that in around November 2014 she  had  commenced  a
      new relationship with a French woman called Sonia, whom  she  had  met
      through an internet dating  site.  That  relationship  had  developed,
      Sonia had moved to Leeds to be with the  appellant,  and,  in  January
      2015, they became engaged. As a result of  difficulties  in  obtaining
      reasonably paid employment Sonia had returned to France in  July  2015
      and obtained a job as a receptionist. Nevertheless, they continued  to
      see each other with Sonia visiting reasonably regularly. She explained
      that they also kept in regular touch through telephone calls and other
      forms of social media.

  15.  At  the  hearing  the  appellant  gave  evidence  of  her  background
      circumstances, her sexuality and the nature of her  relationship  with
      Sonia. Sonia also attended and, as the appellant  had,  gave  evidence
      through a French interpreter. They both gave evidence of the nature of
      the relationship which they had with each other and of  the  depth  of
      feeling which they had one for the  other.  Sonia  was  examined,  and
      cross-examined, in detail, on the background to her relationship  with
      the appellant and upon her knowledge of the appellant's  circumstances
      and family.

  16. Various photographs of  the  appellant,  Sonia  and  others  at  their
      engagement  party  were  relied  upon.  Their  engagement  rings  were
      exhibited, as was a bracelet which Sonia had given to the appellant in
      celebration of her forthcoming birthday. Transcripts of text  messages
      between the two vouching affection and tenderness  were  relied  upon,
      documentation demonstrating visits from Sonia was produced and witness
      statements from others concerning the  nature  of  their  relationship
      were relied upon.

  17. After the conclusion of the evidence, which had been characterised  by
      notably sensitive and professional cross-examination on his  part,  Mr
      Wilding intimated he accepted that the appellant had made out her case
      as to her sexuality. He also accepted that the appellant would wish to
      live openly as a lesbian and that to do so in Cameroon would lead to a
      well-founded fear of persecution.


Discussion and Conclusion

  18. Our analysis is, of course, greatly assisted by the position taken  on
      behalf of the Secretary of State. Nevertheless, we should  state  that
      we found the evidence of both the appellant and Sonia to  be  credible
      and reliable. On that evidence, as supported by the  other  adminicles
      and statements mentioned in paragraph 16 above, we are satisfied  that
      the appellant identifies herself as a lesbian, that she is in a stable
      and full-time relationship with her partner and that  they  intend  to
      marry.

  19. It is acknowledged by the Secretary of State that, as a  lesbian,  the
      appellant would fall to be recognised as  a  member  of  a  particular
      social group, namely individuals defined by the shared  characteristic
      of their sexual orientation. The issue is  whether  she  has  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution within the meaning of article 1A(2) of the
      Convention and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees  (1951)  in
      the country of her nationality based on membership of that  particular
      social group.

  20. It has all  along  been  accepted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that
      prejudice against sexuality by state  and  non-state  actors  is  both
      common and public in Cameroon (see paragraph 44  of  the  reasons  for
      refusal letter). The country background evidence  in  the  appellant's
      bundle B amply supports this conclusion.

  21. The outcome of the appeal in this case is determined by  applying  the
      guidance given by Lord Rodger  of  Earlsferry  in  the  Supreme  Court
      decision of HJ (Iran) and HJ (Cameroon) v Secretary of State  for  the
      Home Department [2011] 1  A.C.  596  at  paragraph  82.  The  relevant
      questions for determination are these:

        i. Are we satisfied  on  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  is  a
           lesbian?

       ii. If so, are we satisfied on the available evidence that  gay  (or
           lesbian) people who lived openly would be liable to  persecution
           in her country of nationality?


      iii. If so, do we consider that the  appellant  would  want  to  live
           openly as a lesbian woman and thereby be exposed to a real  risk
           of persecution if returned to Cameroon?

      We are satisfied that the answer to each question is yes and that the
    appellant    therefore has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  as  a
    result of her membership of a      particular social group. It  follows
    that her appeal succeeds on asylum grounds and      that for  the  same
    reasons the appellant has  established  that  she  would  face  a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm in Cameroon and is therefore entitled to
      humanitarian protection.


  22. The appellant has also sought to rely on  articles  2  and  3  of  the
      European Convention on Human Rights. In her appeal these claims  stand
      or fall with her asylum claim. In light of the findings made above  we
      are satisfied that if she returns to Cameroon  the  appellant  may  be
      subjected to torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment  or
      face death in breach of articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR.


  23. In these circumstances it was not necessary  to  consider  any  of  Mr
      Chelvan's other interesting and potentially important arguments and he
      did not seek to advance them.


Decision

  24. The appeal is  allowed  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian  protection
      grounds and human rights grounds.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed

Alan D. Turnbull

Date

15/6/2016

 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

