
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07160/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated             |
|On 1st March 2016                     |On 9th March 2016                          |
|                                      |                                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     K I
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Miss K Wass, Counsel
For the Respondent:     Ms A Fujiwala, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein dated 12  January  2016.  The
    appeal  relates  to  a  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Amin
    promulgated on 2 October 2015.  The Judge dismissed the appeal  on  all
    grounds including on protection grounds.

2.    The Appellant's claim is in respect of a risk on  return  based  on  a
    blood feud. He was a minor at the time and is still aged under 18.  The
    grounds of the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  can  be  summarised  as
    follows:

    1) The Appellant's minority made it obvious that at the time the  blood
       feud was called, the Appellant could only have been told about it by
       his parents and therefore this was not a credibility point;
    2) The background  evidence  contradicted  the  Judge's  findings  that
       minors would not be the targets of blood feuds;
    3) The findings when read with the Country Guidance are unclear;
    4) It would be unduly harsh to expect this minor to  seek  to  relocate
       within Albania on his own;
    5) The Judge's findings that the Appellant's claim is based on  hearsay
       and/or speculation is wrong.


3.    At the hearing before me Miss Wass said  she  largely  relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal which had been drafted by Counsel who had appeared at
    the hearing. The grounds were supplemented with further matters  raised
    in the application to the Upper Tribunal. It was said that the  Judge's
    incorrect view that the case was based on hearsay and speculation  went
    to all of the reasoning in her decision. The Appellant was only a minor
    at the time of the application and so incorrect weight had  been  given
    to the  evidence.  The  Appellant's  knowledge  would  indeed  only  be
    hearsay.

4.    As was acknowledged by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Landes,  Ground  Two
    of the Appellant's  grounds  had  force.  This  related  to  the  self-
    confinement. This finding was in conflict with the objective  evidence.
    Miss Wass took me through the other written grounds and  in  particular
    said she could not elaborate much further in  respect  of  the  written
    grounds at 4 and 5. In respect of internal relocation  and  sufficiency
    of protection there were also errors as set out in the renewed grounds.
    The Appellant was aged 16 at the time  of  the  hearing.  He  had  been
    granted Discretionary Leave to Remain. This was not a case in which age
    was disputed.


5.    Ms Fijiwala said that she relied on the Rule 24 Reply. In  respect  of
    the hearsay and speculation point the Judge  had  also  looked  at  the
    background material. The Appellant's account was  not  consistent  with
    the Kanun. I should look at  paragraphs  5  and  37  EH  (blood  feuds)
    Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC). The case had been provided  to  the
    Judge. Children under 15 and women are not usually killed. The  5  year
    trigger event is relevant because the Appellant was aged under 15.  The
    renewal of the blood feud was relevant to the 5 year anniversary so the
    Judge was entitled to consider it  in  the  context  of  the  objective
    evidence. The Appellant's father had been released in any event.

6.    As for Ground Two the father had  remained  in  the  same  home  after
    prison. At paragraph 43 the Judge noted that the Appellant was in  self
    confinement. There was no material error of law. In respect  of  Ground
    Three is was accepted that the mother was not in prison.

7.    As for Grounds Four, Five and Six it was submitted that  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation was a viable  option.
    There were clear findings which were properly reasoned. The Judge noted
    the case of EH and the objective material. The Judge also  referred  to
    the objective material referred to within the Respondent's Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.

8.    Overall it was submitted that the grounds  were  a  mere  disagreement
    with the findings.

9.    In reply Miss Wass referred  to  the  original  skeleton  argument  at
    paragraph 8  which  referred  to  other  background  material.  It  was
    submitted that there were a number of issues where the Judge had failed
    to consider the objective evidence.

10.   I had reserved my decision which I shall now provide.

11.   In my judgment the Judge's decision is fatally flawed. That is  for  a
    number of reasons. Firstly, the Appellant is still a minor.  There  has
    not been a dispute about his age. He was 16 at the time of the  hearing
    before the Judge and would obviously have been much  younger  when  the
    events he alleges would have occurred. Therefore as a young child it is
    not surprising that what he had relayed had been told to him by others,
    such as his parents. That is indeed hearsay but that is not unusual  in
    this jurisdiction and perhaps not unusual at all when  the  considering
    the context of this particular claim. I  therefore  conclude  that  the
    Judge materially erred in law in respect of the  diminished  weight  or
    lack of belief she applied to the Appellant's evidence because  it  was
    hearsay.

12.   Secondly, I also consider that the Appellant's grounds in  respect  of
    the background material to be made out. In my  judgment  it  was  clear
    that the Country Guidance decision in EH  was not saying that  children
    are not the victims of blood feuds, but that they are not in the  usual
    case. The skeleton argument at  paragraph  8  along  with  the  further
    background material highlighted to the Judge showed this to be  so.  It
    was therefore an error of law for the Judge to conclude that a ten year
    old would not be the subject of a blood feud.  That  is  not  what  the
    background material or the Country Guidance had actually said. That too
    was therefore a material error of law.

13.          Thirdly,  I  note  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was   that
    reconciliation has been attempted but it was refused. This too required
    a clear decision from the Judge. Therefore as for  issues  of  internal
    relocation and sufficiency of protection, the law is  set  out  in  the
    House of Lords decisions in Horvath and in AH (Sudan)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department. The latter guides whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh or reasonable for the Appellant to seek to relocate within
    Albania. It was against the particular circumstances of this Appellant,
    accepted to be a child that needed to be considered,  albeit  with  the
    conundrum of there being no return of him until he is over 18 years  of
    age. In my judgment, with the particular difficulties in respect of the
    findings in respect of the basic aspects of the claim, coupled with the
    fact that the Appellant is accepted to require Discretionary  Leave  to
    Remain as there are no adequate reception facilities for him on  return
    to Albania, also show material error in the  way  in  which  the  Judge
    dealt with these issues.

14.   What is of particular concern in this case is that the Appellant is  a
    minor. It does therefore mean that the considerations set  out  in  the
    Country Guidance and  the  assessment  of  the  appeal  more  generally
    required a different approach to that adopted by  the  Judge.  That  is
    even if one puts to one side the fatal flaws in respect of the  finding
    that the evidence from the Appellant was hearsay or speculation.

15.   Having reflected on the matter I  conclude  that  there  are  material
    errors of law in the Judge's decision.  The  Judge's  decision  is  set
    aside and shall be reheard at the  First-tier  Tribunal.  None  of  the
    findings of the Judge shall remain.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
is set aside.

There shall be a rehearing at the First Tier Tribunal

An anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                       Date: 1st March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


