
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08623/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 5 November 2015                   |On 13 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between
                                    N M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson &
Cantor
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. Due to the sensitive nature of the issues in  this
    case I am satisfied that it is an appropriate  case  for  an  anonymity
    order to be made.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nicol promulgated on 22 July 2015  which  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a refusal of asylum on all grounds .



Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 26 March  1975  and  is  a  national  of  the
    Democratic Republic of the Congo.

 4. On 3 June 2013 the Appellant applied for asylum on the basis  that  she
    would be at risk on return to the DRC as she is a lesbian.

 5. On 8 October 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) It was not accepted that the Appellant was a  lesbian  due  to  the
         discrepancies in relation to when the Appellant first realised that
         she was attracted to  women  and  how  her  relationship  with  her
         girlfriend developed. There were also discrepancies in relation  to
         the background material as to how gay people conduct themselves  in
         the DRC.

      b) It was not therefore accepted that the Appellant was  attacked  and
         threatened because of her sexuality.

      c) Her account that she returned to make a  complaint  to  the  police
         after being raped by police officers is not credible.

      d) The Appellant failed to  mention  in  her  screening  interview  or
         asylum interview that she had previously been sexually assaulted in
         the United Kingdom.

      e) There were no grounds on which  the  Appellant  should  be  granted
         discretionary leave.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Nicol ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision. The Judge found :

      a) It was regrettable that the asylum interview was not recorded.

      b) He did not accept that she was a lesbian.

      c) Even if the Appellant had a friendship with a female it was  not  a
         sexual one.

      d) The Appellant's account of coming to the United Kingdom on a  visit
         visa was vague.

      e) The only evidence that the Appellant was pregnant as a result of  a
         rape is from the Appellant.

      f) There were no compelling circumstances to warrant a grant of  leave
         outside the Rules.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing :

      a) The Judge failed to take into account the evidence which  suggested
         that she suffered mental health problems prior to the loss  of  her
         child arising out of the trauma of events in the DRC.

      b) The Judge failed to consider whether the interview was unlawful  in
         that it was not recorded although a request was made in writing  in
         advance of the interview and it was therefore  contrary  to  Asylum
         Policy Instructions.

      c) The Judge failed to consider the evidence adduced  in  relation  to
         the  impact  of  sexual  violence  on  disclosure   during   asylum
         interviews.

      d) The Judge failed to consider whether the Appellant would have  been
         perceived to have been in a sexual relationship with  a  female  in
         the DRC.

      e) The Judge suggested  that  the  Appellant  could  relocate  without
         specifying where she could relocate to.

      f) The Article 8 assessment is inadequate and fails  to  consider  the
         Appellant having had a  stillborn  daughter  while  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

 8. On 17 August 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson  gave  permission
    to appeal on all grounds.

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Schwenk  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that :

      a) The Judge failed to consider all of the medical evidence. The judge
         concluded that the Appellant's symptoms of trauma arose out of  the
         birth of a stillborn baby and failed to consider the evidence  that
         suggested it predated the birth of her child.

      b) The Judge failed to consider whether the interview carried  out  in
         contravention of the Respondent's own policy was lawful. The  Judge
         did not record in the decision how he  had  decided  to  treat  the
         interview  although  it  was  put  in  issue  by  the   Appellant's
         representatives who referred to the case of Dirshe  2005  EWCA  Civ
         421 and there was clearly a discussion about of prior  to  evidence
         being called. The Judge failed to consider the impact of a  7  hour
         interview on a traumatised who expressed fears at the beginning and
         end of the interview.

      c) The Judge failed to consider not only whether the Appellant  was  a
         lesbian but also whether she would be perceived to be one.

      d) The Article  8  assessment  was  extremely  brief  and  failing  to
         incorporate any consideration of the  Appellant  being  traumatised
         and having lost a child through stillbirth.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mr McVitie submitted that :

      a) The tribunal  did  consider  the  question  of  how  to  treat  the
         interview record in the light of it not having been recorded and he
         relied on the record  of  proceedings  made  by  Mr  Tan  which  he
         produced today which he suggested showed  that  it  was  agreed  by
         counsel that the interview record should be read together with  the
         letter of amendments sent by the legal  representatives  after  the
         interview and this meant the interview was  lawful.  Therefore  any
         issues in relation to the interview were settled at  the  start  of
         the hearing.

      b) It was never argued before the first tier that the Appellant  might
         be perceived to be a lesbian.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

12. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address  and  determine  what
    weight to attach to the record of interview  taking  into  account  the
    written request for recording made by those representing the  Appellant
    and the Respondent's own policy constitutes a clear error  of  law.  It
    was clearly an issue raised in correspondence by those representing the
    Appellant and they referred to the case of Dirshe (C1  and  E1  of  the
    Respondent's bundle). It was also a matter that was discussed  at  some
    length prior to the evidence being called. Mr McVitie produced at court
    the record of the discussion made by the HOPO in the First-tier Mr Tan.
    The  Judge's  own  Record  of  Proceedings  is   unfortunately   almost
    completely illegible but he did not address the issue in  his  decision
    and make clear the arguments made before him in relation to the  weight
    to be attributed to the interview record and how he resolved  them.  He
    describes the decision as regrettable but this does  not  amount  to  a
    resolution of how he approached the interview. It is also unclear  from
    the remainder of his decision therefore when he refers to discrepancies
    in 'the evidence'  whether  he  is  talking  of  the  contents  of  the
    interview, witness statements or oral evidence. This error  I  consider
    to be material since had  the  Tribunal  conducted  this  exercise  the
    outcome could have been different. That in my view is the correct  test
    to apply.

13. In relation to the argument that the Judge failed to adequately address
    the medical evidence both as to whether  the  Appellant  was  suffering
    from mental health issues prior to the stillbirth and thus how this may
    have impacted an assessment of the credibility of her account of events
    in the DRC and the  weight  to  be  given  to  inconsistencies  in  her
    evidence I am satisfied that this ground is made out. The  Judge  makes
    no reference to anything other than the report of Dr Malik  and  indeed
    in relation to that makes no  findings  about  the  Appellant's  mental
    health either in relation to credibility or Article 8. The judge  makes
    no reference to the evidence of the Counsellor Trish Dooley  at  F1  of
    the Respondent's bundle or the evidence  at  9-33  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle and I am satisfied that there is nothing in  his  findings  from
    which it can be inferred that he has taken it into account.

14. The  Article  8  assessment  is  wholly  inadequate  and  there  is  no
    assessment either there  or  anywhere  else  in  the  decision  of  the
    Appellant's mental health problems or the issue of the  stillborn  baby
    as compelling circumstances.

15. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety as I am  satisfied  that  the  findings  were  inadequate  and
    unclear on a number of key features in the case.

16. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted because
    the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due to the  failure  to  make
    clear and  well  reasoned  findings  on  key  issues  relating  to  the
    interview and the Appellant's mental health issues. In this  case  none
    of the findings of fact are to stand and the matter will be a  complete
    re hearing.

18. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before any other  Judge
    except Judge Nicol and Judge Birrell.

19. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008 9as
    amended) the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.


Signed      Date 11.11.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
