
IAC-AH-CJ-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08024/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 June 2015                       |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                 Anna Awais
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Vaughen, NBS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Anna Awais, was born on 29 July 1986  and  is  a  female
    citizen of Pakistan.  She has two dependent daughters with her  in  the
    United Kingdom who were  born  respectively  in  2009  and  2011.   The
    appellant's mother-in-law and brother-in-law also live  in  the  United
    Kingdom and are refugees.  The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated 24 September 2014
    refusing to grant her asylum and making directions for her removal from
    the United Kingdom.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Birkby)  in  a
    decision promulgated on 16 December 2014, dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is an Ahmadi.  At [35], Judge Birkby found:

         "However, because of  the  finding  that  the  appellant  has  been
         targeted by the KN in Pakistan and indeed that she is of the Ahmadi
         faith, despite the fact she had not claimed that she has  or  would
         proselytise that faith, I find that were the appellant to return to
         the area where she previously lived, even  though  the  appellant's
         brother-in-law appears to believe that  the  KN  do  not  know  the
         address of the  appellant's  husband,  which  will  have  been  the
         appellant's address, the appellant would be at risk of  persecution
         because of her Ahmadi faith."

 3. The judge went on to consider  the  internal  flight  alternative.   He
    noted that "the husband as I find probably still works in Pakistan.   I
    am told the family has savings.   The  family  would  be  able  to  re-
    establish themselves in a part of Pakistan away from  their  home  area
    and in safety".

 4. I find that, notwithstanding the preparation of  a  very  detailed  and
    thorough decision, Judge Birkby has erred in law.  He has  done  so  by
    omitting to consider the operation of the principles of HJ (Iran)  2010
    UKSC 31.  The judge found that the appellant  had  not  and  would  not
    proselytise her faith in Pakistan (a finding which I find no reason  to
    set aside).  However, the judge failed to  deal  with  the  appellant's
    evidence (which he recorded at [25]) that "if she returned to  Pakistan
    she would have to conceal her faith".  Although the appellant would not
    proselytise her faith openly, the judge has not considered whether  she
    might engage in "open discourse" with non-Ahmadis (see  MN  and  Others
    (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00389
    (IAC)).  It is unclear from the  determination  whether  the  appellant
    should be recognised as a refugee because any reluctance she  may  have
    to engage in open discourse (falling short of open proselytising  which
    Judge Birkby found she would not undertake) would be the direct  result
    of a fear of persecution on account of her religious faith.

 5. In normal circumstances, I would  consider  remitting  this  appeal  to
    Judge Birkby to complete his analysis.  However, I was informed  by  Mr
    Vaughen, for the  appellant,  that  the  appellant's  husband  has  now
    travelled to the United Kingdom and has claimed  asylum.   No  decision
    has yet been made by the respondent in  respect  of  his  claim.   This
    development raises new questions  regarding  the  likely  risk  to  the
    appellant if she were to return  to  Pakistan  as  a  lone  female.   I
    consider  it  appropriate,  therefore,  that  the  appeal   should   be
    considered by a judge other than Judge Birkby; if the  husband's  claim
    for asylum is rejected by the respondent and her  husband  appeals,  it
    would make obvious sense for any appeal he may make to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be consolidated with this appeal  and  heard  by  the  same
    judge.  I set aside the First-tier Tribunal determination but  preserve
    the findings  of  fact  save  that  relating  to  the  internal  flight
    alternative.  That issue will need to be re-examined by the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the light of what I have  said  regarding  HJ  (Iran).   By
    setting aside the judge's decision, I certainly do  not  rule  out  the
    possibility that the next Tribunal may conclude that it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh to expect the appellant to  live  elsewhere  in  Pakistan.
    However, that will be entirely a matter for the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  16  December
2014 is set  aside.   The  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal (not Judge Birkby) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

