
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08094/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 June 2013                               |On 4 July 2013               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                               ms shi hai yun
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, whose date of birth is given as 1  January  1992,  is  a
    national of the People's Republic of China.   Her  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal to grant her asylum was dismissed  by  Immigration
    Judge Lobo, and her appeal against this decision was dismissed by Upper
    Tribunal Judge  Waumsley.   Subsequently,  the  appellant  was  granted
    permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  and  it  was  ordered  by
    consent that the appeal be allowed, that the  determinations  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Waumsley and First-tier Tribunal Judge Lobo be set aside
    and that the matter be remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a  case
    management review hearing.

 2. In accordance with this order, this appeal then came  before  me  on  1
    March 2013, when, as recorded in my  note  of  hearing  following  that
    hearing, it was agreed on behalf of both parties that there should be a
    full re-hearing of the  appellant's  substantive  appeal.   As  I  also
    recorded, both parties agreed that this appeal should  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal,  because  substantial  fact-finding  would  be
    required and the grounds of appeal regarding the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal were effectively that there  had  been  misdirections  in
    law.  Both parties agreed that the appellant had not yet had  one  fair
    hearing of her appeal.

 3. For reasons which are set out in  my  note  of  hearing  following  the
    hearing on 1 March 2013, it was then necessary to adjourn  the  hearing
    in order for the appellant to be seen by the Helen  Bamber  Foundation,
    and it was proposed that when the appeal was next before  me,  I  would
    then make a  determination  remitting  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. Accordingly, I will now record my finding that there  were  significant
    errors of law in Judge Lobo's determination which are material, for the
    reasons which were accepted by the Court of Appeal when it ordered that
    Judge Lobo's determination be set aside.

 5. I have had regard to paragraph 7 of the  Practice  Statements  for  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal and consider  that
    the effect of the errors contained within  Judge  Lobo's  determination
    are such that the appellant was effectively deprived of a fair hearing.
     I also consider that the nature  and  extent  of  the  judicial  fact-
    finding which will now be necessary in order for the decision to be re-
    made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal (as  has  been
    accepted on behalf of both parties) and I shall so order.

 6. I record that it has been arranged that this appeal will be listed  for
    re-hearing at Taylor House on 1 October 2013 with a time estimate of  2
    hours, and that Ms Loughran has been notified of this date  and  should
    be available to represent the appellant at that hearing.

Decision

The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lobo having  been  set  aside
as containing a material  error  of  law,  I  direct  that  this  appeal  be
remitted for a re-hearing by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  sitting  at  Taylor
House, to be put before any  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Lobo.


Signed                                  Date: 3 July 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
