
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08908/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd July 2016                             |On 5th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     QAM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik of Counsel, instructed by Latitude Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Lever of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 30th September 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Afghan citizen, born [ ]  1981  making  him  34
    years of age at the date of the Upper Tribunal hearing.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in  May  2012  and  claimed
    asylum.

 4. The Respondent refused the application on 1st September  2013  and  the
    Appellant  appealed  pursuant  to  section  82  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).  The appeal  was  heard
    on 11th August 2015 and dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds are summarised below;

 6. It was contended that it was not in dispute that the Appellant had been
    a religious educator  in  Afghanistan  and  at  paragraph  27  the  FtT
    considered it plausible that he may have been approached by the Taliban
    to indoctrinate students.  It is contended that  the  FtT  subsequently
    erred at paragraph 36 by stating;

         "If it could be said that he feared that his profile as a religious
         teacher potentially placed him at risk because he might be regarded
         as a useful recruit for extremists or potentially regarded as  such
         by the government then it would be a simple question of him  simply
         finding other employment that did not raise his profile if that was
         something that concerned him."

 7. The Appellant contended that the above line of reasoning is directly in
    contradiction with the principles in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.

 8. In addition it was contended that the FtT erred in law at paragraph  34
    by finding there was no credibility in the Appellant's argument that he
    feared the Afghan government  due  to  his  previous  support  for  the
    Taliban, as this was contradicted by further reasoning at paragraph  36
    where it was stated;

         "he may have had and may still retain attitudes sympathetic or  not
         averse to the Taliban".

 9. It was contended that if it was considered credible that the  Appellant
    held such views,  the  FtT  had  failed  to  explain  why  it  was  not
    considered credible and reasonable that the Appellant feared the Afghan
    government.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Adio in the following  terms;



         "Although the judge did not find the Appellant credible in  certain
         aspects of his claim the judge did make a positive finding  of  the
         Appellant's credibility that the Appellant may well  have  followed
         in his father's footsteps to be a religious  educator/teacher.   It
         is therefore an error of law to deny refugee status on  the  ground
         that it would be open to the Appellant on  relocation  to  seek  to
         engage in employment  other  than  as  a  religious  teacher.   The
         conclusion at paragraph 36 of the  judge's  decision  creates  that
         impression and it is for that  reason  alone  that  I  am  granting
         permission to appeal.  The grounds for  permission  to  appeal  are
         arguable."

11. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary  it  was  contended  that  the  FtT  directed  itself
    appropriately.  The FtT made  findings  that  the  Appellant's  profile
    would not generate any adverse interest, and therefore the  comment  as
    to changing employment was not material.

12. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FtT  decision
    should be set aside by reason of error of law.

Oral Submissions

13. Mr Karnik relied and expanded upon the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal.  Mr Karnik confirmed  that  there
    was no application to admit evidence that had not been before  the  FtT
    when error of law was being considered.

14. Mr Karnik submitted that  the  FtT  finding  at  paragraph  36  clearly
    conflicted with the guidance given in HJ (Iran) and infected the  other
    findings made, which meant that the decision was unsafe and must be set
    aside.

15. Mr Karnik anticipated  that  it  might  be  argued  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, that although the FtT had erred, the error was not material
    and in anticipation of such an argument, referred to paragraph 49 of AJ
    (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636.  In that paragraph the Court  of  Appeal
    stated that there  were  two  categories  of  error  that  may  not  be
    material.  One was that any rational Tribunal  must  have  reached  the
    same conclusion notwithstanding the error, and the second was if  there
    was a failure to refer to a relevant legal instrument, but the Tribunal
    had in fact applied the test that it was  supposed  to  apply.   I  was
    asked to find that the error in this appeal did not fall within  either
    of those categories.

16. As anticipated by Mr Karnik, Mr McVeety accepted that the FtT had erred
    by stating that if the Appellant feared  his  profile  as  a  religious
    teacher placed him at risk, then it was  open  to  him  to  find  other
    employment, but argued that this was not a material error.

17. Mr McVeety argued that the finding at paragraph 36 was  an  alternative
    finding, and the FtT had already rejected  the  Appellant's  contention
    that his profile as a religious teacher put him  at  risk,  and  I  was
    referred to the findings made at paragraphs 28-34 inclusive.

18. I was asked to accept that  the  FtT  had  not  found  the  Appellant's
    account to be credible,  and  had  rejected  that  account,  and  those
    findings  should  stand  as  they  had  not  been  challenged  in   the
    application for permission to appeal.

19. In response Mr Karnik argued that the starting point  of  the  FtT  was
    incorrect,  as  the  FtT  should  have  started  consideration  of  the
    Appellant's account with the HJ (Iran) principles.   If  this  approach
    had  been  adopted,  then  the  FtT  may  not  have  made  the  adverse
    credibility findings.



My Conclusions and Reasons

20. As conceded by the Respondent, the FtT erred in law at paragraph 36  in
    stating that it was open to the Appellant to cease  religious  teaching
    if that placed him  at  risk.   The  error  was  not  to  consider  the
    principles in HJ (Iran) which are summarised in paragraph  82  of  that
    decision.

21. The issue to be decided is whether the error of  law  is  material.   I
    conclude that the error is not material for the following reasons.

22. I am satisfied that the finding in paragraph 36 which is the subject of
    challenge, is an alternative finding.  I note that  the  FtT  commences
    the finding by using the word 'if'.

23. The decision must be read as a whole, and such a reading discloses that
    prior to paragraph 36 the FtT had already made  primary  findings  that
    the Appellant would not be at risk, and sustainable reasons  for  those
    findings were given.

24. At paragraph 27 the FtT found that there was  no  suggestion  that  the
    Appellant encountered any difficulties  on  leaving  the  Taliban,  and
    found it "not implausible that as Koran  teachers  in  a  madrassa  the
    Appellant and his father may have been seen as  sympathetic  candidates
    to indoctrinate students."

25. However the FtT found that it was  difficult  to  know  what  extremist
    views the Taliban wished the Appellant and his father  to  indoctrinate
    the students with, as they may already have held views  sympathetic  to
    the Taliban.  The FtT found  that  if  the  Appellant  and  his  father
    refused to indoctrinate students, "there  would  be  little  gained  by
    threatening or  killing  such  individuals.   Pertinently  neither  the
    Appellant nor his father chose to relocate following such  a  visit  in
    2001."

26. At paragraph 28 the FtT does not accept that  an  attack  in  2002  was
    carried out by the Taliban.

27. At paragraph 30 the FtT  finds  that  the  Appellant  was  in  Pakistan
    between 2002 and  2008.   At  paragraph  31  the  FtT  finds  that  the
    Appellant moved to France for "economic betterment rather than any fear
    of persecution either in Afghanistan or Pakistan."

28.  At  paragraph  32  the  FtT  finds  that  the  Appellant  remained  in
    Afghanistan from 2008 to 2012 and that he returned to his  own  village
    in Helmand Province which demonstrates no real  fear  of  the  Taliban.
    The FtT also finds that this  demonstrates  that  whether  or  not  any
    incidents occurred in 2001/2002, there were no incidents involving  the
    Appellant or his family for the four year period that  he  remained  in
    Helmand Province.

29. At paragraph 33 the FtT makes a finding that the Appellant's claim that
    his father was killed by  the  Taliban  is  not  credible.   A  further
    finding is made that if the Taliban wished to kill the Appellant,  they
    clearly had the opportunity to do so but had not made  any  attempt  on
    his life.

30. At paragraph 34 the FtT finds the Appellant's claim to fear the  Afghan
    government  because  of  alleged  involvement  with  the  Taliban  some
    fourteen years previously to be incredible.  The FtT accepts  that  the
    Appellant may have been a supporter or sympathiser  of  Taliban  views,
    but finds that the Taliban have no adverse interest in him.  There is a
    further finding that the Taliban had ample opportunity to  have  killed
    the Appellant while he was living in his village in  Helmand  Province,
    and made no attempt to do so.

31. At paragraph 35 the FtT finds the Appellant to be "an  opportunist  who
    has sought to enter France for economic betterment, was refused and now
    seeks to do the same in the UK, hopeful of better results."

32. At paragraph 36, prior to the finding  which  is  challenged,  the  FtT
    finds that the Appellant has a reasonable internal relocation option to
    Kabul, and repeats the conclusion that neither the government  nor  the
    Taliban would have any adverse interest in him.

33. For the reasons  given  above,  I  conclude  that  the  FtT,  with  the
    exception of the finding under challenge, made findings open to  it  on
    the evidence and provided adequate and sustainable  reasons  for  those
    findings.  The finding under challenge is an alternative  finding,  and
    is wrong in law, but for the reasons previously given, the error is not
    material as it is an alternative finding.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  I do not set  aside  the  decision.   The
appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

It is unclear whether an anonymity direction was made by the FtT.   As  this
is an appeal against refusal of international protection, I have decided  to
make an anonymity direction pursuant to rule 14 of  The  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 26th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 26th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
