
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08272/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 6th June 2016                    |On: 11th July 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     VM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Muzenda, Longfellow Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a female national of Zimbabwe born in  1979.  As  this
    case concerns a claim for international protection I make an order  for
    anonymity in the following terms:


         "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the
         Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
         proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
         indirectly identify the Respondent  (original  appellant)  in  this
         determination identified as VM. This direction applies to,  amongst
         others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
         could give rise to contempt of court proceedings"


 2. The Appellant appeals with permission the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Knowles) to dismiss her appeal against the Respondent's
    decision to reject her protection claim.




    Basis of Claim and Matters in Issue


 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that she had a well founded fear
    of persecution in Zimbabwe for reasons of her political  opinion.   She
    is an ardent supporter of the MDC but her  problems  in  Zimbabwe  stem
    principally from her family relationship with a man named A. He is  her
    husband's brother, and is a prominent member of ZANU-PF.  Her  problems
    with her brother-in-law  began  sometime  after  she  and  her  husband
    attended a training course under the auspices of the 'Community  Health
    and Empowerment Network'. She did not appreciate at the time,  but  now
    knows, that this organisation was an MDC sponsored programme created in
    order  to  parallel  the  ZANU-PF's  'Empowerment  and   Indiginisation
    Programme'.  One of the participants only came to two meetings  and  it
    later transpired that he was  a  CIO  informant.  Towards  the  end  of
    February 2012 [her] brother-in-law came home speaking of "betrayal"  by
    members of his family. He said that he had seen the Appellant  and  her
    husband's names on a list of the participants in a course  run  by  the
    MDC. He had been called in and "grilled" about this and had assured his
    superiors that he would "deal with it".  He told the Appellant that she
    had to immediately disassociate herself from the MDC or she would  face
    consequences beyond his control. The Appellant describes her brother-in-
    law as "zealous, irrational, uncontrollable and  dangerous".   She  has
    heard that he has been accused of  a  number  of  atrocities  including
    murder and she is afraid that he would not  balk  at  killing  his  own
    brother or sister-in-law if he had to.  In the months that followed she
    and her husband tried to avoid  A.  He  called  them  on  a  number  of
    occasions asking them to  attend  ZANU-PF  events  with  him  but  they
    managed to avoid it.


 4. In November  2012  A  convened  a  family  meeting  where  he  publicly
    condemned the Appellant and her husband for  a  lack  of  loyalty.   He
    demanded that  they  openly  condemn  the  MDC.    At  this  point  the
    Appellant had already applied for a visa to come to the UK. Her husband
    had also wanted to leave with her but  had  not  applied  in  case  her
    application was prejudiced. They managed to avoid A but in January  the
    election campaigns were in full swing and he was  insisting  that  they
    accompany him canvassing support from ZANU-PF.  The Appellant  and  her
    husband went away so that they did not have to take part: he telephoned
    them and was "livid". He threatened them. The Appellant bought a ticket
    and flew to the UK.

 5. Since her arrival here she has continued her involvement  in  the  MDC.
    She has attended meetings, organised fundraising events and is a member
    of the [ ] Branch.   She was told that her husband was beaten up during
    2013, an event which caused him to flee Zimbabwe.  As  far  as  she  is
    aware he is now in Mozambique. He has left their  children  with  their
    grandmother in a rural area.

 6. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant was a member of the MDC  and
    that she continues to be politically active in  the  UK.  It  was  also
    accepted, with reference to country background  material,  that  a  man
    sharing the same name as A is the ZANU-PF  Secretary  for  Information.
    The Respondent was not however satisfied that this gentleman is related
    to the Appellant, that he has threatened her, or  that  he  presents  a
    real risk to her upon return to Zimbabwe.



    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The First-tier Tribunal heard live evidence  from  the  Appellant,  and
    from an additional witness, a Mr DC. DC is married to  the  Appellant's
    cousin.  She further relied on a number of documents including her  MDC
    membership cards, a certificate relating to the  course  she  attended,
    and a letter from her MP at home, who confirmed that  A  is  an  active
    member of ZANU-PF and that he is related as claimed to the Appellant.


 8. The First-tier Tribunal accepted,  as  had  the  Respondent,  that  the
    Appellant was a member of the MDC before she left Zimbabwe and that she
    continues to be involved today.  Other than that  very  little  of  the
    account  was  accepted.   There  were  "serious  concerns"  about   the
    credibility of the claim to have attended  the  training  course  since
    there was no trace in the  background  material  of  this  organisation
    existing, and the tribunal did not accept  that  the  government  would
    allow it to operate. Further the certificate bore the date of  February
    2011 when the narrative indicated that she had attended in 2012.  If  A
    was as ruthless as the Appellant claims it was not clear why  he  would
    not have enforced the Appellant's loyalty to ZANU-PF earlier.   It  was
    not accepted that A is in  fact  the  Appellant's  brother-in-law.  The
    evidence of DC and the MP could not be accepted because they were  "not
    sufficiently independent".  Since  the   Appellant's  account  was  not
    credible, little weight could be placed on their evidence.  It is  "not
    credible" that the Appellant has lost contact with her husband and  her
    overall credibility was damaged by the fact  that  she  did  not  claim
    asylum as soon as  practicable  after  her  arrival  in  the  UK.   The
    Appellant had not shown it to be reasonably  likely  that  the  ZANU-PF
    official known as A is her brother-in-law, or  that  she  came  to  the
    adverse attention of the authorities for attending a course.


 9. The determination then deals with risk on return. The country  guidance
    case of CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00059(IAC) is summarised [at 71]:

         "the Upper Tribunal held that the evidence did not show that, as  a
         general matter, the return of a failed asylum seeker from  the  UK,
         having no significant MDC profile,  would  result  in  that  person
         facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF.  In
         particular the Upper Tribunal found inter alia that a  returnee  to
         Harare (where the appellant states that she lived)  would  face  no
         significant difficulties if going to a low or medium density  area.
         The Tribunal went on to say that in a high density  area  a  person
         without ZANU-PF connections would not, in general, face significant
         problems unless he or she has a significant MDC profile which might
         cause him or her to  feature  on  a  list  of  those  targeted  for
         harassment or would otherwise engage in political activities likely
         to attract the adverse attention of ZANU-PF or would be  reasonably
         likely to engage in such activities  but  for  a  fear  of  thereby
         coming to adverse attention"

10.  Applying  this  guidance  the  Tribunal  finds  that   the   Appellant
    participates in meetings, demonstrations and fund raising activities in
    common with many other Zimbabwean nationals in the  UK.  She  does  not
    have profile such that she would be at risk on return. She can continue
    to support the MDC in Harare as she has done since 1999.



    The Appeal

11. The Appellant  submits  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  the
    following material respects:


              i) Failure to make findings on material matters


                 The determination fails to assess what is reasonably likely
                 to happen upon the Appellant's  arrival  in  Zimbabwe.  The
                 appeal is dismissed on the basis that she does not  have  a
                 "significant" MDC  profile.  This  is  not  the  only  test
                 established in the case-law. The question was  whether  the
                 Appellant, a person accepted to have been a member  of  the
                 MDC in Zimbabwe and the UK, would be  at  risk  during  the
                 intelligence-led  screening  at   port.    There   was   no
                 consideration of the second limb of risk in CM.


                 It was the accepted evidence that the Appellant had been  a
                 member of the MDC in Zimbabwe for 1999.  She had  continued
                 her involvement in the UK. It was incumbent on the Tribunal
                 to consider what her profile/level of activity  would  have
                 been on return. Whilst the assessment of this question  was
                 informed by her past behaviour, it was  a  forward  looking
                 assessment.




             ii) Failure to give adequate reasons


                 The consistent evidence of the Appellant,  a  live  witness
                 and the MP for Glenview in Zimbabwe was  that  the  ZANU-PF
                 activist named A is in fact the Appellant's brother-in-law.
                 It is submitted that the reasons given for  rejecting  that
                 evidence were inadequate and/or irrational.

12. In response the Respondent submits that the risk assessment was lawful.
    The Judge was  obliged  to  consider  the  matter  of  the  Appellant's
    profile. It was for the Judge to assess the evidence of the  witnesses.
     If there was an omission to expressly consider how the Appellant would
    behave on return home, this was not material.




    My Findings

13. The current country guidance is set out at paragraph 3 of the  headnote
    to CM:


    (1)    As a general matter, there  is  significantly  less  politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does  not
         show that, as a general matter,  the  return  of  a  failed  asylum
         seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,
         would result in that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
         demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


    (2)   The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case of a
         person without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from  the  United
         Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
         other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a  person
         may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
         serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those
         they control.  The adverse attention may well involve a requirement
         to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the  prospect  of  serious
         harm in the event of failure.  Persons who  have  shown  themselves
         not  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  ZANU-PF  are   entitled   to
         international protection, whether or not they could  and  would  do
         whatever  might  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  such  loyalty  (RT
         (Zimbabwe)).


    (3)   The situation is not uniform across the relevant rural areas  and
         there may be reasons why a particular individual, although at first
         sight appearing to  fall  within  the  category  described  in  the
         preceding paragraph, in reality does not do so.  For  example,  the
         evidence might disclose that, in the home  village,  ZANU-PF  power
         structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.


    (4)    In  general,  a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
         Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to face
         significant  difficulty  from  ZANU-PF  elements,   including   the
         security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter.
         A person may, however, be able to show that his or her  village  or
         area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF  chief,
         or the like.


    (5)    A returnee  to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.


    (6)    A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not  suffer  the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.


    (7)    The issue of what  is  a  person's  home  for  the  purposes  of
         internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact and is not
         necessarily to be determined by reference to  the  place  a  person
         from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  As  a  general
         matter, it is unlikely that a person with a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in a major urban centre such  as  Harare  will  have  a
         viable internal relocation alternative  to  a  rural  area  in  the
         Eastern provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland (including  Bulawayo)
         may be negated by discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.


    (8)    Internal relocation from a rural area to Harare or  (subject  to
         what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in  general,  more  realistic;
         but  the  socio-economic  circumstances  in   which   persons   are
         reasonably likely to find themselves will need to be considered, in
         order to determine whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         to expect them to relocate.


    (9)    The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly improved since  the  period
         considered in RN. The replacement of the Zimbabwean currency by the
         US  dollar  and  the  South  African  rand  has  ended  the  recent
         hyperinflation. The availability of food and other goods  in  shops
         has likewise improved, as has  the  availability  of  utilities  in
         Harare. Although these improvements are not being felt by everyone,
         with 15% of the population still requiring food aid, there has  not
         been any deterioration in the  humanitarian  situation  since  late
         2008. Zimbabwe has a large informal economy,  ranging  from  street
         traders  to  home-based  enterprises,  which  (depending   on   the
         circumstances) returnees may be expected to enter.


    (10)   As was the position in RN, those who are or have  been  teachers
         require to have their cases determined on the basis that this  fact
         places them  in  an  enhanced  or  heightened  risk  category,  the
         significance of which will need to be  assessed  on  an  individual
         basis.


    (11)  In certain cases,  persons  found  to  be  seriously  lacking  in
         credibility may properly be found as a result  to  have  failed  to
         show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they would not, in  fact,  be
         regarded, on return, as aligned with ZANU-PF and/or (b)  that  they
         would be returning to a socio-economic  milieu  in  which  problems
         with ZANU-PF will arise. This important point was identified in  RN
         ... and remains valid.


14. Whilst it is clear that the regard was had to this country guidance,  I
    am nevertheless satisfied that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  two  material
    respects. Firstly, I was not  able  to  understand,  upon  reading  the
    determination, why the Tribunal had reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant did not currently have a 'significant' profile such that  she
    might fact problems on return, or in Harare today. It was accepted that
    she had been a member of the MDC since  1999  and  had  been  committed
    enough to continue her participation in the UK, described  as  "active"
    at paragraph 71 of the findings. The Respondent suggested that the term
    "significant" required the individual to have a leadership role [at 24]
    but this test would not appear to be borne out by the decision  in  CM,
    or the earlier decision in EM & Others (Zimbabwe)  CG  [2011]  UKUT  98
    (IAC).  The conclusion that she does not have a  "significant"  profile
    appears to be based on her failure  to  demonstrate  that  she  is  the
    Branch Treasurer in the UK. That does not seem to me to be  a  complete
    assessment of whether she would have a profile to  adversely  associate
    her with the MDC.   The determination notes that the Upper Tribunal has
    in the past drawn a distinction between "high level"  and  "low  level"
    activity. It might be presumed that the term "low level" would include,
    for instance, someone who carried a membership card but rarely attended
    meetings, or someone who from time to time signed a  petition;  at  the
    other end of the spectrum there would be  full  time  workers  for  the
    party  or  candidates  for  official  office.  The  question  of   risk
    correlates to where the individual is found on that  spectrum.  For  my
    part I do not understand how the Tribunal reached the  conclusion  that
    active participation  in  meetings,  demonstrations  and  fund  raising
    events over a 16 year period should be classed as "low level".

15.  Secondly,  and  most  fundamentally,  the   determination   gives   no
    consideration at all to how the Appellant will actually act upon return
    to Zimbabwe. I reject the Respondent's submission that this omission is
    not material. Risk  assessments  must  be  forward  looking.  It  being
    accepted that she held political views  fundamentally  opposed  to  the
    oppressive government in office, it was incumbent on  the  Tribunal  to
    consider whether the Appellant would in the future behave, or to put it
    another way, whether she might develop a significant profile such as to
    attract adverse attention.

16. I am not persuaded that the Tribunal erred in finding  the  Appellant's
    home area to be Harare. Although Mr Muzenda is no doubt correct to  say
    that her origins lie  in  a  rural  area  (in  common  with  many  city
    dwellers) it was clear from the evidence that she had lived  in  Harare
    for some 10 years  [see  for  instance  the  screening  interview].  As
    paragraph (7) of the headnote in CM makes clear, the Tribunal cannot be
    expected in these circumstances to embark on an artificial analysis  of
    what might happen if she "returned" to a village she had  not  in  fact
    lived in.   I accept that in this case there is something of  a  nuance
    to that since it is the Appellant's evidence that her children are  now
    in the rural area with their grandmother, and that it is to  them  that
    she would return, but since the Tribunal appears to have  rejected  the
    evidence about the whereabouts of  her  husband  and  children  it  can
    hardly be criticised for failing to consider that matter.

17. The final submission turned on the approach taken to the evidence,  and
    in particular that given by the live witness DC. It would  appear  from
    the summary of the evidence  given  that  his  testimony  was  entirely
    consistent with that given by the Appellant, and indeed in  the  letter
    from the MP.  This evidence is dealt with as follows:

         "Given my concerns over the credibility of the appellant's account,
         however, I am not satisfied that the accounts of the  MP,  or  [DC]
         represent sufficiently independent evidence on which I can rely"

18. Mr Tarlow did not attempt to defend  that  reasoning  which  any  great
    enthusiasm. It is incumbent on the Tribunal to analyse  and  weigh  all
    relevant evidence but that is particularly so where it has come from  a
    live witness.   It is not  enough  to  dismiss  evidence  out  of  hand
    because the Appellant's evidence had already  been  rejected.    Whilst
    the Tribunal  may  have  reached  the  conclusion  that  she  had  been
    exaggerating or telling outright untruths about some matters, DC  spoke
    directly to a central matter in  issue:  the  Appellant's  relationship
    with A.  His evidence required more attention than it received in  this
    determination.


19. The parties were in agreement that if the grounds  were  made  out  the
    decision in this appeal would need to be wholly  remade.   Due  to  the
    nature and extent of the fact finding  required it was agreed that this
    would best be done in the First-tier Tribunal.



      Decisions


20. The decision contains an error of law and is set aside.


21. The matter is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                5th July 2016
