
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08218/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 13th February 2014                           |On 5th March 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                       mohammed sahlan Mohamed salman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Professor W Rees, Counsel instructed on behalf of
                    Vasuki Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 1st  August  1990.   He
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Walters) who in a determination promulgated on 10th October 2013
    dismissed his appeal against the Respondent's decision to issue removal
    directions and to refuse his claim for asylum.

 2. The history can be stated shortly.   The  Appellant  is  a  Sri  Lankan
    Muslim speaking both Tamil and Singhalese.  Whilst in Sri Lanka  in  or
    about 2006 he provided accommodation for various people at  the  family
    home, delivered parcels and obtained mobile phones and transport  money
    for a third party.  In or about January or February 2009 the  Appellant
    ceased undertaking those duties.  Contact was re-established  with  the
    third party in or about January 2010  and  the  Appellant  accommodated
    people at his request in the family home.

 3. In October 2010 he obtained  a  student  visa  travelling  to  the  UK.
    However his leave was curtailed on 6th June 2011.   The  Appellant  did
    not appeal that decision.

 4. The Appellant returned to Sri Lanka on 16th January 2013.  It is whilst
    in Sri Lanka the Appellant's claim is that in March 2013 he ran into an
    acquaintance who had worked at the third party's shop previously.  That
    night the Appellant was arrested from his family  home,  taken  to  the
    police station, photographed and taken to an unknown destination by the
    army.  During that time the Appellant states that he  was  tortured  by
    being burned with a hot rod and cigarettes.   On  20th  June  2013  the
    Appellant was taken to a place outside prison and handed  to  an  agent
    after his father had paid a bribe for his release.

 5. The Appellant left Sri Lanka on 5th July 2013 arriving in the UK on the
    same day.  He subsequently applied for  asylum  based  on  his  imputed
    political opinion and fear of the Sri Lankan authorities.

 6. The Respondent considered that claim and in  a  decision  letter  dated
    21st August 2013 refused his claim.

 7. The Appellant appealed that decision and the  matter  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 27th September 2013.  The judge  considered  the
    Appellant's claim but dismissed it on asylum and human  rights  grounds
    having not found the Appellant to be a credible witness  and  rejecting
    his account of having being detained, interrogated and tortured.

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that  decision  and  on  13th
    November 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge Sommerville granted  permission
    he stated:-

         "It is arguable that the FTJ erred in law in his  approach  to  the
         expert medical evidence.  At paragraph 49  he  concluded  that  the
         Appellant's account of his interrogation was not credible.  He made
         this finding before he considered the medical reports, particularly
         that of Professor  Lingam  who  had  opined  that  the  scars  were
         diagnostic of the Appellant's  account  of  his  interrogation  and
         torture.  The other grounds have less merit but may be argued."

 9. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Whilst the grounds advanced
    on behalf of the Appellant take issue with the  judge's  assessment  of
    the Appellant's credibility and the application of the country guidance
    decision of GJ, the principal ground relied upon relates to  the  issue
    of the medical evidence and in particular the judge's treatment of  the
    report of Professor Lingam (see paragraphs 7 and 10 of the grounds).

10.   Mr Bramble conceded that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did
    disclose an error of law for the reasons set out in the grounds and the
    grant of permission that dealt with the issue of the medical  evidence.
    In the light of the concession made on the Secretary of State's behalf,
    there is no basis on which I could possibly do  otherwise  than  accept
    that concession and find that  the  determination  cannot  stand  as  a
    consequence.  It is therefore common ground between  the  parties  that
    the judge made an error of law and that the Tribunal must substitute  a
    fresh  decision  to  allow  or  to  dismiss  the  appeal.    In   those
    circumstances it  is  necessarily  only  briefly  to  explain  why  the
    Tribunal finds that to be the case.

11.  At paragraph 49 the judge made a finding that  he  did  not  find  the
    Appellant's account of the content of the interrogation to be  credible
    and thus having rejected that went on to consider the medical evidence.
     The judge fell into error in the way set out in the Mibanga v the SSHD
    [2005] INLR 377 where the process of arriving at an adverse credibility
    finding is based on the Tribunal's view of the Appellant's evidence and
    then as a separate exercise considered whether that  finding  might  be
    shifted by the medical evidence.  As the case law stands, the  evidence
    must be considered as a whole and reports relevant to credibility  must
    be assessed during that process.

12.   Mr Bramble conceded further that when looking at  the  key  focus  of
    paragraphs 53 to 57, taken in the context of the grounds at  paragraphs
    7 to 10 the judge fell into error, in that, if there appeared to  be  a
    discrepancy between the description of the object said to  have  caused
    burns to the Appellant, by either a rod or a cambi,  that  should  have
    been resolved at the hearing.  By not clarifying the issue, it had  led
    to the judge to find a discrepancy which was central to  his  dismissal
    of the report.  At paragraph 6 Professor Lingam considered the scarring
    which he described as "thick and linear scarring" and that the material
    used to cause such scarring was described  as  a  "thick  heated  metal
    (rod)".  Whilst Professor Lingam went on to say that the Appellant  was
    not aware what it was,  at  paragraph  4  earlier  in  the  report  the
    Appellant had indeed identified the implement used as a "cambi"  which,
    had it been clarified, and is common ground, describes a "rod" which is
    the implement referred to by Professor Lingam.   Furthermore  Professor
    Lingam dated the scarring having been  inflicted  in  March/April  2013
    consistent with the time line of when  the  interrogation  and  torture
    took place.  Mr Bramble further noted that  the  judge's  focus  as  to
    whether the Appellant could see the implement  or  not  was  not  taken
    forward in the medical evidence  and  that  there  was  an  element  of
    speculation in the findings made.  Thus he conceded on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that there was an error of law in the assessment  of
    the  medical  report  and  the  credibility  findings  and   that   the
    determination could not stand.

13. As to the remaking of the decision, both parties  before  the  Tribunal
    indicated that in their view, by reason of the  nature  of  the  error,
    none of the findings could be preserved and that a fresh  oral  hearing
    would be required.

14. Having accepted the concession made on behalf of  the  Respondent  that
    the determination  discloses  an  error  of  law  the  decision  should
    therefore be set aside.  As  to  the  remaking  of  the  decision  both
    advocates have invited the Tribunal to  determine  the  appeal  with  a
    fresh oral hearing by way of remittal to the First-tier  Tribunal.   It
    was not possible for the Tribunal to go on and remake the  decision  as
    Professor  Rees  had  provided  confirmation  of  a   further   medical
    examination to take place in respect of the Appellant's  mental  health
    on 27th February.  As there is likely to be a delay for the  report  to
    be filed, I am satisfied that the appropriate course to follow  is  the
    one that both parties invited the court to adopt, namely to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.   Whilst  it  is  not  the  ordinary
    practice of the Tribunal to remit cases  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    there are reasons why in this case such a  course  should  be  adopted,
    having given particular regard  to  the  overriding  objective  of  the
    efficient disposal of appeals and also that there are  issue  of  facts
    that require determination which will be required to be assessed.

15. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, none of
    the findings shall stand and the case is to be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a hearing on a date to  be  fixed  in
    accordance  with  Section  12(2)(b)  of  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act and paragraph 7.2 of the  practice  statement  of  10th
    February 2010 (as amended).

16. The following directions are made

      1) The Appellant's solicitors shall file and serve upon the Respondent
         any further medical evidence no later than seven  days  before  the
         hearing.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law  the  decision  is  set  aside.
The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor  House  on
a date to be fixed.






Signed                              Date 13/2/2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


