
  [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  Aa/08099/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date sent                    |
|On 31 May 2013                                |On 25 June 2013              |
|Prepared 31 May 2013                          |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                             DAVID OSEREME OJEME


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     His uncle, Charles Omoeighe
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on 10 September 1994  appeals,
    with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Goldmeier who in  a  determination  promulgated  on  10  December  2012
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of
    State to refuse his application for asylum and for leave to  remain  on
    human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant's claim was that he entered Britain  as  a  visitor  with
    his mother on 10 September 2008 but that his mother had  abandoned  him
    in a church in Chatham on 21 September, the church being  a  church  of
    which the husband of Mrs Hodge-Okafor, a friend of his mother, was  the
    pastor.  Despite the appellant having an uncle in Britain, Mr Omoeighe,
    with whom he was in contact it was claimed by the appellant and by  Mrs
    Hodge-Okafor that they had been unable to trace the appellant's  mother
    who had, it was believed, returned to Nigeria.

3.   The appellant was granted leave to remain  as  an  unaccompanied  minor
    and was given leave to remain until 9 March 2012.  He  remained  living
    with Mrs Hodge-Okafor and her family although he was, it appears, under
    the care of Kent Social Services.

4.   On 5 March 2012 the appellant applied for further leave  to  remain  on
    general grounds relating to his  progress  in  his  education  and  the
    uncertainty that would face him if he were returned to Nigeria.

5.   The respondent considered that he was making  a  claim  for  asylum  as
    well as a claim for leave to remain under the ECHR. His application was
    refused and he appealed.

6.   The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Goldmeier  who
    heard evidence from  the  appellant  and  Mrs  Hodge-Okafor.   Somewhat
    surprisingly despite the evidence of  Mrs  Hodge-Okafor  that  she  had
    known the appellant's mother in Nigeria, had been a good friend of hers
    and that contact had been made with the  appellant's  uncle  here,  let
    alone the fact that the appellant had travelled  to  America  with  his
    Mother, they appeared to come from a middle class family and there  was
    no evidence of abuse of the appellant by his  Mother,  Judge  Goldmeier
    accepted the assertions of the appellant and Mrs Hodge-Okafor that  the
    appellant had been abandoned completely by his mother and that  it  had
    been impossible to trace her.

7.   Judge Goldmeier accepted that the appellant had  done  well  at  school
    here and that he was popular with his peers and those in the church.

8.   He dealt with a number  of  matters  raised  by  the  appellant's  then
    representative.  The first referred to Article 2 of the first  Protocol
    to the ECHR - the right to education.  He pointed out that there was no
    denial of the right to education as the appellant, if removed would  be
    able to continue  his  education  both  at  school  and  university  in
    Nigeria.  He also considered an allegation made that the procedure used
    was unfair and that the appellant had not been  asked  to  clarify  his
    application before it was refused by the  Secretary  of  State.   Judge
    Goldmeier referred to the fact that there was  an  appeal  against  the
    decision at which the appellant  had  been  able  to  put  forward  all
    relevant arguments.

9.   The appellant's representative appeared to argue at  the  hearing  (but
    not in the grounds of appeal) that there was a breach of Section 55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and that the decision
    was unreasonable.  Judge Goldmeier found that Section 55 did not  apply
    in this case as the appellant was not a child. HE considered  that  the
    decision had been made fairly and that it  was  not  unreasonable.   He
    also found that the appellant could not succeed under  the  Immigration
    Rules relating to an applicant's private life.

10.  He then considered the rights of the appellant under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR applying the relevant structured approach  and  finding  that  the
    appellant  had  established  private  life  here,  there  would  be  an
    interference with that  private  life  but  that  was  interference  in
    accordance with the law and that the appeal  therefore  turned  on  the
    issue of proportionality.  He dealt with the issue  of  proportionality
    in paragraphs 207 onwards of the determination.  He  set  out  relevant
    factors accepting that the appellant might be unable  to  continue  his
    studies in Britain if he applied for entry as an overseas student.   He
    thought also that the appellant would, in the short-term, be unable  to
    continue his studies in Nigeria.  He however placed weight on the  fact
    that the appellant was no longer a child but a young adult, that he had
    been brought up in Nigeria for the first thirteen years of his life and
    was not a stranger to Nigeria, its culture and customs.  He found  that
    English was a commonly spoken language in the Lagos area to  which  the
    appellant would be returned, that the appellant had  accepted  that  he
    would probably be able  to  secure  employment  and  that  he  was  not
    suffering from any physical, medical or psychological conditions  which
    would prevent a successful reintegration  into  Nigerian  society.   He
    stated that he found on the balance of probabilities that having regard
    to the appellant's  education,  intelligence,  character  and  outgoing
    personality he would be able to make new friends in Nigeria.

11.  He went on to state that he found the  Pentecostal  churches  welcoming
    places and that Pastor Hodge-Okafor was in contact with the  pastor  of
    the  Lagos  sister  church.  He  considered  that  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities  that some short-term temporary support was likely to  be
    available to the appellant from the Lagos  congregation  while  he  re-
    established himself.  He  stated  that  the  same  admirable  sense  of
    charity and  responsibility  which  the  church  and  congregation  had
    demonstrated here was in  his  judgment  likely  to  be  replicated  in
    Nigeria at least for a short-term period particularly as the  appellant
    was likely on the balance of probabilities  to  arrive  with  a  highly
    positive recommendation from Pastor Hodge-Okafor and his wife  both  of
    whom were known to the Lagos congregation.  He was sure that the church
    and congregation would also wish to support the appellant in the short-
    term.  He stated that there was nothing to indicate, as claimed by  the
    appellant's representative that he would be at serious  risk  of  being
    unable to practise religion or enjoy sport.

12.  Having referred to the ties which  the  appellant  had  made  over  the
    past four years Judge Goldmeier noted that the appellant's private life
    had been fostered in the context and knowledge of having limited  right
    to remain in Britain.  There could have been no legitimate  expectation
    of being allowed to remain indefinitely.

13.  He  stated  that  in  his  view  the  appellant's  private  life  could
    reasonably be continued  in  Nigeria.   He  therefore  found  that  the
    appellant's application under Article 8 of the ECHR could not succeed.

14.  Having dismissed the appeal Judge Goldmeier stated that he  recommended
    that the respondent take no action to remove the appellant until he had
    sat his A level examinations which he was studying at the date  of  the
    hearing.

15.  Grounds of appeal were then lodged by the appellant's solicitors.   The
    application was refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Saffer.

16.  The grounds were then renewed in the Upper Tribunal.  They referred  to
    the fact that the Immigration Judge had noted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had made a typographical error in the  letter  of  refusal  which
    referred to the appellant being returned to Sudan or  Iraq  and  stated
    that the judge was not entitled to state that that was not proposed  as
    it was clear the appellant's view proposed  to  Nigeria.   The  grounds
    appeared to suggest  the  respondent's  submission  that  there  was  a
    typographical error in the letter of refusal should have amounted to  a
    new decision.

17.  The grounds went on to assert that the judge had  been  wrong  to  find
    that the removal of the appellant would be proportionate asserting that
    that decision was unreasonable.

18.  The grounds were considered by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  who  in
    the second paragraph of the decision found  that  the  grounds  had  no
    merit apart from his concern that "on the one hand the judge  purported
    to dismiss the human rights  appeal  and  then  on  the  other  made  a
    recommendation."  He stated that it was only for that  reason  that  he
    had granted permission to appeal.

19.  At the hearing of the appeal before me the appellant's uncle stated  on
    behalf of the  appellant  that  he  had  not  been  involved  with  the
    appellant because it was not convenient and Mrs Hodge-Okafor  had  been
    willing to look after him.  He had not contributed to  the  appellant's
    maintenance.  He said that he had not had contact with the  appellant's
    mother for some time before  she  had  left  the  appellant  here.   He
    confirmed that he had an aunt and two sisters in Nigeria - one in Abuja
    and one on the outskirts of Lagos.  They, he claimed,  considered  that
    it was not convenient to look after the appellant. Indeed one  of  them
    had relocated to America at Christmas.

20.  I pressed him as to what error of law there was in  the  determination.
    He stated that the issue was one of compassionate grounds as it was not
    in the best interests of the appellant to go to Nigeria.  He would have
    difficulty in starting over there.  He said that although  he  had  not
    played any part in the appellant's  upbringing  now  that  two  of  his
    children had left home he would be willing to help the  appellant.   He
    again stated that he emphasised "compassionate factors."  He said  that
    it was not fair to remove the  appellant  when  he  planned  to  go  to
    university.

21.  In response Mr Deller stated that the  judge  had  taken  all  relevant
    factors into account and reached a properly reasoned  decision  on  the
    rights of the appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR.  He stated that it
    was simply an act of kindness at the end of the determination  for  the
    judge to have made the recommendation that he did.

22.  The appellant's uncle  and  Mrs  Hodge-Okafor  who  had  by  this  time
    arrived at court both stated that the decision was unfair  and  without
    compassion and the appellant's uncle asserted that  the  representation
    by the appellant's previous solicitors had been inadequate.

23.  I consider that there is no merit whatsoever in the grounds  of  appeal
    and that there is no error of law in the determination.

24.  The determination was reached with particular care and the findings  of
    fact of the judge were generous.  His approach to  the  rights  of  the
    appellant under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  was  properly  structured  and
    detailed and it is clear that the judge weighed up all relevant factors
    before reaching his conclusions. These were entirely open  to  him  and
    were obviously correct.  It is completely wrong to suggest  that  there
    is any lack of compassion whatsoever in the decision.  The decision  to
    dismiss this appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  was  reached  after  a
    thorough examination of the facts and indeed, of  course,  it  has  now
    come to light that the appellant does have relatives  in  Nigeria  with
    whom his uncle who was interested enough in the appellant's welfare  to
    attend the hearing, is in contact.

25.  I can see no contradiction  whatsoever  in  the  fact  that  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds but  went  on  to  make  a
    recommendation.  Indeed I consider that all  that  that  shows  is  the
    kindness and compassion with which the judge approached the  issues  in
    this appeal.  There is nothing illogical in the decision of  the  judge
    to dismiss the appeal on human  rights  grounds  but  then  to  make  a
    recommendation that the appellant not be removed  pending  his  sitting
    his A levels.

26.  I therefore find that there is no error of law in the determination  of
    the Immigration Judge and that his decision dismissing  his  appeal  on
    both   immigration   and   human   rights    grounds    shall    stand.








Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
