
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
AA/08060/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard  at  Bradford                                             Decision   &
Reasons Promulgated
On 14th March 2016                                           On  13th  April
2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:
                                 MR T. A. B.
                          (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal

Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr Hussain (Counsel)
For the Secretary of State: Ms  Petterson  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Bircher promulgated on the 25th  August  2015,  in
      which she allowed the Claimant's appeal against  the  refusal  of  his
      protection claim on asylum grounds under the Refugee Convention 1951.

   2. Permission to appeal against that decision was granted  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Ford on the 16th September 2015.

   3. Within the Grounds of Appeal, it is  argued  that  the  Judge  made  a
      material mistake as to fact which amounted to a material error of law.
       It is argued that the Judge  was  mistaken  within  the  decision  in
      finding that it had been accepted by the Secretary of State  that  the
      Claimant had left Eritrea illegally at [36] of the  decision.   It  is
      said that within the reasons for refusal letter the  Claimant's  claim
      that he had left Eritrea illegally was specifically  rejected  at  [38
      and 39] of the refusal letter.  It  is  said  that  the  Judge  having
      considered that it had been accepted by the Secretary  of  State  that
      the Claimant left illegally, the Judge had thendecided the case on the
      wrong basis and at [73] explicitly found that "However, by  virtue  of
      the fact that it is accepted that the Claimant left Eritrea illegally,
      he will be at risk of return by virtue of the fact  that  he  will  be
      perceived as a draft evader.".

   4. Within  the  permission  to  appeal  grant,  Judge  Ford  in  granting
      permission found that it was arguable that Judge Bircher had erred  at
      [36] and [73] of the decision in deciding the case on the  basis  that
      the Secretary of State had conceded the issue of illegal exit, when in
      fact the refusal letter made clear that no such concession  was  being
      made.

   5. Mr Hussain on behalf of  the  Claimant  at  the  oral  appeal  hearing
      conceded the fact that there was an error, in that  the  illegal  exit
      had not been accepted by the Secretary of State, but told me  that  he
      would be arguing that although there was an error of law,  that  error
      was not material,  given  that  the  Judge  had  considered  the  case
      properly including consideration of the Country Guidance  case  of  MO
      (Illegal Exit - Risk on Return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 00190 (IAC) and
      that at [78] the Judge had dealt with the question as  to  whether  or
      not in any event, the Claimant  fell  within  any  of  the  exceptions
      contained with MO, such as to mean that he would be a person who would
      have been able to exit Eritrea legally, when he was of draft age.

   6. Ms Petterson on behalf of the Secretary of State argued that the Judge
      had mistakenly considered the Claimant's appeal on the basis that  the
      question of illegal exit had been conceded by the Secretary  of  State
      when he had not.  However, she conceded on behalf of the Secretary  of
      State that in light of the Judge's consideration of the case  at  [78]
      wherein she considered, "for the avoidance of doubt"  whether  or  not
      the Claimant fell  within  the  exceptions  contained  within  MO  and
      explicitly found that there was insufficient evidence  before  her  to
      indicate the Claimant would be perceived by the regime's military  and
      political  leadership  as  having   given   them   valuable   service;
      insufficient evidence to indicate the Claimant was  a  trusted  family
      member of the regime's military or political leadership and was not  a
      personal charge or parents who fled what later became the territory of
      Eritrea during the war of independence. She conceded that although the
      Judge had erred  in  considering  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
      conceded the question of illegal exit, given these findings  at  [78],
      she could not argue that the error in this regard was  material.   She
      conceded that in  such  circumstances  she  could  not  point  to  any
      material error of law within the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Bircher.

      My findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   7. In light of the concessions quite properly made  by  Ms  Petterson  on
      behalf of the Secretary of State, I do find the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Bircher did contain an error of law on the  basis  that
      Judge Bircher had wrongly assumed that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
      conceded the question of illegal exit, when in fact  the  reasons  for
      refusal letter makes it quite clear that the Secretary  of  State  had
      not conceded  that  issue  and  that  indeed,  illegal  exit  was  not
      accepted.  This was a mistake as to a material  fact  which  could  be
      established by objective and unconscientious evidence in the  form  of
      the refusal letter,  and  the  Claimant  and  his  advisors  were  not
      responsible for that mistake.

   8. However, although the Judge had approached the case on  that  mistaken
      basis, again given the concession properly made  by  Ms  Petterson  on
      behalf of the Secretary of State, I do not find that the error in this
      regard was material.   The  Judge  had  quite  properly  set  out  the
      findings of the Upper Tribunal in the  Country  Guidance  case  of  MO
      (Illegal Exit - Risk on Return) Eritrea CG UKUT  [2011]  00190  (IAC),
      and also considered the evidence sought  to  be  relied  upon  by  the
      Secretary of State saying that there had been a change of circumstance
      since that Country Guidance.  However, having  rejected  that  further
      evidence as being sufficient to establish that there had been material
      change in circumstance, and the Judge then quite  properly  relied  in
      those circumstances upon the case of MO.

   9. The Judge properly did go on to consider whether or not  the  Claimant
      would have fallen within one of the exceptions contained within MO  at
      [78] and found  specifically  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence
      before her to indicate the Claimant would be perceived by the regime's
      military and  political  leadership  as  having  given  them  valuable
      service; insufficient evidence to indicate that  the  Claimant  was  a
      trusted  family  member  of  the  regime's   military   or   political
      leadership, and that he was not a person or child or parents who  fled
      what  later  became  the  territory  of  Eritrea  during  the  war  of
      independence. The Judge further found at [1] that the  Claimant  is  a
      national of Eritrea he was born on the 12th February 1991 and he  left
      Eritrea on the 25th June 2014, such that he would have been aged 13 at
      the time, and therefore of draft age as found by the Country  Guidance
      case of MO, as dated within that Country Guidance case  at  [iv]  that
      "The general position in adopting MA, that a person of or  approaching
      draft age (i.e. aged 8 or over and  still  not  above  the  upper  age
      limits for military service, being under 54 for men and 47 for  women)
      and not medically  unfit  who  is  accepted  as  having  left  Eritrea
      illegally is reasonably likely to be regarded with  serious  hostility
      on return, is reconfirmed, subject to limited exceptions in respect of
      (i) persons  whom  the  regime's  military  and  political  leadership
      perceives as having given them valuable service (either in Eritrea  or
      abroad); (ii) persons who  are  trusted  family  members  of,  or  are
      themselves part of, the regime's military or political leadership.   A
      further possible exception, requiring more case-specific analysis,  is
      (iii) persons (and their children  born  afterwards)  who  fled  (what
      later  became  the  territory  of)   Eritrea   during   the   war   of
      independence."

  10.  The Judge having made specific findings that  the  Claimant  did  not
      fall within any of the exceptions, and being above draft age, and  not
      within the categories of people who were able  to  exit  legally,  the
      error of the Judge in assuming that the Secretary  of  State  conceded
      the issue of illegality was not material.  In  light  of  the  Judge's
      findings at [78] and the concession by Ms Petterson that  thereby  the
      Judge's  decision  did  not  contain  a  material  error,  she  having
      considered the issue of illegal exit in any  event,  the  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Bircher stands, the same not disclosing  any
      material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bircher  does  not  contain  a
material error of law and is maintained.


Signed
Dated 26th March 2016

R McGinty
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
