
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08971/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7th November 2016                          |On 20th December 2016          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                     ea
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

 1. In a decision dated 16th September 2016 I decided that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal contained errors on points of law such that  it
    should be set aside and re-made.  I now set out the relevant  parts  of
    my decision:

         "Background

         1.   On 2nd March 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davidge
             gave  permission  to  the  appellant  to  appeal  against  the
             decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Foudy  who
             dismissed the appeal on all grounds against  the  decision  of
             the respondent to refuse asylum, humanitarian and human rights
             protection to the appellant, a female citizen of Nigeria.

          2. Permission was granted because  Judge  Davidge  thought  that,
             despite Judge Foudy making cogently reasoned adverse  findings
             of fact, there was no reference to objective evidence provided
             in a bundle submitted by the Citizens  Advice  Bureau  on  the
             appellant's behalf.  Such objective material was said to  make
             reference to the practice of human sacrifice in Nigeria.  That
             information was relevant to the appellant's claim that, if she
             and her daughter were returned to Nigeria, her child would  be
             killed or subjected to FGM.  In allowing the application Judge
             Davidge  also  pointed  out  that  the  appellant   had   been
             unrepresented at the First-tier hearing.

         Error on a Point of Law

          3. Mr Nicholson submitted that the  relevant  objective  material
             could be found on pages 28, 30, 47 and 48 of the bundle  which
             had been submitted by CAB in Bolton about ten days before  the
             hearing.    That   information   talks   about    'ritualists'
             commissioning others to  procure  body  parts  for  sacrifice,
             ritual murder and cult and secret societies.  He urged  me  to
             accept that the judge's error in  failing  to  refer  to  this
             information was material particularly bearing in mind that the
             appellant was unrepresented and had drafted her own grounds of
             appeal.

          4. Mr Nicholson made reference to paragraph 18 of the decision in
             which the judge had erroneously indicated that  the  appellant
             had produced no independent evidence about human sacrifice  or
             country information relating to such practices in Nigeria.  He
             also thought that the  reference  in  that  paragraph  to  the
             appellant's response to question 30 of  the  asylum  interview
             had been misinterpreted and so it was not open to the judge to
             find it incredible that the appellant would be  taken  to  see
             members of her wider family if she was at risk of being killed
             by them.  He also thought that  the  appellant's  response  to
             question 60 did not support the conclusion that the  appellant
             had completed her secondary education.  Further, he  contended
             that the judge had not  shown  that  she  had  considered  the
             provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE  or  identified   compelling
             circumstances such as disability and trafficking  which  might
             have been relevant.

          5. Mr Nicholson has also mentioned  an  alleged  failure  by  the
             judge  to  refer  to  trafficking  in  the  appellant's  case.
             However, the decision of the respondent of 21st May 2015 shows
             that  the  appellant  was  not  found,   on   a   balance   of
             probabilities, to be a victim of trafficking.

          6. Mr  Bates  confirmed  that  the  respondent  relied  upon  the
             response which suggested that it was not  entirely  clear  why
             permission to appeal had been granted as the First-tier  Judge
             had given a 'plethora' or negative credibility findings all of
             which were open to her.  It was  clear  that  the  appellant's
             subjective fear was wholly speculative and could not  remotely
             be described as objectively well-founded.

          7. Mr Bates conceded that the objective evidence present  in  the
             bundle had not been referred to by the judge but asked  me  to
             find that it was not relevant.  Further, the judge  had  found
             that the appellant had  not  shown  that  she  was,  actually,
             Nigerian so none of the information was relevant in any event.
              He thought that the cogent  reasons  given  in  paragraph  18
             should have been sufficient.  As to the references to  answers
             in interview he pointed out that the appellant's statement had
             clearly  indicated  that  she  had  completed  her   secondary
             education and, as to visits to her wider family,  the  judge's
             conclusions were open to her.  In any event, if the  appellant
             had completed her  education  he  questioned  why  that  might
             suggest the ill-treatment claimed.  In  conclusion,  Mr  Bates
             agreed that the judge should have considered paragraph  276ADE
             although he regarded that failure as also irrelevant.

          8. Mr Nicholson concluded  by  emphasising  that  the  judge  had
             reached  conclusions  on  human  rights  issues   which   were
             inadequate.

         Conclusions

          9. At the end of the hearing  and  after  I  had  considered  the
             matter for a few moments, I announced  that  I  was  satisfied
             that the decision did show material errors on  points  of  law
             such that it should be set aside and re-made.  I now  give  my
             reasons for doing so.

         10. Whilst there is no doubt that the decision of  the  First-tier
             Judge gives reasons for concluding that the appellant had  not
             shown that she was part  of  a  family  that  practised  human
             sacrifice or a family that had any future interest in  her  or
             would put her daughter at risk of FGM, it is  clear  that  the
             judge did not take into consideration the  objective  material
             submitted in the appellant's bundle  which  showed  that  such
             activity did take place in Nigeria.  It may be that the  judge
             would have reached the same conclusions if she had  taken  the
             objective material  into  consideration  but  that  conclusion
             cannot be presumed.  Additionally, the judge  dismissed  human
             rights  issues  in  one  short  paragraph  (33)  without   any
             reference to the  possibility  of  the  claimed  private  life
             coming within  the  provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
             Immigration Rules.  Although the judge appears  to  find  (17)
             that the appellant had not shown that she is from Nigeria,  it
             is not clear that the judge made her other findings of fact in
             the alternative or that, if the appellant  did  not  originate
             from Nigeria, she was not living there at the relevant time.

         11. In these circumstances it appears to me that the appeal should
             be re-made before the  Upper  Tribunal  bearing  in  mind  the
             defects in the appellant's evidence which have  been  properly
             highlighted  by  the  First-tier  Judge.   The  hearing   will
             therefore resume before me in the  Upper  Tribunal  where  the
             inconsistencies in evidence already identified by  the  First-
             tier Judge can be considered against  the  objective  material
             produced in the original bundle and the human rights claim can
             be examined at the date of that hearing."

Anonymity

 2. At the first hearing  before  me  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  I  made  an
    anonymity direction which is repeated at the end of this decision.

Resumed Hearing

 3. At the resumed hearing I confirmed with representatives that the matter
    would be re-made on the basis I have previously specified.

 4. The appellant produced a fresh bundle of documents through the Citizens
    Advice Bureau in Bolton under cover of  a  letter  dated  27th  October
    2016.  This contains the documents listed  in  the  index.  During  the
    hearing reference was also made to  the  appellant's  original  hearing
    bundle produced to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Medical evidence in the form  of  a  patient  summary  shows  that  the
    appellant suffers from osteoarthritis and consequent impaired mobility.
     As she complained of some pain at the commencement of the hearing, but
    that this might be relieved by  her  standing,  I  indicated  that  she
    should feel free to adjust her position or stand  without  any  further
    reference to me.  No  additional  problems  in  this  connection  arose
    during the course of the hearing.

The Respondent's Case and outline of the appellant's claims

 6. The respondent refused asylum, humanitarian and human rights protection
    for the reasons set out in a refusal letter dated 1st June  2015.   The
    appellant's  claims  had  also  been  referred  to   the   respondent's
    Trafficking Unit which made the decision, on 21st May  2015,  that  the
    appellant was not a victim of trafficking.

 7. In the refusal letter the respondent outlined the  appellant's  claims.
    It was noted that the appellant was born on 1st April 1987  in  Nigeria
    and claimed to be a member of the Yoruba tribe.  Her mother  died  when
    she was 1 year old and her father died when she was 10.  She claimed to
    have no siblings or other family  members  in  the  country.   She  was
    educated to secondary school level.  She came to the United Kingdom  in
    2006 by air but did not claim asylum until 28th March 2013.  Before  he
    died, her father had told her, when she was about 10 years of age, that
    her family had been involved in human sacrifice of female  children  of
    the family as males were preferred.  Her father had not allowed her  to
    undergo FGM.

 8. After the death of her father she lived with her father's friend for  a
    short while until he died.  She claimed to have been raped by this man.
     She then went to stay at friends' houses or to live  on  the  streets.
    Whilst begging she met a lady called F who  befriended  her.   She  was
    told that F could take her to UK where she would receive an  education.
    Her journey was arranged and, on arrival in UK, she went to  live  with
    F.  However, instead of receiving an education  she  was  held  at  F's
    house and made to perform household chores.  She  was  not  allowed  to
    leave the house or to use the telephone.  She was also threatened  that
    if she tried to escape the police would "get" her.   F  also  assaulted
    her.  However, on an unknown date, she went to a party  with  a  friend
    where she met a Nigerian man called FE who, because she was upset, said
    that he  would  help  her  to  escape  from  F.   She  entered  into  a
    relationship with FE and, as a result, her daughter  was  born  on  9th
    July 2013.  However, during her pregnancy FE was abusive  towards  her.
    He had also told her that his family  performed  FGM  in  Nigeria.  She
    could not say whether he was of the Yoruba tribe even though  he  spoke
    the dialect.

 9. The appellant stated that she feared returning to Nigeria  because  she
    and her daughter would be sacrificed by her father's relatives and FE's
    family would also subject her daughter to FGM.

10. The respondent confirmed that, on 13th  February  2015,  reference  was
    made to the Trafficking Unit which concluded that the appellant was not
    a  victim  of  trafficking  on  account  of  the  adverse   credibility
    conclusions which  the  respondent  reached  in  conjunction  with  the
    overall claim.

11. In concluding that the appellant was not credible the respondent  found
    that the appellant was not a member of a social group as  a  trafficked
    person.  It was also stated that the appellant's lack of  knowledge  of
    the Yoruba tribe and the fact that she was content to answer  questions
    in asylum interview in English led to the conclusion that she  was  not
    of that tribe.

12. As to the allegation that the  appellant  and  her  daughter  would  be
    sacrificed by her father's family and  of  the  risk  of  FGM  for  the
    daughter, the respondent pointed out that the appellant had moved  away
    from her father's family and, in interview, had stated she did not know
    who they were.  The  appellant  had  provided  insufficient  detail  in
    relation to this aspect of the claim  to  enable  it  to  be  believed.
    Indeed, the respondent  commented  that  the  appellant's  claims  were
    "highly speculative".  As to the appellant's daughter,  the  respondent
    noted that the last time the appellant had  spoken  to  her  daughter's
    father was when she was pregnant.  Further, she indicated that she  had
    no contact with anyone in Nigeria.  It was not accepted  that  her  ex-
    partner's family were looking to carry out FGM on her daughter.

13. The  respondent  also  considered  internal  relocation.   It  was  not
    considered unreasonable to expect  her  to  move  to  another  area  in
    Nigeria.  In this respect the respondent referred to the US  Department
    of State Report on human rights practices of 2011 which showed that the
    constitution and law provided  for  freedom  of  movement  and  foreign
    travel.  The respondent also noted that  the  appellant  had  indicated
    that she  had  completed  secondary  school  education.   Although  she
    acknowledged that the appellant had a medical problem with her leg, she
    had lived most of her life in Nigeria and  her  child  had  no  medical
    conditions that would impact on an ability to internally relocate.

14. The respondent considered human rights issues.  She was  not  satisfied
    that  the  appellant  could  benefit  from   the   Immigration   Rules,
    particularly those set out in Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  noting
    that the appellant's child had only been in the United Kingdom for  two
    years and the appellant for nine years.  The respondent considered  her
    obligations under Section 55 of the 2009 Act.  However,  as  the  child
    was Nigerian and the child's father was not involved in  her  life,  it
    was not considered unduly harsh for the child to return to Nigeria.

15.  Further,  the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were  any
    exceptional circumstances in the case which warranted a grant of  leave
    to remain.  The appellant's medical condition giving rise  to  pain  in
    her right leg was not  considered  to  reach  the  degree  of  severity
    defined in N [2005] UKHL 31 and it was noted  that  objective  material
    indicated that painkillers of the type already taken by  the  appellant
    were widely available in Nigeria.

The Appellant's Case and the Hearing

16. The appellant gave evidence through a Yoruba interpreter.  She  adopted
    the content of her statement which appears on page 3 of her bundle.  In
    this she confirms the events which were outlined  in  the  respondent's
    refusal.  She claims to have a disabled right leg which resulted in her
    walking with sticks from the age of about 5.  She claims that she is in
    constant pain.  However, whilst in Nigeria she never received treatment
    for her disability.  She confirms that,  following  the  death  of  her
    father, she had lived with a friend of his for three or four years  but
    ran away when she was sexually abused by him.  She  describes  how  her
    relationship with F came about and how she paid for her  to  travel  to
    the United Kingdom but then F started to treat her  like  a  slave  and
    held her prisoner in her home.  She was required to take  care  of  F's
    children and clean the house. She was hit and had water poured over her
    if she did not get out of bed early enough.  She  eventually  ran  away
    with her former partner, FE, but  then  eventually  realised  that  her
    situation was no better as he abused her physically and sexually.   She
    states that, in  2012,  she  first  became  pregnant  but,  because  of
    beatings, she had a miscarriage.  In  the  following  year  she  became
    pregnant with her daughter but was rejected by  FE  who  deserted  her.
    She wandered the streets until she met someone  who  suggested  to  her
    that she ought to claim asylum but that she needed to do so in Glasgow.
     The woman she met took her to Victoria Bus Station and  bought  her  a
    ticket.  However, when the appellant went to claim asylum  in  Glasgow,
    she was told to return to Croydon.  She was given a ticket to return.

17. The appellant said that, during  asylum  interview,  she  was  ill  and
    exhausted and had to be taken to hospital.  However, she  was  released
    on the same day and put into temporary accommodation in a hotel  before
    being transferred to Bolton where she has lived ever since.  She states
    that it was only once she had settled in Bolton that she  was  able  to
    access treatment and support for the remainder of her  pregnancy.   She
    indicates that, since giving birth to her daughter on  9th  July  2013,
    she has found it difficult caring for an active child.  Her daughter is
    3 years of age and now attends a nursery in Bolton during the  morning.
    Her daughter has problems as her speech is not developing as hoped  for
    and she is undergoing hearing checks.  As to her own medical condition,
    the appellant claims that her condition is deteriorating as a result of
    increased strain being put on her  left  leg  and,  when  walking,  her
    muscles go into spasm.

18. The appellant asserts that, if returned to Nigeria, now, she cannot see
    how she could survive.  Even  without  taking  into  consideration  her
    disability she would have difficulty caring for her daughter as she has
    no family support network there.

19. During cross-examination the appellant was asked why she had not used a
    Yoruba interpreter when interviewed by the Home  Office.   In  response
    she said this was because she was pregnant and  stressed  she  was  not
    aware of anything relating to asylum.  She agreed that her English  was
    "pretty good". It was put to her that,  during  the  course  of  giving
    evidence, she had pre-empted  the  Yoruba  interpreter  by  giving  her
    answers in English.  When asked about her education she  said  she  was
    not sure when she had stopped going to school in Nigeria and could  not
    explain why, in response to question 60, she had indicated that she had
    finished her secondary school education.  She also denied having  taken
    any exams, despite saying that she  had  "passed"  in  interview.   The
    appellant agreed that she had begged for  money  or  food  in  Nigeria.
    When it was pointed  out  to  her  that,  in  interview  (question  120
    onwards), she had been unable to describe the denominations of Nigerian
    currency and notes, she said she had fainted before the  interview  and
    had attended hospital.  The appellant was asked about  a  contradiction
    in her evidence about the existence of family members.  In question  30
    she had indicated that her father had taken her to see  family  members
    but, question 107, had said she did not know and had not met any family
    members.  She was therefore asked if she had received any threats  from
    family members.  In response she said that, before her father died, she
    had done but then explained that this was what her father had told  her
    and she agreed she had not met any family members.

20. As to her medical condition the appellant said that she is not  due  to
    have any operations and that her pain is being treated.  She claimed to
    wear a leg brace.   My  attention  was  drawn  to  the  physiotherapist
    referral form on page 68 of her bundle to confirm the information.

21. In relation to education the appellant agreed that she had started  her
    education before her father had died.  She was  therefore  referred  to
    the  information  in  the  decision  on  trafficking  indicating   that
    secondary education started at the age of 12 when she had said that her
    father died when she was 10 and she had  also indicated that her father
    had died when she was at secondary  school.   The  appellant  said,  in
    relation to this inconsistency, that she was a "bit  messed  up".   She
    added that primary school was normal when  she  was  younger.   It  was
    pointed out to her that, if she had come to the United Kingdom in  2006
    she would be 19 years of age on the basis that she was  born  in  1987.
    The appellant indicated that she could not remember when  she  came  to
    the United Kingdom and could not say exactly what her age was.

Submissions

22. Mr McVeety confirmed that the respondent relied on  the  terms  of  the
    refusal letter of 1st June 2015.  He emphasised that there  were  major
    credibility issues in the case.  The appellant's  claim  to  have  been
    trafficked had not been  accepted.   He  also  questioned  whether  the
    appellant was, actually, a national of Nigeria because of her ignorance
    of  the  country's  coinage  and  her  inability  to   remember   basic
    information about her claimed tribe and when she had attended secondary
    education.  He also questioned how  she  could  have  survived  on  the
    streets of Nigeria from the age of 10 to the age of 19  if  her  claims
    were true.

23. As to the objective material (now  incorporated  into  the  appellant's
    latest bundle from page 127) he agreed that there was some evidence  or
    ritual killings in that material, although there was no  evidence  that
    firstborn children were targeted.  The appellant had not undergone  FGM
    and so it was unlikely that such practices were approved in her family.

24. As to the returnability of the appellant  and  her  child,  Mr  McVeety
    emphasised that medical treatment was available in Nigeria  bearing  in
    mind that the appellant is only receiving painkillers.  The appellant's
    daughter was not yet 3 years of age and so had not been in  the  United
    Kingdom for seven years.  She could return to Nigeria to attend school.
     Family life between the appellant and  her  child  could  continue  in
    Nigeria.  He agreed that the appeal should be considered on  the  basis
    that the appellant was Nigerian although he emphasised the  appellant's
    inability to give basic information about the country.  In relation  to
    the  human  rights  claim,  particularly  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's child he made reference to the Court of Appeal decision  in
    EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874  on  the  basis  that  the  future
    education of the child would not be a relevant consideration.

25. Mr Nicholson emphasised that it was not in dispute that  the  appellant
    was a sole female who had been in the United Kingdom for ten years with
    a child of 3 years  of  age.   She  would  return  to  Nigeria  with  a
    congenital defect.  He suggested that, in Nigeria, her disability would
    result in her being stigmatised.  He argued that the best interests  of
    the child were to be  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  her  mother.   My
    attention was  drawn  to  the  supporting  evidence  showing  that  the
    appellant's daughter had established a  strong  relationship  with  her
    peer  groups  and  had  enjoyed  attending  pre-school.   It  would  be
    difficult for the child to  reintegrate  along  with  her  mother  into
    Nigerian society.

26. As to  the  situation  in  Nigeria  Mr  Nicholson  contended  that  the
    background evidence showed that  ritual  killing  and  trafficking  did
    occur.  He therefore argued that the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(vi)
    would be met, which, coupled with the  respondent's  obligations  under
    Section 55, pointed to the child remaining in the United Kingdom.   The
    family should not be put at risk of going to  Nigeria  because  of  the
    appellant's disability and lone female status.

27. Mr Nicholson referred me to evidence in  the  present  bundle  and  the
    original bundle to show  the  existence  of  exceptional  circumstances
    including ritual killings, superstition, the ill-treatment of children,
    the existence of cults and secret  societies  and  mutilation,  all  of
    which could put the appellant and her child at risk.

28. As to credibility Mr Nicholson argued  that  the  appellant  had  given
    satisfactory explanations for some of  the  perceived  inconsistencies,
    notably that she had been at primary school when her father  had  died,
    she had spoken Yoruba at the hearing  and  her  claims  of  trafficking
    should be believed.  If it were to be found that the appellant were not
    Nigerian then this would aggravate her problems.



Decision and Reasons

29. The burden of proof is on the appellant to show that she is  a  refugee
    or  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  or  that  the  respondent's
    decision is incompatible with her rights under the  1950  Human  Rights
    Convention.

30. The standard of proof is a reasonable degree  of  likelihood.   I  have
    looked at the evidence in the round as of now.

31. In considering whether the  appellant  is  a  refugee  or  entitled  to
    humanitarian  protection  I  have  taken  into  consideration  all  the
    provisions of the Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 and paragraphs 327 to 339P, inclusive,
    of the Immigration Rules, as amended.

32. Only if I am not satisfied to the lower standard that the appellant  is
    a refugee can she have a valid claim for humanitarian  protection.   If
    these claims fail but the appellant asserts she is  still  in  need  of
    protection her human rights claim can be considered.

Credibility

33. My consideration of the appellant's claims, taking  into  consideration
    the objective material and supporting evidence, leads  me  to  conclude
    that, whilst I am prepared to accept that  she  has  shown  she  is  of
    Yoruba ethnicity, her claim to be at risk of sacrifice and FGM for  her
    daughter and to have left Nigeria as a victim of trafficking  have  not
    been shown to be credible.  My reasons for these conclusions follow.

34. The appellant's claim to be of Yoruba ethnicity and to speak Yoruba  is
    consistent with answers which she has given  in  screening  and  asylum
    interviews.  Although the interviews were conducted in English, I  find
    it significant that the appellant has also indicated that she  required
    a Yoruba interpreter for the hearings in which she has been involved in
    the First-tier Tribunal and subsequently.  Whilst  the  respondent  has
    suggested that  the  appellant  might,  through  her  understanding  of
    English, be able to disguise an inability to speak Yoruba  despite  the
    presence of  a  Yoruba  interpreter,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  this
    suspicion is well-founded.  In conjunction with my  conclusion  I  have
    considered the respondent's suggestion  that  the  appellant  may  not,
    actually, be Nigerian.  The significance of the appellant being  Yoruba
    is that objective material available through the  respondent's  Country
    Information and Guidance for August 2016  is  that  the  tribe  is  the
    second largest in  Nigeria.  Although  I  acknowledge  the  significant
    inconsistencies in the appellant's specific claims  about  her  reasons
    for leaving Nigeria and risk on return, I am satisfied that  she  is  a
    Yoruba from Nigeria.  Nevertheless, apart from such tribal  membership,
    the appellant has not claimed any specific risk on that account, alone.
     Indeed, in interview, the appellant showed little knowledge of  Yoruba
    customs which, although not necessarily  suggesting  that  she  is  not
    Yoruba, lead me to conclude that she  had  little  interest  in  Yoruba
    customs and traditions, which makes it  less  likely  that  her  father
    would have been an adherent to any such customs.

35. The appellant's evidence about the claimed threat from members  of  her
    family imparted to her by her father is unsubstantiated, there being no
    evidence to suggest that any relatives attempted to harm her or even to
    suggest that she should go through FGM which, in  any  event,  she  has
    said her father was opposed to.  Indeed, in  interview,  the  appellant
    stated that she does not know who her father's family are (questions 29
    to 30).  The risk to the appellant or her  daughter  from  this  source
    either as sacrifice or to undergo FGM has not been shown.  In  reaching
    that conclusion I accept that the appellant has produced a copy of  the
    US Department of State  Report  for  2015  specifically  covering  both
    issues.  Whilst it is clear that sacrifices and FGM  still  take  place
    despite being  prohibited  activity  in  law  in  Nigeria,  it  is  not
    possible, from the lack of  detail  in  the  appellant's  evidence,  to
    conclude that there is a real risk of harm in that  respect  to  either
    her or her daughter.  She has already indicated  that  her  father  was
    against FGM.

36. The appellant also claims that the family of her former partner in  the
    United Kingdom could subject her  daughter  to  the  generally  illegal
    practice FGM, but she has not shown that there has been any  threat  of
    such since her relationship came to an end or even  that  relatives  of
    her former partner even know of the  child  and  the  relationship.   I
    should also mention that the objective material to which the  appellant
    refers also refers to legislation in the form of the Child  Rights  Act
    of 2003 designed to protect the rights of children.

37. The appellant also claims that, as a disabled person, she would  suffer
    discrimination which would make it difficult  for  her  to  survive  on
    return.  However, such disability  discrimination  is  the  subject  of
    prohibitive federal laws.  Vocational training  centres  in  Abuja  and
    Lagos are available to train those with disabilities and to enable them
    to become self-supporting.

38. The state protection which is available must also be seen  against  the
    background of inconsistencies in the appellant's  evidence  which  have
    already been highlighted in the  respondent's  refusal  and  which  are
    evident from the appellant's evidence.

39.  I deal, first, with the appellant's claim to have been  trafficked  to
    the United Kingdom by a person who befriended her when she  claimed  to
    be begging on the streets.  It is  inconsistent  with  the  appellant's
    claim to have been educated to secondary  level  that  she  would  have
    found  herself  in  that  situation.   She  claims  to  have  left  the
    protection of her father's friend because of sexual assaults made  upon
    her but she has given no evidence of  any  approach  she  made  to  the
    authorities for  protection  on  that  account.   I  have  reached  the
    conclusion that the appellant took the opportunity  to  travel  to  the
    United Kingdom for economic reasons. I also find it unlikely  that  the
    appellant would be trafficked into enforced  domestic  service  if  her
    disability was obvious to the extent that, as claimed, she walked  with
    the aid of sticks. A disabled person might be seen as less likely to be
    able to perform the harsh domestic chores the appellant describes.

40. According to objective material the appellant would have been 18  years
    of age when she completed her secondary education. Whilst her  evidence
    about her education has been confused it is unlikely that,  as  someone
    who had "passed" her exams would be found begging on  the  streets  and
    met someone who had asked why she was not at school.

41.  It is also inconsistent that the appellant would be  living  with  her
    strict trafficker in UK yet be allowed to attend a party at  which  she
    met her former partner. As the respondent has indicated, and  I  agree,
    such an opportunity would be inconsistent with the controlling measures
    which she claimed had  been  imposed  upon  her.   The  appellant  also
    claimed that she was in her relationship with her  former  partner  for
    about six years.  However, if that is so and she separated from him  in
    March 2013, this suggests that she would have been  in  a  relationship
    with that person from  March  2007.  Buit,  in  asylum  interview,  she
    indicated that she had been held at her trafficker's home  until  2008.
    Additionally, if the appellant was allowed some freedoms whilst in  the
    United Kingdom she would, I  conclude,  have  had  the  opportunity  to
    escape and seek protection from the UK authorities but she did  not  do
    so.  Thus, I find that the appellant was not trafficked to  the  United
    Kingdom.

42.  In reaching the preceding conclusions I have taken into  consideration
    that the  appellant  claims  to  have  given  inconsistent  answers  in
    interview because she was "utterly exhaustive  from  travelling  whilst
    pregnant".  In this respect I note that the appellant's responses which
    are recorded at the commencement of the interview record show that  the
    appellant volunteered to continue with the interview.   When  asked  if
    she was feeling well enough to be interviewed she stated:

         "Not really, pain in leg, I'm on medication  but  should  be  okay.
         Need to take medication today."

     The record does not show that she  subsequently  complained,  initially
    during interview or at the end, that she needed to stop or required any
    further medical treatment.  This does not suggest to me  that  she  had
    any particular difficulty in giving her responses even if  her  answers
    revealed inconsistencies.  Further, the medical evidence produced  does
    not suggest to me that the appellant suffers from any life  threatening
    illness or mental condition which could reflect upon the quality of the
    evidence she gave.  A physiotherapist referral form of 12th  July  2016
    refers to  the  appellant  suffering  from  congenital  hypotonia  with
    degenerative changes in her  right  knee  joint  from  a  possible  old
    injury.  The letter from the advanced orthopaedic  practitioner,  Kevin
    Doyle, dated  2nd  March  2016  shows  that  the  appellant  was  being
    considered for a right knee brace but that she would "not allow much in
    the way of an assessment due to pain around the knee and leg". None  of
    this suggests any mental impairment.

43. As to the supporting evidence in the form of  letters  from  the  three
    witnesses who are referred to between pages 8  and  12  of  the  latest
    bundle, I am satisfied that these contain evidence to support the claim
    that the appellant and her daughter have a social life  in  the  United
    Kingdom with assistance from friends but that does not serve to  assist
    me  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's  main  claims  are   otherwise
    believable.  I refer, again, to this evidence in relation to the  human
    rights claim.

44. As I am not satisfied that the appellant came to the United Kingdom for
    anything other than economic reasons, I cannot be  satisfied  that  she
    has told the truth about the absence of family members in Nigeria.   It
    follows that I cannot conclude that she will be specifically at risk if
    returned there as a lone  woman  with  a  young  child.   She  is  not,
    therefore, a refugee. I am also unable to conclude that she is entitled
    to humanitarian protection.

Human Rights

45. I have first considered whether or not the appellant and her child  can
    benefit from human rights protection by applying the Immigration  Rules
    particularly those set out in paragraphs 276ADE and Appendix FM.  If  I
    am not  so  satisfied,  then  I  have  sought  to  identify  compelling
    circumstances existing in the case which would justify a grant of leave
    to remain outside the Rules.  In doing so I apply the judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387  which  establishes
    that test.

46. Making the best interests of the appellant's 3 year old child a primary
    consideration and noting that Mr Nicholson emphasised that this  appeal
    should be allowed under the  provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules, I have referred to that Rule, first.   Sub-paragraph
    (vi) of the Rules states, in relation to an applicant:

         "(vi)    subject to sub-paragraph (ii), is aged 18 years  or  above
             has lived continuously in the UK for less  than  twenty  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK."

47. The above sub-paragraph can be applied to the  appellant  who  has  not
    been in the United Kingdom for twenty years on the basis that she might
    meet the "very significant obstacles" test.  However, in the  light  of
    my findings of credibility I am not satisfied that there are  any  such
    very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  reintegration  into
    Nigeria.  She claims that such obstacles exist because  of  her  child.
    However, the child is 3 years of age, is in good health  and  has  only
    just started nursery school.  Education  and  the  prospect  of  future
    education  does  not  create  a  very  significant   obstacle   as   EV
    (Philippines) makes  clear.   In  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (Decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC)  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that the best interests of a young child are  to  remain
    with its parents or parent.  In this  case  there  is  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the child's father has any interest in the child  or  that
    there is any Family Court order in respect  of  that  child  who  is  a
    Nigerian National.  Thus, I conclude that  the  appellant's  child  can
    move with her to Nigeria.  Although the  supporting  evidence  in  this
    case, to which I have already referred, suggests that the appellant and
    her child have formed a private life here with the child settling  into
    her nursery school and making acquaintances there, I conclude that  she
    can also do so in Nigeria where such education now and  in  the  future
    will be available to her.   Thus,  I  cannot  conclude  that  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules can benefit  either  appellant  or  her
    child.  The other Immigration Rules relating  to  family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom cannot benefit the appellant whose partnership has ended
    and whose child has not been in the United Kingdom for seven years.

48. As to the existence or  otherwise  of  compelling  circumstances  which
    might justify a grant of leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules,
    I have taken into consideration not only the child's best interests but
    also the claimed medical difficulties from which the appellant suffers.
     The latter are evidenced  by  the  medical  reports  which  have  been
    submitted, although there is no  single  report  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant suffers from severe disability  arising  from  her  arthritic
    knee condition or that there is a difficult prognosis.  She is  treated
    with painkillers and objective material shows that such  treatment  can
    be made available in Nigeria.  She can also benefit from schemes  aimed
    at the disabled to fit her for employment.  I have also indicated  that
    the inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  evidence  also  lead  me  to
    conclude that she has not shown that, on return to  Nigeria,  she  will
    have no family to turn to for initial assistance.  The circumstances of
    the case do not point to the existence of any compelling  circumstances
    which would warrant a more detailed consideration of the claims outside
    the Immigration Rules.

49. The provisions of Section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act (as amended) set out the public  interest  in  human  rights
    cases.  In relation to the provisions of  that  Section  the  appellant
    does not have a private life with a qualifying person nor does she have
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,
    that is in this case, a child who has been in the  United  Kingdom  for
    seven years.  Thus, the public  interest  is  in  the  removal  of  the
    appellant and her child.

Notice of Decision

I dismiss the appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
grounds.

Anonymity

I repeat the anonymity direction already  made  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  as
follows:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed                              Date 20/10/2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was payable in this case I am unable to make any award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
