
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08498/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                       |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 10 June 2015                        |             On 23 June 2015        |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    Engas
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Simmonds of Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on  16  November  1992.
    The appellant arrived in the UK on 17 January 2013 and was granted  six
    months' leave as a family  visitor.   On  6  August  2013,  he  claimed
    asylum.  On 26 September 2014, the Secretary of State refused his claim
    for asylum, for humanitarian protection and under Art 8  of  the  ECHR.
    On that same date, the Secretary of State made a decision to remove the
    appellant by way of directions under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum
    Acts 1999 to Iraq.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated  on  24  February  2015,  Judge  J  Lebasci   allowed   the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.  Judge Lebasci accepted,  as  did
    the respondent, that the appellant could not be returned  to  his  home
    area of Mosul because it was  currently  occupied  by  ISIS.   Further,
    Judge Lebasci found that the appellant could not be reasonably expected
    to relocate to  the  KRI.   None  of  those  findings  are  challenged.
    Finally, Judge Lebasci found that the appellant could not reasonably be
    expected to relocate to Baghdad for the reasons set out in para  40  of
    her determination as follows:

         "40. Taking into account the:

         40.1 Fact that the appellant has been the victim of kidnapping  and
         serious injury.

         40.2 Risk that if the appellant were to return to Baghdad he  would
             be linked to his mother and therefore, there is  a  real  risk
             that he would become a target for  the  reasons  that  he  had
             identified.

         40.3.    Increasing civil unrest and segregation across Iraq.

         40.4 Break down of law and order making it unlikely that the  state
             would  be  able  to  provide  effective  protection  for   the
             appellant.

         40.5 Acceptance that it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             appellant's mother to relocate to Baghdad.

         40.6 Absence of any established family links with Baghdad

         I find that Baghdad is not a reasonable relocation alternative  for
         the appellant."

 5. On 26 March  2015,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Grant-Hutchison)
    granted the Secretary of  State  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the following basis:

         "2.  It is arguable that the judge  failed  to  consider  and  make
             findings on

             (a)  why, if the appellant's father is living in Baghdad,  his
                  links  to  his  wife  would  not  become  known  and   the
                  appellant's links as her son would;

             (b)   by finding that although there  is  an  increasing  civil
                 unrest across Iraq  why  the  appellant  could  not  return
                 specifically to Baghdad and

             (c)   while the judge finds that it may not be  reasonable  for
                 the appellant's mother  to  relocate  to  Baghdad,  as  the
                 appellant is an independent adult, he  could  return.   His
                 father is in Baghdad.  No consideration has been  given  to
                 this.  Although the judge sets out  the  appellant's  claim
                 that his father is seeking to leave for Jordan (para 33  of
                 the Decision and signed Reasons) there are no  findings  on
                 why this is the case."

 6. The appellant filed  a  Rule  24  response  arguing  that  the  judge's
    decision should be upheld and that she had given adequate  reasons  for
    finding in the appellant's favour.

 7. The appeal came before me on 10 June 2015.

Discussion

 8. The appellant's claim before Judge Lebasci was that he would be at risk
    in Baghdad because he would be targeted as his mother's son.  She was a
    lawyer and politician who had stood in the local parliamentary election
    in Mosul.  The appellant was targeted by Kurds because of  his  mother,
    an attempt was made to kidnap him when he suffered knife wounds to  his
    arm  necessitating  two  operations  and  46   stitches.    After   the
    kidnapping, he had to move between  houses  in  Mosul  because  he  was
    afraid.  The appellant claimed that because of  his  mother's  problem,
    which had led to his  ill-treatment,  he  would  also  be  targeted  in
    Baghdad.

 9. Both Mr Mills, who represented the Secretary of State, and Mr Simmonds,
    who represented the appellant, informed me that the separate appeal  of
    the appellant's mother had been successful in that her  application  to
    remain in the UK had been referred back to the Secretary of State.   Mr
    Mills told me that it had yet to be decided whether she could return to
    Baghdad.

10.  Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the  judge's  reasoning  in  para  40  was
    inadequate.  The judge had failed to provide adequate reasons  why  the
    appellant, given that his father was  in  Baghdad,  would  be  targeted
    because of his mother when there was no evidence that  his  father  had
    been targeted.  Mr Mills also submitted that the judge had  been  wrong
    to take into account that the appellant's mother could not relocate  to
    Baghdad because, first that had not yet been decided as the matter  was
    outstanding for the Secretary of State and further the risk to her  was
    at least, in part, because she was an ethnic Shabak.  The appellant was
    not.  He was of Arab ethnicity and a Sunni Muslim.  Mr Mills submitted,
    therefore, the judge had failed to provide  adequate  reasons  why  the
    Home Office Country Information and Guidance for Iraq  report  at  para
    1.3.75 should be departed from namely that:

         "in general Arab Sunnis ... will be able to  relocate  to  Baghdad,
         where it  is  noted  that  there  is  a  sizeable  Arab  Sunni  IDP
         population."

11. Mr Mills acknowledged that the judge was entitled to disagree with that
    statement but she had not given any reasons for doing so.

12. Mr Simmonds relied upon Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set  aside)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) that it  was  not  necessary  to  give
    extensive reasons for a decision providing that a brief explanation  of
    the conclusions on the central issues in the appeal had been  given  by
    the judge.  Mr Simmonds submitted that the judge had done that in  para
    40 and even if she was not entitled to take into account at  para  40.5
    that the appellant's mother could not reasonably relocate  to  Baghdad,
    that was not material and the remaining reasons were adequate.

13. The judge's reasons are very brief.  Even if, as Mr Simmonds submitted,
    by accepting the appellant's  evidence  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant's father was only temporarily in Baghdad,  it  still  remains
    the case that the appellant's father has remained  in  Baghdad,  albeit
    temporarily, without any evidence that he has been targeted because  of
    the political activities or otherwise of the  appellant's  mother.   In
    para 40.2, the judge states that  there  is  a  "real  risk"  that  the
    appellant would be targeted as he would be identified and  linked  with
    his mother.  The judge  provides  no  reasons  for  finding  that  that
    linkage would be made.  Further, it was not open to the judge simply to
    assert, as a relevant factor, that the  appellant's  mother  could  not
    reasonably be expected to relocate to Baghdad without  considering  the
    basis on which she could not be expected to  do  that  given  that,  at
    least in part, any such conclusion would be based upon a characteristic
    (namely  her  Shabak  ethnicity)  which  had  no  application  to   the
    appellant.

14. In my judgment, the reasons (such that they are) given by the judge  at
    para 40 of her determination do not provide a clear and adequate  basis
    for her conclusion, in effect, that the appellant would  be  identified
    as his mother's son and would be at risk because of her in Baghdad.

15. In addition, without adequate reasons, the judge simply offers no basis
    upon which to depart from the opinion stated in para 1.3.75 of the Home
    Office  report  that  in  general  Arab  Sunnis  (which  includes   the
    appellant) can relocate to Baghdad and further, in para 1.3.7  of  that
    report, that it is not essential that an  individual  has  "established
    family links" within Baghdad.

16. For all these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge erred  in  law  in
    allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds on the basis that  he
    could internally relocate to Baghdad.

Decision

17. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error  of  law.   That
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

18. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the  decision  to
    be remade.  The only issue will be whether the appellant can internally
    relocate to Baghdad.  The findings that he would be at  risk  in  Mosul
    and cannot internally relocate to the KRI are not affected by the error
    of law and are preserved.

19. Subject to that, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    be heard by a judge other than Judge Lebasci.



                                                                      Signed



                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


