
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA082912014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd May 2016                     |On 10th June 2016                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                          SUBRAMANIAM YOGATHARSHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt of Counsel instructed by Ison Harrison Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion and to be consistent, I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 2. On 27th July 2015 Designated Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Zucker
    gave permission to the respondent to appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers who  allowed  the  appeal  on
    asylum and human rights grounds against the decision of the  respondent
    to refuse asylum, humanitarian  and  human  rights  protection  to  the
    appellant an adult citizen of Sri Lanka.

 3. In reaching his decision Designated Judge Zucker noted that the grounds
    contended, first, that the judge had failed to consider the appellant's
    claim for asylum in the context of the country guidance set out  in  GJ
    and Others (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  319
    (IAC) particularly when the appellant had been found to be credible  in
    his claim that he had made a minimal contribution to  the  LTTE  cause,
    was  not  a  member  of  that  organisation  nor  had  any  high  level
    involvement with it.  It was also submitted that the judge was wrong to
    dismiss consideration of the  decision  in  the  appellant's  brother's
    asylum claim when it was incumbent upon  him  to  have  regard  to  the
    factual conclusions in that decision as a  start  point  following  the
    Court of Appeal decision in AA (Somalia) [2007] EWCA Civ 1040.

 4. Although Designated Judge Zucker gave permission on both grounds raised
    he thought that the first had "rather more merit" than the second.

The Hearing and Submissions

 5. Ms Johnstone confirmed that the respondent relied on the  grounds.   In
    relation to the country  guidance  issue  she  drew  attention  to  the
    judge's conclusion, paragraph 30, that it was  not  apparent  that  the
    appellant was formally charged.  This meant that  the  appellant  would
    not have come into the risk categories set out in GJ, particularly that
    in paragraph 7(d) of the head note covering those who would  be  placed
    on a stop list accessible at the airport.   The  judge  had  not  shown
    anywhere in the decision that he had regard  to  the  relevant  country
    guidance.

 6. Ms Johnstone also submitted that, in relation to the  decision  in  the
    brother's case (made by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pickup  and
    sent out on 28th May 2012), the judge should  have  had  regard,  as  a
    start point, to the  fact  that  the  brother's  claim  was  completely
    rejected even though it was interlinked with that of the appellant.  In
    that respect she referred me to the conclusions reached  in  paragraphs
    105, 108 and 114 of the earlier decision which make  reference  to  the
    claim by the brother  in  this  appeal.   The  only  reference  to  the
    appellant's brother in the decision in this appeal is in  paragraph  39
    where the judge wrongly concludes that the brother's case  is  not  the
    starting point.

 7. Mr Holt conceded that the judge had made no specific reference  to  the
    country guidance in  GJ  but  submitted  that  he  did  make  reference
    (paragraph 41) to the relevant principle, in 7(d) of the  headnote,  on
    the basis that the appellant was an individual who  had  been  arrested
    and so was suspected by the authorities  and  therefore  questioned  on
    return.  He submitted that the judge had found that the appellant was a
    person with an outstanding court order or arrest  warrant  and  so  was
    entitled to find the appellant fell into the 7(d)  risk  category.   It
    was evident, from the judge's comments in paragraph  38,  that  he  had
    breached the bail granted to him which could be  regarded  as  a  court
    order.

 8. In relation to the decision in the brother's case Mr Holt  argued  that
    the appellant had not been a party to the appeal by his brother and the
    findings on the present appeal were  not  incompatible  with  the  risk
    categories set out in GJ.

 9. At the conclusion of submissions representatives suggested that, if  an
    error were found but no findings of fact were  to  be  made,  then  the
    matter should remain in the Upper Tribunal.

Conclusions

10. I am unable to conclude that the risk category indentified in paragraph
    7(d) of the head note to GJ harmonises with the findings of the  First-
    tier Judge which, for reasons I set out below, are materially  affected
    by the judge's failure  to  give  any  consideration  to  the  decision
    relating to the brother of the appellant in this case.  My reasons  for
    those conclusions follow.

11. The judge's findings are materially affected by the  failure  to  apply
    the guidance of the Court of Appeal in AA  (Somalia)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
    1040 which made it clear that the Devaseelan guidelines extend to cases
    where the earlier decision involved different parties but  where  there
    was a "material overlap of evidence" in the sense  of  matters  arising
    out of  the  same  factual  matrix.   Whilst  the  first  Adjudicator's
    decision is not binding in the  sense  of  issue  estoppel  it  is  the
    starting point and, in the interests of good administration, should  be
    followed unless a good reason is advanced to the  contrary.   There  is
    clearly an identical factual matrix in this  appeal  and  that  of  the
    brother which was dismissed by Judge Pickup.  The  latter  makes  clear
    reference to the claimed mutual interest  of  the  authorities  in  the
    suspected LTTE activities of both brothers particularly in relation  to
    the claimed reporting to the authorities and  arrest  of  the  brother.
    The First-tier Judge in this appeal also acknowledged that some of  the
    issues in both appeals were the same and involved common  questions  of
    fact even if he then wrongly concluded that the brother's case was  not
    a start point.  This was clearly a material error because, if the judge
    had followed the guidance set out in  AA  (Somalia)  he  should,  as  a
    minimum, have shown  that  he  had  given  some  consideration  to  the
    negative credibility findings in the earlier decision about the  claims
    by both brothers.  If the judge then chose to make findings which  were
    not in line with those of the earlier judge good  reasons  should  have
    been advanced but it is clear that the judge considered that  he  could
    not even regard those findings as a start point.

12. If the judge had taken account of the findings  of  the  judge  in  the
    brother's case then it is possible that he would have reached different
    factual conclusions.  For that reason I conclude that,  in  respect  of
    this error, alone, it is appropriate that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal should be set aside and the matter re-heard afresh by the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This accords with the Practice Statement  of  the
    Senior President of Tribunals of 25th September 2012 at  paragraph  7.2
    because of the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding which will be
    necessary to re-make the appeal.

13. The decision also shows a further material error  in  relation  to  the
    judge's assessment of risk on return.  There is no  reference,  in  the
    decision, to the relevant country guidance set out in GJ.  Although  it
    is evident that the judge had such guidance in mind when referring to a
    "recognised risk category"  in  paragraph  41,   his  summary  of  that
    category as someone "who has been arrested and who is suspected by  the
    authorities and who will, on return be questioned" is not  an  accurate
    reflection of paragraph 7(d) of the head note to GJ which reads:
         "(d) A person whose name appears  on  a  computerised  'stop'  list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name  appears  on  a  'stop'  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant."

    It is evidence that the risk category  does  not  specifically  involve
    those who have  been  arrested  or  those  who  are  suspected  by  the
    authorities.  It relates to those against whom there are specific court
    orders or arrest warrants.  That is not the same.  Although Mr Holt has
    argued that any bail documents issued to the appellant would come  into
    the court document category that is a matter which would  require  some
    supporting evidence.  The judge's failure to  accurately  identify  the
    risk category against the background of the country guidance authority,
    to which he made no reference, amounts to a further error although,  as
    I have already indicated, the judge's earlier credibility findings  are
    vitiated by the failure to have regard to the decision in the brother's
    case. Further, the matter is affected by the apparent inconsistency  in
    the determination  which  stems  from  the  comment  of  the  judge  in
    paragraph 30 of the decision where he says that it  was  "not  apparent
    that the appellant was charged".

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows material errors on  points  of
law.  I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remit  the
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh on all issues.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  nor  do  I
consider one appropriate  in  relation  to  the  matters  before  the  Upper
Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS
      1. The appeal is to be heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal  at
         the Manchester Hearing Centre on a date  to  be  specified  by  the
         Resident Judge.
      2. The appeal should not be  heard  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Chambers.
      3. A Tamil  interpreter  will  be  provided  for  the  hearing  unless
         representatives indicate to the contrary at least 7 days before the
         substantive hearing.
      4. The time estimate for the hearing is 3 hours.


Signed   Date 10th June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
