

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08261/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10th November 2016                    |On 7th December 2016              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     P C
                           (Anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms I Sabic, counsel, instructed by Harrow Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
appellant in this determination identified as PC. This direction applies
to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction
could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

   1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the grounds  it  was
      arguable the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  erred  in  reaching  a
      conclusion  on  the  credibility  of   the   appellant's   claim   for
      international protection without having taken account of  the  medical
      evidence; that the finding on the medical evidence was taken based  on
      the previous findings of credibility and  that  the  findings  on  the
      evidence overall were as  a  consequence  arguably  irrational  and/or
      unfair.


   2. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national. His  claim  for  international
      protection was refused for reasons set out in letters dated  20th  May
      2015 and 23rd February 2016. His appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier
      Tribunal judge McKenzie for reasons in a decision promulgated on  15th
      September 2016 subsequent to a hearing on 22nd August 2016.

   3. In paragraph 10 of his decision the judge states that he has looked at
      "the position as it exists at the present time and [has] considered at
      [sic] all the evidence as a whole". He goes on to state  at  paragraph
      12 "I must look at the documents in the round together with  the  rest
      of the evidence. The burden of demonstrating for [sic] the reliability
      of documents rests on the Appellant". In paragraph 45 of the  decision
      the judge states "I have taken account of all the documentary and oral
      evidence and the submissions made by the representatives, even if  not
      specifically referred to herein." And in  paragraph  46  he  says  "In
      making my findings in fact, I remind myself that I must  consider  the
      evidence before me in the round." The judge then states that he  finds
      the appellant's evidence not credible and that "I must, of  necessity,
      set out my findings in some sort of order. However, the order in which
      these findings appear is not indicative of the amount of weight I have
      attached to each issue in my overall consideration of the evidence."

   4. The judge then sets out various aspects of the appellant's  claim  and
      reaches conclusions that the appellant's account is not  credible.  In
      paragraph 69 the judge states

              "I now turn to consider the medical evidence,  in  the  round
             together with the rest of the evidence. Mr  Izquierdo-Martin's
             expert report described injuries that I accept are  consistent
             with the evidence given by the  Appellant  regarding  what  he
             claims happened when he was detained by the authorities in Sri
             Lanka. The report considers possible  alternative  causes  for
             the injuries and I accept that the description of the scars as
             'matured' is consistent with the Appellant's account that  the
             injuries  occurred  more  than  a  year  prior  to  him  being
             examined."


        He goes on in paragraph 72 to say


             "...however when I consider this medical evidence in the round
             with all  the  other  evidence  before  me,  not  finding  the
             Appellant to be a credible witness  in  respect  of  the  core
             elements of his claim, I do not find, even to the low standard
             of proof, that the Appellant  has  discharged  the  burden  of
             proving that he was tortured by the authorities in  Sri  Lanka
             for a Convention reason.".


   5. On the face of it the judge has  failed  to  deal  with  the  evidence
      before him 'in the round' despite stating that he  is  aware  that  he
      should do so and despite stating that he  has  considered  it  in  the
      round. He has not done this but has considered  the  medical  evidence
      having already reached his  findings  on  the  core  elements  of  the
      appellant's claim.


   6. In paragraphs 81 to 84 the judge considers the  expert  report  of  Dr
      Smith. Whilst accepting the expertise of Dr Smith the judge  concludes
      that it does not assist in  persuading  him  that  the  appellant  was
      subject to the treatment he  claims,  or  that  because  he  does  not
      believe the appellant's account, that he would be of any  interest  to
      the authorities on his return. He finds that the 'objective  evidence'
      relied upon by the appellant "does not alter  [his]  clear  conclusion
      that the Appellant will not be at  any  risk  on  his  return  to  Sri
      Lanka".

   7. Again, the  judge  has  considered  the  expert  report  and  what  he
      describes as 'objective evidence' in terms  of  whether  it  dislodges
      conclusions  he  has  already  reached  rather  than  considering  the
      appellant's evidence in the context of the evidence in the round.  The
      statements by the judge that he is aware he must consider the evidence
      and the setting out of the evidence and his findings in 'no particular
      order' do not prevent it being apparent that the judge has  failed  to
      do that which he claims to be aware of.

   8. Ms Sabic submitted these errors were such  as  to  merit  the  setting
      aside of the decision and it being remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
      for a decision to be taken on the evidence, as required.

   9. Mr Walker submitted that these were not errors and  that  although  on
      their face they appeared to be so, it was a turn of phrase rather than
      a failure to consider the evidence. A close  reading  of  the  reasons
      given by the judge make it clear that she has considered the  evidence
      properly and finds, for the detailed reasons given, that the appellant
      would not be at risk if returned to Sri  Lanka.  Mr  Walker  submitted
      that in any event, even if  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
      medical evidence and the expert report by Dr Smith in the round in her
      assessment of the appellant's evidence, any error was not material. He
      submitted that the  appellant's  claim  did  not  raise  a  Convention
      reason; there was nothing to show he would be on a STOP list;  he  had
      not been in the LTTE; Dr Smith's report refers to the appellant having
      been in the LTTE and the report could therefore not be relied upon and
      there was no evidence whatsoever that any grievance held by  Rajapekso
      against the appellant (if it existed) would in any event lead  to  him
      being placed upon a STOP list.

        Appellant's basis of claim

  10. The  appellant  worked  as  co-ordinating  secretary  for  the  Deputy
      Minister of Water and Supply (Nirupama Rajapaksa, a  relative  of  the
      then President) from December 2012 until May 2013. During his job,  he
      claims he recommended  a  student  to  work  for  the  Minister,  such
      employment not taking place but during which  she  was  introduced  to
      Namal Rajapaksa, the then President's son. She claims she was raped by
      Namal Rajapaksa. The appellant claims she came to him  for  assistance
      and he attended the police station with her father. The police refused
      to register the complaint and the appellant was detained  for  8  days
      and tortured. Medical evidence relied upon by the appellant refers  to
      the scarring being consistent with the allegations made. The appellant
      claims he was then subjected to threats and harassment  and  left  Sri
      Lanka. He returned when his wife was arrested in April  2014  and,  at
      the airport, was arrested again and detained for 28 days. He claims he
      was investigated by the Terrorist Investigation Department and accused
      of being associated with the LTTE and  released  after  payment  of  a
      bribe. He again left Sri Lanka and in the UK on 1st November  2014  he
      claimed asylum. His wife was then kidnapped and CID demanded he return
      to Sri Lanka which he did; his wife was released.  He  claims  he  was
      asked for further information about the rape, which he was  unable  to
      give but he offered to give information about corruption. He was asked
      for further information after the election in  January  2015  -  which
      President Rajapaksa lost. Shortly thereafter the  appellant  left  for
      Dubai and then to the UK where he claimed asylum. The  evidence  of  a
      problem in Sri Lanka after that date is  an  assertion  that  although
      originally a lawyer had confirmed there was no case  recorded  against
      the appellant, in October 2015 the appellant's father in law was  told
      by the lawyer that there was a case filed. There was  no  letter  from
      the lawyer produced.


        Consideration


  11. The report by Dr Smith states:

             "35. As such, there is no reason why the authorities would  be
             bound to inform the Appellant as to why the authorities  would
             have known about his connections to the LTTE. The  information
             would likely have been intelligence driven and  their  sources
             of  intelligence  would  not  have  been  disclosed  to  avoid
             compromise.
             36.The material evidence for a resurgence of the LTTE is  thin
             enough to be all but discounted. However during and around the
             time,  there  were  several  statements   relating   to   LTTE
             resurgence.
             .....
             45. Against this backdrop it is completely plausible that  the
             Sri Lanka authorities  would  show  adverse  interest  in  the
             Appellant, if it were considered that he had any links to  the
             LTTE.
             ....
             51. It is certainly impossible  to  say  without  equivocation
             whether the Appellant, or any other person of adverse interest
             is on the 'wanted list'. However, I have made  clear  in  this
             report that the Appellant has been and will continue to be  of
             adverse interest on account of the facts that he is  known  to
             history and that that Sri Lankan authorities  continue  to  be
             concerned about the resurgence of the LTTE and the  return  of
             LTTE remnants from overseas.
             ....
             54. The Appellant will continue to be of adverse  interest  as
             the authorities will likely have kept and recorded details  of
             their adverse interest. As previously explained, anyone with a
             past connection to the LTTE will be of adverse interest and  a
             potential threat to the unitary state  of  Sri  Lanka.  It  is
             reasonably  likely  that  these   details   will   have   been
             transferred onto the electronic database, from which the  Stop
             and Watch Lists are derived.
             ....
             68.  The  Rajapaksa  clan  remains   exceptionally   powerful.
             Although Mahinda was  unsuccessful  in  his  re-election  bid,
             despite the long standing claims of corruption and evidence of
             authoritarianism, he still claimed over 40% of the vote in the
             January 2015 presidential election.  His  stock  is  therefore
             considerable and remains so and the family could  well  return
             to power. If the appellant is, as he  claims,  of  significant
             adverse interest to the Rajapaksa family, there will  be  ways
             and means of  tracking  the  appellant  and  learning  of  his
             return, especially if the family has placed him  on  the  Stop
             List."

  12. The report by Dr Smith is predicated upon the appellant having been at
      least a supporter if not a member of the  LTTE.  This  is  simply  not
      correct.


  13. At its highest the appellant has been detained twice and tortured some
      years ago. He was released from 28-day detention after  payment  of  a
      bribe and left the country.  He  was  questioned  about  alleged  LTTE
      support. He returned to Sri  Lanka  and  was  not  rearrested  or  re-
      detained. The president whose  son  allegedly  raped  the  appellant's
      former student is no longer President and the  current  President  has
      asserted he will investigate wrong doing by that family. The appellant
      left Sri Lanka after the election; there was very little evidence from
      him that he had significant problems or was at risk  of  serious  harm
      between leaving the country  in  November  2014  and  his  return  and
      subsequent departure.

  14. Ms Sabic submitted that at its highest the appellant would  be  deemed
      to be an LTTE supporter returning from the diaspora and in  accordance
      with GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]
      UKUT  00319  (IAC)  the  appellant  would  be  on  a  Stop   List   or
      alternatively would be traced and be at real risk of serious harm from
      the Rajapaksa family. She submitted that the failure of the First-tier
      Tribunal judge to consider the medical evidence and the report  of  Dr
      Smith rendered the findings unsafe.

  15. I do not agree that the final conclusions of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge are infected by a material error of law. Dr Smith refers to  the
      lack of evidence of a  resurgence  of  the  LTTE.  The  appellant  has
      returned to Sri Lanka since the election and has not been re-detained.
      The appellant has had no LTTE activity of any kind. It is  simply  not
      possible on the facts of the appellant's claim taken at their  highest
      that he would be at risk of being detained at the airport  on  return.
      The evidence about the claimed recorded case  is  simply  not  tenable
      when the rest of the case is taken at its highest and would  thus  not
      make any difference to the outcome.

  16. In so far as the assertion that the Rajapaksa family would be able  to
      place him on the Stop List or would be able to trace him, there was no
      evidence to this effect other than the final paragraph of  Dr  Smith's
      report which refers to 'ways and means'. That is simply inadequate  to
      call in aid of an assertion that the appellant is  at  risk  from  the
      Rajapaksa family or is on the Stop List.

  17. For these reasons, although the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law
      in her decision as referred to above, the outcome of the appeal  would
      have been the same. The errors are not material.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

    I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge to dismiss the appeal stands.





    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




[pic]

                                    Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker          7th December 2016

