

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08336/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  6 May 2014                                |On 22 May 2014               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between


                                 ZAFAR KHAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                 SECRETARY 0F STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice
solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr M Diwncyz, HOPO

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Chana made following a hearing at Harmondsworth on  the
      16 September 2013, dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      decision to refuse to grant him asylum.


   2. The appellant's claim is based upon his fear of  the  Taliban  who  he
      says are looking for him because they believe  that  he  informed  the
      authorities of their stay at a guest house owned by his family.

   3. At the date of interview and at the hearing the appellant said that he
      was 15 years old. The judge relied on an age assessment carried out by
      Sheffield Social Services who concluded that he was over  the  age  of
      18.

   4. The judge dismissed the appeal principally because of  inconsistencies
      in his account.

   5. The appellant challenged the determination on a number of grounds,  in
      particular that the judge's reasoning was perverse and  that  she  had
      reached her decision on credibility before considering his age.

   6. Since the hearing Sheffield has  revised  its  earlier  view  and  now
      accept that the appellant's date of birth is as he claims, and that he
      is 15 years old.

   7. The matter came before me on 2 occasions when the  Presenting  Officer
      asked for time to consider whether the  original  decision  should  be
      withdrawn. Nothing has transpired since those hearings.

   8. Mr Diwncyz did not resist my suggestion that the proper course was for
      this decision to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal on  the  grounds
      that the judge had erred in law, through no  fault  of  her  own,   in
      proceeding on the basis of a material mistake of fact, namely that she
      considered  that  he  was  an  adult,  and   assessed   his   evidence
      accordingly, whereas he was and is a child.

   9. The decision is set aside. The appropriate course is remittal  to  the
      first-tier tribunal. The case should be listed at  Bradford  before  a
      judge other than Ms Chana.



Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
