
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08503/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12th February 2016                     |On 21 April 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                     EFH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Singapore born on [ ] 1983.  She  entered
    the  United  Kingdom  on  19th  September  2004  as  a  student.    The
    genuineness of her entry is not challenged.  Student leave was extended
    until 15th November 2012.  She applied for further leave to  remain  on
    14th November 2012.  Within that application the Appellant  stated  she
    was transgendered and lesbian and that her gender was  not  legally  or
    socially recognised in Singapore.   The  Respondent's  application  was
    refused under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  There were no
    exceptional circumstances justifying consideration of a grant of  leave
    under Article 8 outside the Rules and it  was  concluded  that  in  the
    circumstances the Appellant should have applied for asylum at an Asylum
    Screening Unit.

 2. The Appellant appealed against the decision.  Such appeal was based  on
    both asylum and human rights grounds and the appeal came  before  Judge
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  P-J  White  on  10th  January  2014.   The
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all  grounds.   The  judge  however
    noted that the Appellant had been born a male child and had realised in
    about 2002 that she was  psychologically  female  and  since  2004  had
    presented herself as female and behaved and socialised as such  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Warr on 5th August 2014.  In a detailed promulgation dated  8th  August
    Judge Warr concluded that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was not materially flawed in law and the appeal was dismissed.

 4. On 18th November 2014 a decision was taken by the Secretary of State to
    remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant  appealed
    against that decision and the appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Rodger sitting at Taylor House on 23rd February 2015.  In
    a determination promulgated on 26th February 2015 Judge Rodger  allowed
    the appeal to the extent that it was not in accordance with the law and
    remitted the matter back to the Respondent so that a new decision could
    be made.  That finding was made after there had been  a  concession  by
    the representative of the Secretary of State that  there  had  been  an
    error of law in the decision to remove on  two  grounds.   Firstly  the
    Appellant had made her asylum appeal on the grounds that she had a real
    fear of persecution if  she  refused  to  do  the  compulsory  military
    service which  is  required  for  males  in  Singapore.   Judge  Rodger
    acknowledged that this was different from the argument  raised  in  her
    previous appeal and it had been accepted by the Secretary of State that
    this had not been dealt with within the refusal letter.  Secondly Judge
    Rodger found there was an inconsistency in the content of the  decision
    letter and the refusal letter.

 5. The Secretary of State thereafter reconsidered the matter, noting  that
    the Appellant applied for asylum  and  asked  to  be  recognised  as  a
    refugee and that the Appellant claimed to have a well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Singapore on the basis of her membership of a particular
    social group, namely  a  transgender  individual  in  Singapore.   That
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 18th May 2015.   The
    Appellant appealed against that decision.  That  appeal  was  heard  at
    Harmondsworth on 2nd November  2015  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Jackson.  In  a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  19th
    November 2015 the Appellant's appeal was allowed  on  both  asylum  and
    human rights grounds.  It is the appeal from that decision  that  comes
    before me.

 6. On 3rd December 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those Grounds of Appeal contended that the  First-
    tier Tribunal's basis for allowing the appeal on asylum grounds set out
    at paragraphs 35 to 39 of Judge Jackson's determination gave inadequate
    reasons for the conclusion reached and that it was maintained that  the
    Appellant had failed to demonstrate that  her  decision  not  to  serve
    compulsory  military  service  in  Singapore  would  engage  the   1951
    Convention.  Further it was contended that the finding was inadequately
    reasoned and failed to have proper regard to the previous determination
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the decision of Judge P-J White)  in  which
    the First-tier Tribunal had dismissed the Appellant's Article 8  appeal
    and that the inadequacy of reasoning rendered the  decision  flawed  to
    the extent that it should be set aside.

 7. On 15th December Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Brunnen  granted
    permission to appeal.

 8. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is any material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.   In  addition  on  27th  January  2016  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins gave directions advising:-

      1) both parties are directed to be prepared to address the Tribunal on
         the question of costs at the end of  the  hearing  on  Friday  12th
         February 2016 or whenever the case is next heard;

      2) the Tribunal hearing the appeal will consider  any  representations
         made and either make an  order  for  costs  (which  could  be  that
         neither party pays  the  other's  costs)  or  give  directions  for
         further submissions or order a further hearing to consider costs or
         such further order, if any, that seems fitting.

 9. It is on that basis  that  the  appeal  comes  before  me.   There  are
    consequently two extant issues which I have to consider.  The first  is
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  This is an appeal by the Secretary of State
    but for the purpose of continuity throughout the  appeal  process  Miss
    EFH is referred to herein as the Appellant and the Secretary  of  State
    as the Respondent.  On the appeal as to whether there is  an  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  the  Appellant
    appears by her instructed Counsel Mr Chelvan.  Mr Chelvan  is  familiar
    with this matter having appeared before Judge Jackson in the First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears on the hearing of  the  error
    of law appeal by her  instructed  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Clarke.  The  Secretary  of  State  is  separately  represented  by  Mr
    Anderson of Counsel so far as the issue relating to costs as set out in
    the directions order of Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins is concerned.   It
    was against that very extensive historical background that I heard the
    appeal.  Miss EFH was present but bearing in mind the  issues  did  not
    provide any oral testimony.



Submissions/Discussions

10. Mr Clarke starts by taking me back through the history of  this  matter
    (which is set out in detail above) and to the views initially expressed
    by Judge White.  He  points  out  that  Judge  White  at  paragraph  39
    accepted that if the Appellant was at risk of persecution arising  from
    her gender identity, that would be a reason falling within the ambit of
    the  Refugee  Convention.   However  he  points  out  further  that  at
    paragraph 55 Judge White having considered all the evidence  with  care
    and concern was satisfied that the Appellant was likely  to  face  some
    difficulties and  may  well  face  some  degree  of  discrimination  in
    Singapore but was not persuaded that the treatment she is  at  risk  of
    suffering has been shown either in individual instances or cumulatively
    to reach the level of really  serious  harm  or  to  have  sufficiently
    serious prejudicial consequences so as to amount  to  persecution.   He
    therefore submits that at first instance the judge found that living as
    a man would not bring the Appellant  within  a  level  of  persecution.
    Therefore her appeal could not  succeed.   That  view  he  submits  was
    upheld by Upper Tribunal Judge Warr.

11. Mr Clarke points out that the referral back to the Secretary  of  State
    by Judge Rodger was due to the failure of the  Secretary  of  State  to
    have addressed issues and that the history of the matter was considered
    by Judge Jackson at paragraphs 34 and  35  of  her  determination.   Mr
    Clarke points out  the  judge  looked  at  the  asylum  appeal  on  two
    completely separate bases and that the issues  in  the  instant  appeal
    before me raised the question of whether the refusal by  the  Appellant
    to do military service in Singapore engaged the Convention.  He submits
    that a refusal  not  to  do  military  service  would  not  engage  the
    Convention because by refusing to do so the Appellant would be  in  the
    same position as anybody else who seeks to refuse and consequently  the
    causal link with the prescribed social group is broken.  He  relies  on
    guidance to be found in Sepet and Another v the Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2003] UKHL 15.  He points  out  this  was  a  case
    involving a refusal to  perform  compulsory  military  service  in  the
    Turkish Army by Kurds on conscientious grounds and  that  there  was  a
    liability to imprisonment if returned  to  Turkey.   He  refers  me  to
    paragraph 22 therein, pointing out that treatment is not persecutory if
    it is treatment meted out to all and is not discriminatory.  He submits
    that this authority shows that the causal link has been broken  so  far
    as it relates to a social group and that  the  judge  has  inadequately
    reasoned on what constitutes a social  group.   He  submits  that  this
    creates a material error of law.

12. Mr Clarke takes me through a detailed analysis of paragraphs 36  to  39
    of Judge Jackson's decision.  The Secretary  of  State  challenges  the
    finding at paragraph 36 that the Appellant would  refuse  to  undertake
    military service on the basis of her gender as a woman, contending that
    that following Sepet does not mean  that  she  is  being  discriminated
    against and further whilst noting the comments made at paragraph 37 and
    39 contends that the judge erred in finding  the  conditions  that  the
    Appellant would face were persecutory.  He points out that the issue of
    women  not  being  required  to  do  military  service  was   expressly
    considered by Judge White at paragraphs 51 and 52  and  that  he  found
    that the threshold was not reached.  Consequently it is the  submission
    of the Secretary of State that Judge Jackson has gone behind the first-
    tier decision of Judge White (which he submits was  approved  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Warr) and that the judge erred in doing so.  Further  Mr
    Clarke takes me to paragraph 28 of the  Appellant's  Rule  24  response
    where it is set  out  that  where  punishment  arises  out  of  an  act
    committed by an individual who refuses to comply with a  discriminatory
    measure, based  on  a  protected  characteristic  that  the  individual
    possesses,  which  falls  within  a  Refugee   Convention   (in   these
    proceedings her preoperative  gender  identity)  then  prosecution  can
    amount to persecution.  He submits that that  is  wrong  and  that  the
    measure does not warrant protection and that  punishment  was  not  the
    basis of the causal link.  In such circumstances he  submits  that  the
    basis upon which the judge has considered this appeal is erroneous  and
    he asks me to set it aside.

13. Mr Clarke thereafter turns to the second ground  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's submission, namely that  inadequate  reasons  have  been  given
    pursuant to Article 8.  His starting  point  is  paragraph  58  of  the
    decision of Immigration Judge White.  He  notes  that  the  Appellant's
    case raises issues as analysed by Judge  White  which  are  potentially
    compelling and compassionate and  which  undoubtedly  are  outside  the
    contemplation  of  paragraph  276ADE  and  that  consequently  a   full
    traditional assessment of the  Article  8  claim  is  appropriate.   Mr
    Clarke comments therefore that what is being suggested is that  Article
    8 arguments  must  be  considered,  i.e.  would  Article  8  rights  be
    considered if the Appellant had to do military service?  He submits the
    judge goes behind the findings of Judge White and that at paragraph  40
    of her decision Judge Jackson has allowed the appeal under Article 8 on
    exactly the same reasons that Judge White refused  it,  i.e.  that  the
    reasons given were  nothing  to  do  with  military  service  and  that
    therefore Judge Jackson had failed to give  any  reason  for  departing
    from the decision of Judge White which constitutes a material error  of
    law.

14. Mr Chelvan states that the Home Office are  hypothetically  seeking  to
    send  a  woman  back  to  Singapore  to  be  punished  as  a  man.   He
    acknowledges and appreciates the guidelines in  Devaseelan  but  points
    out that this is only  the  starting  point  and  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was not bound by the guidance and that any asylum claim had to
    be reconsidered.  He submits that Judge White was  the  starting  point
    and circumstances were being looked at as they were in 2014.  Similarly
    the analysis under Article 8 is only the starting point.

15. He takes me to the skeleton argument that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, in particular paragraphs 23 to 29, submitting  that  it
    is accepted by the 2014  First-tier  Tribunal  determination  that  the
    Appellant faces discrimination on the basis of her gender in  Singapore
    which is ignored by the state unless she undergoes forced modification,
    be it through being forced to "live and be treated as a man" or undergo
    sex reassignment.  He again reiterates paragraphs 35  to  39  of  Judge
    Jackson's decision, pointing out it  is  important  to  note  that  the
    findings of fact therein are not challenged by the Secretary  of  State
    in her Grounds of Appeal and that the  central  issue  is  whether  the
    punishment for  refusal  to  undertake  military  service  recorded  at
    paragraph 39 of the determination as being a fine and a  jail  sentence
    of an initial fifteen months amount to persecution.   And  that  within
    paragraph 39 of Judge Jackson's decision she finds that prosecution for
    refusal to undertake military service amounts to persecution but  notes
    that it is the Secretary of State's position that that is  inadequately
    reasoned.

16. He contends that gender identity is clearly a protected  characteristic
    within a particular social group Convention  reason  as  identified  by
    Judge  Jackson  at  paragraph  37   and   within   the   earlier   2014
    determination.  He submits that the Respondent would  not  be  able  to
    live "openly and freely as a preoperative trans-woman in Singapore when
    undertaking military service and unless she accepts forced modification
    she will be punished for her actions".  He submits that the punishments
    to be meted out are both a prison  sentence  and  fine  which  are  not
    insignificant and arise solely out of the Appellant's refusal to engage
    with   forced   modification   of   her   protected    immutable/innate
    characteristic.  Consequently he submits  that  the  pleadings  by  the
    Secretary of State are wholly without merit and he asks me  to  dismiss
    the appeal.

17. He further reminds me of the approach adopted by Judge Rodger -  which
    he submits was correct - but the argument currently being considered is
    different to that raised in the previous appeal before Judge White  and
    that it had not been dealt with in the original Notice of Refusal.   He
    submits as there is no punishment to the Appellant as a woman she would
    not be subject to military service and that it  is  only  men  who  are
    punished but transgender women  who  have  not  gone  through  surgical
    intervention would be subject to punishment.  He submits that there  is
    agreement all round that discriminatory treatment lies at the heart  of
    an asylum appeal and therefore submits that Mr Clarke's  submission  is
    without foundation and merit, for  otherwise  the  Secretary  of  State
    would not have conceded to the original remittal as the Convention  was
    not engaged.

18. Mr Chelvan takes me to paragraph 4 of the Secretary of State's  Grounds
    of Appeal, namely those contending that in order to qualify for  asylum
    persecution must be as a result of a particular social  group  and  the
    contention that the Tribunal has failed to demonstrate any such  causal
    link.  He points out that punishment to  the  Appellant  would  be  for
    refusal to carry out military service as the Appellant will be  treated
    as a man in Singapore.  He further points out  that  the  Secretary  of
    State accepts that the Appellant is a woman.   She  consequently  falls
    therein within the UK as a member of a gender social  group,  namely  a
    preoperative transgender woman.   He  points  out  that  Judge  Jackson
    acknowledged that this  was  not  the  position  in  Singapore  and  in
    Singapore  that  the  Appellant  would   have   two   options,   either



      a) radical surgical intervention; or

      b) to accept that she is a man under Singapore law.

    He points out that if the latter is accepted by the Appellant she would
    have to serve her military service as a man, i.e. living with  men  and
    showering with them, etc.  This fact he submits is not challenged.  The
    Appellant would therefore be faced with two steps, either revoking  her
    biological man persona or alternatively if  not  punished  it  will  be
    because she was treated as a man and she will be  punished  as  a  man.
    Hence the gender discussion that took place and the finding that  women
    are not punished within  the  military.   He  submits  that  all  these
    factors were accepted  and  grasped  by  Judge  Jackson  and  therefore
    firstly there is no material error of law disclosed in the decision and
    secondly on that basis an application for wasted costs has been made.

19. He takes me at some length to Judge Jackson's decision and goes through
    the findings made at paragraphs 34 to 39.  He points out that these are
    the key paragraphs and that there has been no challenge to the findings
    of fact made therein.  He points out that Mr Clarke on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State has accepted the contentions made in paragraph 34 as
    accurately  representing  the  facts  at  the  date  of  the   hearing.
    Paragraph 35 is not challenged.

20. He notes the challenge to paragraph 36 by reference to paragraph 22  of
    Sephet but points out that the Appellant would be  punished  as  a  man
    when in fact she is a woman, albeit that she has not  been  treated  as
    such in Singapore and has not had surgical  intervention.   He  submits
    that this must be discriminatory and that this was a finding  that  was
    open to Judge Jackson.  He rejects the contention made by the Secretary
    of State that  this  is  not  discriminatory,  pointing  out  that  the
    Appellant is a woman, not a man and that the findings  therein  of  the
    judge were perfectly open to her.

21. He next takes me to paragraph 37, pointing out the  facts  therein  are
    not challenged and that the paragraphs set  out  the  Judge's  findings
    clearly and distinctly; that she has analysed the  position  thoroughly
    and he submits that there is no material error of law disclosed.

22. So far as the position under Article 8 is concerned he submits that the
    judge has here also carried out a very thorough analysis and that there
    are no material errors of law.  He  asks  me  firstly  to  dismiss  the
    Secretary  of  State's  appeal  and  secondly  to  give  due  and  full
    consideration to his application for a wasted costs order.

The Law

23.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

24. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings re Material Error of Law

25. I start by reminding myself that the issue before me is whether or  not
    there is a material error of law in the decision of  Immigration  Judge
    Jackson.  I have not heard oral testimony and I  am  not  retrying  the
    issue.  I find that Judge Jackson's  decision  does  not  disclose  any
    material errors of law.  It is important that I give my reasons.   The
    core of Judge Jackson's determination is to be found at  paragraphs  35
    to 39.  It is however important to analyse all of the findings of Judge
    Jackson and to look at them in the context of this  matter.   Much  has
    been made by Mr Clarke that the decision of Judge Jackson does  not  in
    any way concur with the findings of Judge White.  When there has been a
    prior decision the approach to be adopted by the second  judge  is  set
    out in detail in Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial
    Effects) Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT 00702.  Judge Jackson  has  taken  full
    account of the provisions of Devaseelan.  Firstly she has gone  so  far
    at paragraph 33 of her  determination  to  recite  the  whole  of  that
    decision.  Secondly she has then analysed the findings of  Judge  White
    (as approved by UTJ Warr) at paragraph 34.

26. However it is important to note the special features  of  this  matter.
    The history has been referred to above  in  some  considerable  detail.
    Judge Jackson was aware that the matter was  referred  back  via  Judge
    Rodger to the Secretary of State.  Judge Rodger very clearly set out at
    paragraph 9 the basis of that referral, namely that the  Appellant  had
    made her asylum appeal on the grounds that  she  had  a  real  fear  of
    persecution if she refused to do the compulsory military service  which
    is required for males in Singapore.  Judge Rodger  importantly  noticed
    that that was a different argument  to  that  raised  in  the  previous
    appeal and that it had been accepted by the  Secretary  of  State  that
    that had not been dealt with within the refusal  letter.   Consequently
    the extant appeal is on a different basis to  that  which  came  before
    Judge White.  However Judge Jackson, in a  very  carefully  constructed
    couple of paragraphs, firstly analysed the position with regard to  the
    Appellant being forced to undertake compulsory military  service  as  a
    man in  Singapore  and  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal.   Secondly
    thereafter at paragraph 35 she went  on  to  consider  the  alternative
    claim for asylum, i.e. the new claim on the basis  that  the  Appellant
    would refuse to undertake compulsory military service.  She noted  that
    this was not an issue before Judge White or Judge Warr and  there  were
    no findings made by Judge Rodger who properly remitted the case back to
    the Respondent.  It is the analysis of that claim that she then goes on
    to carefully consider at paragraphs 36 to 39.

27. I find the decision between paragraphs 36 and 39 to be  extremely  well
    constructed and thought through.  At paragraph  36  she  considers  the
    Appellant's  evidence  and  makes  a  finding  that  it  was   entirely
    reasonable based solely on the Appellant's gender to undertake military
    service  if  returned  to  Singapore  and  not  on  the  basis  of  any
    conscientious objection to military service per se.  That was a finding
    of fact that was open to the judge.

28. Judge Jackson goes on to state that the Appellant is recognised by  the
    Secretary of State as a woman and it is not disputed that she would not
    be recognised as such by any authority  in  Singapore.   Judge  Jackson
    makes  a  very  strong  finding,  emphasising  the   words   that   the
    Respondent's view that "provision is made for  transgender  individuals
    to undertake military service in Singapore" by stating that  this  does
    not engage at all with what she accepts would be the position  for  the
    Appellant who would be required to  live  as  a  man  in  a  male  only
    environment for the period of military service.  She thereafter goes on
    to  give  examples  of  behavioural  and  factual  difficulties   which
    constitute persecution.  The submission by Mr Clarke that this  is  not
    persecution amounts to little more than disagreement.

29. Thereafter at paragraph 39 Judge  Jackson  analyses  sentencing  powers
    that would  avail  themselves  to  the  Singapore  authorities  if  the
    Appellant refused to undertake military service and  finds  that  given
    that military service is only required for men, she  did  not  consider
    the Appellant's reason for refusing to undertake this based  purely  on
    her gender to be a  normal  case  of  draft  evasion  or  conscientious
    objection.  Her conclusions  ultimately  bearing  in  mind  the  likely
    punishments of fine and imprisonment for refusing to undertake military
    service amount to persecution  for  a  Convention  reason.   These  are
    findings of fact firstly that she is entitled to make and secondly  but
    more importantly she has given full reasons for.

30. In reaching this decision I have given very  careful  consideration  to
    the detailed submissions made by Mr Clarke.  He has valiantly on behalf
    of the Secretary of State sought to persuade me that  the  decision  of
    Judge Jackson is erroneous and that the judge has in the  Secretary  of
    State's view looked at the matter as one of punishment, rather than one
    finding that the Appellant is a member of a social group.   I  disagree
    with that analysis.  The judge has set out very carefully at  paragraph
    39 the basis upon which she finds the Appellant to be  a  member  of  a
    social group and it has to be  remembered  that  Singapore  refuses  to
    treat the Appellant as a woman.  Judge  Jackson  found  that  Singapore
    would be  punishing  the  Appellant  as  a  man  and  that  constitutes
    persecution.   To  that  end  the  judge's   reasoning   is   perfectly
    understandable and straightforward.  In a very clear and well explained
    decision she addresses fully these issues and for all the above reasons
    there is no material error of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of
    State is consequently dismissed.

31. It is appropriate to briefly refer to Article 8.  This  has  only  been
    briefly addressed by Judge Jackson at paragraph 40 where she states

         "I would also have allowed  the  appeal  under  Article  8  of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights on the basis that requiring the
         Appellant to live as a man, even for a period of two weeks  a  year
         to undertake military service would be a fundamental breach of  her
         right to private life and expression of her gender identity."

32. In fairness to Mr Clarke the arguments under Article 8 that are  raised
    are limited in the extreme.  He does little more than to seek  to  rely
    on paragraph 6 of the Grounds of Appeal.  Those grounds contending that
    the finding was inadequately reasoned and failed to have proper  regard
    to  the  previous  determination  in  which  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    dismissed the Appellant's Article 8 appeal.  For reasons given above  I
    have already indicated that there has  been  very  careful  and  proper
    consideration by Judge Jackson to the decision of Judge White.   As  Mr
    Chelvan points out in his submissions Judge Rodger in his determination
    of February 2015 finds that the decision on Article 8 was defective and
    needs to be remade and as Judge Jackson describes  her  decision  under
    Article 8 is for a claim based on breaches of Articles 8 and 10 due  to
    the discrimination that the Appellant would be forced to suffer  living
    as a man to perform military  service.   In  such  circumstances  I  am
    satisfied that  the  judge  albeit  in  a  brief  paragraph  has  fully
    addressed  this  issue  and  the  Article  8  appeal  is   consequently
    dismissed, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  disclosing  no
    material error of law.

The Wasted Costs Application

33. That leaves extant before me  the  claimant's  application  for  wasted
    costs.  On this application the Secretary of State was  represented  by
    her instructed Counsel Mr Anderson.  Both Mr Chelvan  and  Mr  Anderson
    acknowledged that as a starting  point  for  that  application  it  was
    necessary for me to determine the error of law appeal  and  only  if  I
    found there was no  material  error  of  law  could  the  wasted  costs
    application be sustained.  That of course I have found above.  In  such
    circumstances the correct approach is to firstly note the basis of  the
    application and to note that I have not taken any evidence thereon  and
    to set out directions reserving the matter  to  myself  for  a  hearing
    solely with regard to the application for wasted costs.

34. I note Mr Chelvan's contention that the basis  of  the  application  is
    that the finding I make herein was so obvious that  the  Secretary  of
    State should not have appealed the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
     I further note that both in oral submissions and in written  arguments
    reference  is  made  by  the  Appellant's  legal   representatives   to
    allegations of negligence generally in  bringing  this  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State and  of  specific  negligence  alleged  against  the
    Secretary of State's representative Miss  Savage.   It  is  appropriate
    that the extant issue is dealt with properly and that any party against
    who allegations of this nature are made is  given  the  opportunity  to
    fully respond.  However it does seem to me that that can  be  addressed
    by way of the provision of witness statements and that judicial control
    on this matter would indicate that the  correct  approach  is  to  give
    detailed directions and for  the  issue  to  be  addressed  by  way  of
    submissions.  What however is important is that the Tribunal has before
    it a full understanding of the case that is to be made  out,  including
    the financial claim that is made.   Inevitably  such  an  appeal  would
    involve two steps:-

      1) the showing of an entitlement to a wasted costs order; and

      2) in the event that a wasted cost order is made the quantification of
         that amount.

    It is clear of course that the Appellant cannot proceed to  the  second
    limb of such argument unless she succeeds on the first limb.   On  that
    basis I set out directions for the further hearing of this matter  with
    regard to the wasted cost application.

Notice of Decision

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  discloses  no  material
    error of law and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

36. Directions on the Appellant's  appeal  for  a  wasted  cost  order  are
    attached herewith.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

