
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/08757/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 July 2017 and                           |                              |
|Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent                 |On 27 April 2018              |
|On 29 November 2017                           |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     Z P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation and Interpreter:
Interpreter   On 29 November 2017 Ms Shafa Seyidili interpreted the Russian
                    and English languages
For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person assisted by Mr D
                    Forbes as a McKenzie friend
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer on
10 July 2017
                    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer on
                    29 November 2017
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because this is a protection case and there is invariably  a
    risk in cases of this kind that publicity will itself create a risk.

 2. Mr Forbes identified himself as an  employee  of  Lifeline  Options,  a
    Community Interest Company based in Vyse Street, Birmingham.  Mr Forbes
    is registered with the OISC and  is  entitled  to  provide  immigration
    advice but he has no rights of audience and was punctilious  in  acting
    solely as a McKenzie friend.  His  contribution  was  professional  and
    thoughtful and I acknowledge it with my thanks.

 3. This is an appeal by a citizen of Kazakhstan against a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State on 22 May 2015 refusing her leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a refugee and on  human  rights  grounds  relying  on
    Article 3 and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 4. No interpreter had been invited to attend on 10 July 2017 which is  one
    of the reasons the case had to be adjourned.  On 29 November 2017 I was
    assisted by Ms Shafa Seyidili who interpreted the Russian  and  English
    languages.

 5. For reasons that will be explained later it is a feature of  this  case
    that the appeal has to succeed.  Mr Mills made clear on  10  July  2017
    that the appellant has shown a human right to remain because she is the
    mother of a British citizen child who cannot be expected to  leave  the
    protection of the European Union.  It follows that her appeal  must  be
    allowed on human rights grounds.  Whether or not Mr McVeety  was  bound
    by that concession is immaterial.  He made  it  clear  that  he  wholly
    agreed with Mr Mills and confirmed that the appeal had to be allowed.

 6. The benefits available to the appellant as a person who  has  succeeded
    in an appeal on human rights grounds  are  not  hugely  different  from
    those available to her as a person who succeeds.  It follows that  even
    if I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds the appellant will be in much
    the same position as if I allow it.  In either case she would be  given
    a limited period of leave to remain in the United Kingdom  after  which
    time her case will be looked at again.

 7. Nevertheless, she insists that she is a refugee and she is entitled  to
    a lawful decision on that claim and a lawful decision on appeal.

 8. It is helpful to begin by considering the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 9. This notes that the appellant was given a multi-visit  visa  in  August
    2014 and arrived in the United Kingdom with her three  children  on  19
    November 2014.   She  claimed  asylum  on  23  December  2014  and,  as
    indicated above, the application was refused on 22 May 2015.

10. Under the heading "Findings and Conclusions"  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    explained that the appellant is "half Chechen  and  half  Russian"  and
    says that she is the victim of bride kidnapping and a forced marriage.

11. She had spent most of her life in Kazakhstan and some  time  in  Russia
    and Chechnya.

12. The judge noted evidence that bride kidnapping is  commonplace  amongst
    Chechen people who tend to operate under their customary laws and  have
    little regard to the customs of the state in which they live.

13. The Secretary of State did not  accept  the  appellant's  claim  to  be
    Chechen but  the  judge  found  in  her  favour,  noting  that  she  is
    identified in her passport as a person of Chechen origin and she  found
    the Appellant to be a credible witness.

14. At paragraph 16 of her decision the judge  accepted  that  gender-based
    violence is:

         "... endemic in Chechnya and in other parts of the North  Caucasus.
         This  can  include  honour  killings,  domestic   violence,   bride
         kidnapping and forced marriage.  I therefore accept it is practised
         culturally.  However, I note  the  objective  evidence  relates  to
         Chechnya and other parts of the North Caucasus not Kazakhstan but I
         accept the practices are likely to relate  to  Chechen  people  who
         live elsewhere".

15. The judge also accepted that there was a cultural  expectation  that  a
    woman would live under the protection of a man, firstly her father  and
    then her husband, and that in the event of the marriage failing and her
    divorcing she would be expected to revert to the control of her father.
     The judge also found that women who "find  themselves  back  in  their
    father's home" are  "likely  to  face  various  forms  of  gender-based
    violence including physical and psychological abuse, humiliation, being
    confined to the home and so on".

16. The judge accepted the  appellant's  account  of  being  kidnapped  and
    forced into marriage.  The judge also accepted that the  appellant  had
    been the subject of domestic violence.

17. However, the judge found that this was not the complete  picture.   She
    said at paragraph 21:

         "However not in keeping with the culture, the appellant explains in
         her statement that she was returned to her family home in 2011  two
         years after the birth of her third child following a  dispute  with
         her father-in-law.  However in accordance with the Chechen culture,
         her three children remained with their father.   Unusually  however
         the children were later returned to the appellant sometime in  2012
         on her estranged husband's mother's dying request.   The  appellant
         has failed to explain why her husband would be willing to  do  this
         even on the request of his mother,  given  it  is  the  father  who
         usually retains residence".

18. The judge accepted the appellant's evidence that the appellant at least
    believed that she would have to leave her home area if  there  was  any
    possibility of her finding another man who would have any  interest  in
    her when she had three children to consider.  The judge noted that  the
    appellant obtained visas for herself and her children and travelled  to
    Chechnya where she spent  a  month  before  travelling  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  The  appellant  said  that  her  relatives  thought  she  was
    returning to Kazakhstan.  This led  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant was "able to freely travel  alone  with  her  children  which
    would seem contrary to the culture".

19. The judge noted other parts of the claim  that  were  contrary  to  the
    cultural expectations.  For example, her estranged husband on more than
    occasion allowed the children to return to the  appellant.   The  judge
    found this suggested the appellant's husband was "more relaxed and does
    not adhere to Chechen customs as the appellant suggests".

20. The judge also noted  that  the  appellant  did  not  speak  a  Chechen
    language and that her father, contrary to cultural  expectations,  made
    no effort to encourage her to learn a Chechen language.

21. The judge also found the appellant was "well educated and  mature  when
    she was kidnapped" and regarded this as an unusual feature.  The  judge
    found the  appellant  "was  allowed  to  travel  and  work  in  various
    different places without male control". The Judge  further  noted  that
    the appellant "left her husband in 2011 and did not return, neither did
    she stay in her father's house as custom dictates she does".

22. It was not her case that her husband had forced her or  threatened  her
    in order to encourage her return and the judge found that the appellant
    had described a family whose members "do not strictly adhere to Chechen
    culture".

23. The judge concluded that the  appellant  was  "unlikely"  to  have  any
    problems from her husband's family in the event of her return.

24. While the judge reminded herself that she had accepted  evidence  about
    cultural based ill-treatment in  the  past,  she  found  there  was  no
    evidence that the appellant's husband would do anything  to  enforce  a
    reconciliation and noted that  between  2011  and  2014  there  was  no
    suggestion by the appellant that her husband or  her  family  had  done
    anything to force her  or  threaten  her  with  harm  if  she  did  not
    reconcile with her husband.

25. The judge concluded there would be no problem on return.

26. The judge found in paragraph  32  that  the  appellant  did  not  leave
    Kazakhstan in fear for  her  safety.   She  left  to  ensure  that  her
    estranged husband could not remove the children once again and so  that
    she would have to option of marrying again.

27. The judge also found that if there was any well-founded fear about  the
    children being taken back by her husband she could relocate  away  from
    her home area.  Additionally she found there was sufficient  protection
    in Kazakhstan.  She recognised that such procedures were not often used
    but found  they  existed  in  law  and  the  claimant  would  have  the
    confidence and education to access remedies.

28. There are five grounds of appeal.  Grounds B and C are related.  Ground
    B complains the First-tier Tribunal Judge disregarded the substance  of
    the expert report, and ground C complains that  the  judge  disregarded
    the objective evidence.  These complaints are not made out.  I  do  not
    see why the judge was not entitled to conclude that the appellant would
    be able to take advantage of the protection of the state of Kazakhstan.
     As the grounds acknowledge something like 17% of family  disputes  are
    referred to the authorities but that is not the point.   The  appellant
    is not entitled to protection against the family law of her country  of
    nationality.  The judge's point is that the evidence of  the  last  few
    years indicates that whatever may have gone on in the early  stages  of
    the relationship in which the appellant was kidnapped, the  appellant's
    husband and his family and her family have not committed themselves  to
    the usual pattern of outrage that  might  be  expected  to  follow  the
    breakdown of a marriage involving somebody from Kazakhstan.

29. The expert report is not a satisfactory document.  It is  the  work  of
    one Almut Rochowanski who has worked as a Programmes and  Advocacy  Co-
    ordinator with the US-based Chechnya Advocacy Network  since  2004  and
    since 2011 has been a Project Co-ordinator with  the  UK-based  charity
    Peacebuilding UK on  the  rights  particularly  about  girls  in  North
    Caucasus.  I have no reason to doubt the experience of the  writer  but
    she does not list her academic qualifications and does not include  the
    normal expert direction indicating she appreciates that her duty is  to
    the court and not to the person paying her.  I have no reason to  doubt
    the  opinions  expressed  are  honestly  held  or  that  she  describes
    accurately what can or might well happen, in  Chechen  society  because
    she writes from considerable experience.  However the  absence  of  the
    expert direction necessarily diminishes the weight that can be given to
    the evidence. A report  can  be  biased  without  being  dishonest  and
    without a direction I cannot know that the writer  understood  what  is
    expected from an expert witness.

30. Further, the report is not a particularly persuasive guide to what will
    happen or what might happen in this particular case.  It does not  deal
    with the points that have interested  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    particularly the lack of hostility shown to the  appellant  when  there
    was an opportunity to show it.  I do not find the expert  report,  such
    as it is, something that assists the appellant because it does not deal
    with her particular circumstances  or  answer  adequately  the  judge's
    concern that this case is different from the norm.

31. The remaining ground concerns the  contention  that  the  findings  are
    perverse.  That is not an easy thing to establish in  a  case  such  as
    this where the judge has clearly read the papers and show  respect  for
    the evidence of the appellant.

32. The criticisms are in the form of something akin to  a  Scott  Schedule
    and purport to  compare  the  judge's  findings  with  the  appellant's
    statement and Ms Rochowanski's statement.

33. The findings about the unhappiness in the marriage  are  not  important
    because the marriage has broken up and the appellant has  been  allowed
    to establish herself independently.   I  recognise  the  expert  report
    explains that the appellant has been tolerated because the  appellant's
    husband has consented to the arrangement, at least nominally, and so is
    in control.  I appreciate that the expert report explains the sense  of
    outrage that people in  the  Chechen  community  will  feel  about  the
    appellant's behaviour and the  expert  speculates  that  the  appellant
    would  be  at  risk  if  she  tried  to  establish  herself  completely
    independently in circumstances where the pretence of subjection to male
    authority could be preserved or, as she surely would if she had  to  be
    returned, with a man from outside the Chechen community.

34. However, although examples are given of very serious violence following
    in these circumstances I do not see how they can show there is  a  real
    risk in all cases  involving  similar  circumstances.   The  judge  was
    entitled to find that this appellant's family had shown more  tolerance
    than might have been expected.  It is  always  extremely  difficult  to
    make proper findings about "honour killing" because the motivation  and
    morays behind it are so completely alien to the mindset of a judge  who
    can  be  expected  to  embrace  western  democratic   liberal   values.
    Nevertheless, when all allowances are made the appellant still  has  to
    prove her case and proving that some women are treated in an  appalling
    way does not establish that there is a  real  risk  of  this  appellant
    being so treated.  Given the thin nature of the expert report  and  the
    history of tolerance, I am satisfied that the  judge  was  entitled  to
    come to the conclusion that she did.  Her findings  were  not  perverse
    and although Mr Forbes' assistance has directed me  very  carefully  to
    the important part of the expert's report from his  perspective,  I  am
    not  persuaded  there  was  any  error  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    conclusions.

35. In her oral submissions the appellant drew  attention  to  her  witness
    statement at page 18 in the bundle where she identified her  cousin  B.
    She said that he had killed someone and  she  was  frightened  of  him.
    However, the actual conduct  complained  of  has  always  been  in  the
    context of disputes over the children and  they  appear  to  have  been
    resolved because the appellant's husband's family wanted  her  to  look
    after the children.  They arranged for them to come back.  Whatever the
    general position might be, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to take
    the view that this is not a typical case and the hostility that can  be
    expected would not follow.

36. I am inclined to agree with the appellant that it is not safe to assume
    that she could not be found.  I accept  that  record  keeping  is  very
    precise and I do not accept that there can be  any  confidence  in  the
    records being kept private.  Neither do I see any basis  for  rejecting
    the appellant's evidence that Chechen people take an interest  in  each
    other and wherever she settled news of her whereabouts will  eventually
    trickle back to her husband's family.  What I cannot accept is that the
    First-tier Tribunal  was  obliged  to  accept  that  the  very  serious
    consequences that sometimes happen would be reasonably likely to happen
    here.  It is no more than a bare possibility.

37. Neither do I see any error in the conclusion that effective  protection
    is available.  State authorities might be very reluctant to act in part
    because they are not often asked to act but the expert recognises  they
    are probably the best place to go for protection and I am not persuaded
    that it is unsafe  to  conclude  that  there  would  be  no  protection
    available for this appellant.

38. However, my main point is that there  is  no  need  for  protection  or
    rather the First-tier Tribunal was allowed to reach that conclusion.

39. Where the First-tier  Tribunal  clearly  erred  was  in  requiring  the
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom with her British citizen children
    or requiring her to go  and  leave  them  behind.   That  is  just  not
    permissible and the Secretary of State does not suggest that it is.  It
    follows therefore that the appeal should have  been  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds.

40. In short, I am not persuaded there is any legal error in  the  decision
    to dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds but I allow the appeal on human
    rights grounds for the reasons given above.





Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I substitute a  decision  allowing  on
human rights grounds only the Appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of
State's decision.









|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 25 April 2018                 |
|Judge                                |                                     |







