
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08178/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport    |Decision promulgated                 |
|On: 28 May 2015                      |On: 29 May 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NKN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W Evans, Duncan Lewis & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson in which she allowed the
    appeal of NKN, a citizen of Kenya, against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse asylum. I shall  refer  to  NKN  as  the  Applicant,
    although she was the Appellant in the proceedings below.

 2. The Applicant arrived in the United Kingdom in September  2010  with  a
    visa giving leave to remain until 25 February 2011. She claimed  asylum
    in April 2012. Her application was refused on 26 September  2014.   The
    Applicant exercised her right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is the appeal which came  before  Judge  Suffield-Thompson  on  19
    January 2015 and was  allowed.  The  Secretary  of  State  applied  for
    permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  application  was
    granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray on  10  February
    2015 in the following terms

         "The grounds of application state that  the  judge  erred  when  at
         paragraph  30  of   the   determination   she   states   that   the
         representative for the respondent did not challenge the  legitimacy
         of a letter submitted by the appellant  but  at  paragraph  31  the
         judge states that the respondent asked for a  finding  to  be  made
         that the appellant's story is not credible in any way and that  the
         appellant is saying she is  gay  so  she  is  granted  asylum.  The
         grounds state that the judge erred by making contradictory findings
         as had she in her mind that the letters may have been  fabrications
         she might have come to a different conclusion about the appellant's
         sexuality.

         At paragraph 30 of the determination the judge  refers  to  finding
         letters from the appellant's friends to be genuine based  upon  the
         respondent not challenging their legitimacy but at paragraph 31 she
         states that the respondent has asked her to find that none  of  the
         appellant's evidence is credible. The judge has made  contradictory
         findings which may well have affected her final decision."

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Mills appeared to represent  the  Secretary
    of State and Mr Evans represented the Applicant. A section 24  response
    was filed by the Applicant dated 7 May 2015.

Background

 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Applicant was born in  Kenya  on  18  November
    1982. She arrived in the United Kingdom in September 2010  and  claimed
    asylum in April 2012 on the basis of her  sexuality.  In  refusing  her
    claim the Secretary of State did not accept that the  Applicant  was  a
    lesbian or, if she was, that she would be subject to persecution  on  a
    return to Kenya on account of her sexuality.

 5. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing the judge accepted  the  credibility
    of the Applicant's account (see paragraphs 29 and 31). In doing so  the
    Judge accepted  that  the  Applicant  had  told  the  truth  about  her
    sexuality. The Judge went on to find that the Applicant has  been  able
    to live peacefully in Kenya in the past by  hiding  her  sexuality  and
    that if she were not to do so she  could  face  serious  reprisals  and
    consequences from the authorities.

 6. The grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  do  not  challenge  the
    finding that the Applicant would face persecution  as  a  lesbian  only
    that the Judge erred  in  making  a  positive  credibility  finding  by
    wrongly stating that the Secretary  of  State  did  not  challenge  the
    legitimacy of the letter(s) submitted in support of her claim  when  it
    was the Secretary of States position that the Applicant's story was not
    credible in any way.



Submissions

 7. On behalf the Secretary of State Mr Mills  relied  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  He  said  that  the  Judge  accepts  the
    various letters submitted  in  support  of  the  Applicant's  claim  at
    paragraph 30 of the decision and places weight upon  those  letters  in
    making a positive credibility finding.  The  Judge  made  this  finding
    despite enormous discrepancies in the Applicant's account  and  despite
    stating that the letters were not challenged by the Secretary of  State
    ignored the fact that the Secretary of State did not accept any  aspect
    of the Applicant's account.

 8. For the Applicant Mr Evans referred to the rule 24  response.  He  said
    that the grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were  very  narrow
    suggesting that if the letters in support had been fabricated the Judge
    would have come  to  a  different  conclusion.  However  there  was  no
    allegation of fabrication and no evidence to back up such an allegation
    if it had been made. It is clear from paragraph 30 that the Judge  does
    not simply accept the provenance of the letters because  the  Secretary
    of State did not challenge their authenticity but that she made her own
    assessment of the letters.

Error of law

 9. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are, as pointed out  by  Mr
    Evans, very narrow. The only error asserted  is  that  the  Judge  made
    contradictory findings by saying that the Secretary of  State  did  not
    challenge the legitimacy of the letters in support of  the  Applicant's
    claim whilst acknowledging that the Secretary  of  State  asked  for  a
    finding to be made that her story was not credible in any way.

10. It is difficult to see how these amount to contradictory  findings.  To
    the extent that it is argued that the Judge was wrong to state that the
    letters were not challenged it is very clear in my judgement that  this
    was not material to  her  decision.  There  is  no  suggestion  in  the
    grounds, nor in the  oral  submissions  made  by  Mr  Mills,  that  the
    Secretary of State made any specific challenge to any  of  the  letters
    submitted in support of the Appellant's claim still less  that  it  had
    been submitted that the letters were  fabricated.  These  were  letters
    written by  acquaintances  of  the  Applicant  in  the  United  Kingdom
    corroborating her claimed sexuality.

11. The Secretary of State's challenge to credibility was  a  general  one.
    The decision demonstrates that the  Judge  considered  the  Applicant's
    account  carefully  before  reaching  positive   credibility   finding.
    Paragraph 26 of the decision shows that the Judge took into account the
    inconsistencies in the Applicant's account that the Secretary of  State
    asserted should be held against her  credibility.  Having  taken  these
    inconsistencies into account the Judge finds at paragraph 27

         "Although I acknowledge that there are some  discrepancies  in  her
         various accounts I find them to be minor in nature and not  matters
         that damage her overall credibility".

    At paragraph 28 the judge notes that the Applicant  delayed  in  making
    her claim for asylum but concludes

         "I find that the fact that she did not seek to regularize her  stay
         earlier does not outweigh the merits of her case in  the  balancing
         exercise I have to carry out".

    At paragraph 29 he judge concludes

         "I accept her sexuality is as she states it to be".

12. Paragraph 30 of the decision deals with the letters. Having  said  that
    the Secretary of State did not challenge the legitimacy of the  letters
    the Judge goes on to say

         "They are in different type sets and have different content  and  I
         accept these letters as genuine"

    before noting in the following paragraph that the  Secretary  of  State
    asks it to be found that the Applicant is  not  credible  in  any  way.
    There is in my judgement nothing contradictory here  and  nothing  that
    comes close to suggesting that the Judge was under any  misapprehension
    about the Secretary  of  State's  position.  To  the  contrary,  it  is
    abundantly clear that the Judge fully appreciated that the Secretary of
    State did not accept any aspect of the Applicant's account.

13. There is no material error of law identified here for the reasons given
    above only a disagreement with credibility findings that the judge  was
    properly entitled to make.

14. My conclusion from all of the above is that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains no error of law  material  to  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal. The appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is  therefore
    dismissed.

Summary

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. I dismiss the Secretary of  State's  appeal  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
