
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08614/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Employment Tribunal Birmingham       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2016                              |On 8 April 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                              mr mohammad panav
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bhanchu of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 21 September 1982.

2.   The appellant was given permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sangha, who dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds  on  29
    June 2015.

3.   It appears that  the  appellant  made  an  application  for  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student visa at the  British  Consulate  in  Istanbul  on  19
    October 2012.  His application was successful and he was granted a visa
    from 23 October 2012  to  30  May  2014.   On  20  September  2012  the
    appellant arrived at Heathrow Airport with valid  entry  clearance  and
    subsequently completed his studies at Coventry  University  in  January
    2014.  However, on 28 May  2014  he  claimed  asylum  and  subsequently
    completed a substantive asylum interview on 19 September 2014.  Further
    representations  were  received  from  the  appellant  and  a   witness
    statement dated 22 September 2014 was provided.  However, on 8  October
    2014 the respondent refused an application.  The respondent noted  that
    the appellant had claimed to have  taken  part  in  Kurdish  activities
    including distributing leaflets about Mousavi but  the  respondent  did
    not accept that the appellant had been of interest to  the  authorities
    in Iran, having safely arrived in the UK some time previously.  He  was
    not a practising Muslim, did not follow a religion and a number of  his
    claims were thought to have been incredible.  The respondent had regard
    to the objective evidence but did not accept the appellant had given an
    honest and truthful account.  It  was  noted  that  the  appellant  had
    claimed to have worked for an uncle in Ilam in 2006 to 2010, which  was
    inconsistent with his claim to have worked for an uncle for "two and  a
    half years" in his witness statement (paragraph 3).  The respondent did
    not accept that the appellant could have partaken in demonstrations  in
    Tehran whilst he was still working and residing in Ilam.  The appellant
    had claimed that his father was a "Supreme Judge" but it was noted that
    the appellant had also claimed that his father had  participated  in  a
    silent march in Tehran (question 92 in the asylum  interview).   It  is
    suggested that the appellant's father had taken part in the appellant's
    activities.  Furthermore, the appellant's account of  his  attending  a
    demonstration  was  inconsistent  with  international  news   articles.
    Overall, the respondent rejected the appellant's account and considered
    that he had not established a well-founded fear of persecution such  as
    to give support to his asylum claim.  He had not suffered serious  harm
    and he could safely return to Iran.

The Appeal Proceedings

4.   The appellant appealed to  the  IAC  at  Birmingham.   The  appellant's
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sangha  sitting  at
    Sheldon Court, Birmingham on 11  August  2015.   At  that  hearing  the
    appellant was represented by Counsel and the respondent was represented
    by a HOPO.  The Immigration Judge decided that the  appellant  had  not
    engaged  in  the  activities  he  claimed  to  have  engaged  in.   The
    Immigration Judge found the appellant's account to be  incredible.   He
    did not accept the claim that the appellant  had  distributed  leaflets
    and CDs in support of Mousavi in the three  weeks  leading  up  to  the
    elections in 2009 because the appellant had been "working and  residing
    in Ilam" at the  time.   There  was  also  a  discrepancy  between  the
    background information in relation  to  the  march,  which  showed  the
    marchers wearing black, and the appellant's  account  of  the  marchers
    having worn green accessories.  The Immigration Judge  did  not  accept
    that the appellant's answers to the questions were consistent with  the
    background material more generally, for example, it was suggested  that
    the appellant's father had only found out about his activities when  he
    had posted information  through  a  neighbour's  letter  box  but  this
    contradicted the appellant's claim that he only distributed information
    to trustworthy persons.  The Immigration  Judge  also  noted  that  the
    appellant had been able to travel on his own passport out of  Ilam  and
    had travelled via India to the  UK.   In  all  the  circumstances,  the
    Immigration Judge did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  would  be  of
    interest to the authorities or, indeed, that he was politically active.



5.   At paragraph 38 of his decision the Immigration  Judge  considered  the
    role of the appellant's uncle, Abbas Panav.  The appellant had  claimed
    that Mr Panav  was  arrested  with  a  friend  on  25  April  2014  for
    "cooperating" with the PJAK Group.  The  appellant  accepted  that  his
    uncle was not part of that group and  the  authorities  would  have  no
    reason to arrest him.  Nevertheless, he had been accused of pro-Kurdish
    activities by them.

6.   The Immigration Judge went on to find that a raid carried  out  on  the
    appellant's house occurred when the Internal Affairs' Police  had  come
    to question the appellant's father. This  was  in  2014.   There  were,
    however, according to the Immigration  Judge,  inconsistencies  in  the
    account which led him  to  reject  this  part  of  the  evidence.   The
    Immigration  Judge  also  noted  that  the  court  summons  that   had,
    allegedly, been issued for the appellant's arrest had not  resulted  in
    his arrest.  This was surprising given that some time went by after the
    issue of the warrant before the appellant left Iran.

7.   The appellant had claimed in evidence before the FtT  that  his  sister
    had been arrested and detained but the Immigration Judge had noted that
    she had not been called to  give  evidence  or  asked  to  provide  any
    written confirmation of this. The respondent did not  accept  that  the
    appellant's sister was involved in political activities.  In  order  to
    find that she was, the Immigration Judge would have to accept there was
    a summons for her arrest. Such evidence was lacking in her view.

8.   The Immigration Judge did not accept that the appellant had  ceased  to
    be a Muslim, which was an additional part of the appellant's claim.  In
    essence the appellant claimed to fear the strict Islamic authorities in
    Iran.

9.   The Immigration Judge concluded that the  appellant  would  not  be  at
    risk on return and then noted the basis on which the appellant had come
    here (education).  For the same or very similar reasons to those  given
    by the respondent the Immigration Judge  concluded  that  the  relevant
    Articles of the European Convention on Human  Rights  (ECHR)  were  not
    engaged.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

10.  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Brunnen  gave  permission  to  appeal
    because grounds 2(a)(ii) and 2(a)(iv) appeared to be at least arguable.
    He noted that the appellant had put  forward  explanations  to  address
    points made against him in the  refusal  letter.   In  Judge  Brunnen's
    view, his explanations had not been fully considered before an  adverse
    credibility finding had been made by the Immigration  Judge.   Secondly
    grounds 2(b) and (c), which alleged that the Judge erred in failing  to
    consider the criminal record document which had been  produced  at  the
    time of the appellant's asylum claim.  in  Judge  Brunnen's  view,  the
    chronology of events needed to be considered in weighing up the  asylum
    claim.

11.  A hearing was fixed and standard directions sent  out  indicating  that
    the Upper Tribunal would not consider evidence not  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

12.  The  respondent  opposed  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    indicating  that  the  FtT  had  directed  itself  appropriately.   The
    Immigration Judge had taken into account the  appellant's  own  witness
    statements.  These documents had been fully considered at  paragraph  5
    of the decision.  The appeal amounted to no more  than  a  disagreement
    with the findings of fact made by the Immigration Judge.

13.  Directions were sent  out.   The  Upper  Tribunal  would  not  consider
    evidence which had not been before the FtT unless the party seeking  to
    adduce such evidence had made the appropriate application and the Upper
    Tribunal had decided to admit such evidence.

The Hearing

14.   I  heard  submissions  by  both  representatives.   Ms  Bhanchu,   who
    represented the appellant, submitted that a number  of  inconsistencies
    identified by the Immigration Judge had in fact been addressed  by  the
    appellant in his witness statement.   The  Immigration  Judge  had  not
    fully taken this into account.  The appellant claimed that in  fact  he
    travelled to Tehran regularly and therefore the Immigration  Judge  had
    been wrong to find (at paragraph 37  of  his  decision)  there  was  an
    inconsistency between his attending  demonstrations  in  Tehran  whilst
    working and residing in Ilam.  In a nutshell, the appellant  had  fully
    explained that he regularly travelled back to Tehran for  the  purposes
    of attending such demonstrations.  This evidence had  simply  not  been
    taken into account as fully as it should have been.

15.  Secondly, Ms  Bhanchu  also  reminded  me  of  the  obligation  on  the
    Immigration Judge to give reasons for his decision,  referring  to  the
    case of MK (duty to give reasons) [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC).   She  said
    that the Immigration Judge had not fully explained his decision.  As an
    example, the appellant had explained at  paragraph  9  of  his  witness
    statement how his father (a Supreme  Judge)  was  able  to  demonstrate
    against the government on  pro-Kurdish  marches.   In  any  event,  the
    contention was that the appellant's father had simply lent  support  to
    the appellant rather than actually attended  such  demonstrations.   It
    was suggested in paragraph 37 of the determination that the appellant's
    contention that he had been targeted by the authorities was  not  borne
    out by his account because he says that he had  "never  encountered  by
    the authorities".  However, it was pointed out by Ms Bhanchu that  this
    was not the case.  It was the appellant's evidence that his  house  was
    raided and his computer was taken.  I note, however, that according  to
    paragraph 22 of his witness statement  such  a  "raid"  seems  to  have
    occurred since the appellant left Iran.

16.  Ms Bhanchu also said that her client had explained that his father  had
    not wished to ridicule the appellant's name for fear that he  would  be
    blackmailed.  This, it was submitted, was perfectly plausible.

17.  Ms Bhanchu  then  referred  to  paragraph  42  of  the  decision.   The
    Immigration Judge found that, despite the warrant being issued for  the
    appellant's arrest, his parents had not been arrested. The  Immigration
    Judge did not find that to be credible. Ms  Bhanchu  pointed  out  that
    there was a two-year gap between the issue of the warrant and the raid.
     Furthermore, I was referred to the  country  guidance  for  Iran  from
    2014.  It was submitted that in the light of that  objective  evidence,
    the Upper Tribunal ought to conclude that the appellant's evidence  was
    accurate.  Unfortunately, Ms Bhanchu was unable to produce  a  copy  of
    the objective evidence in question.

18.  Ms Bhanchu then criticised paragraph  44  of  the  decision.   In  that
    paragraph the Immigration Judge had dealt with the  evidence  that  the
    appellant had ceased to be an active Muslim but had  become  interested
    in Christianity. The Immigration Judge had criticised the appellant for
    not providing evidence  of  his  renunciation  of  Islam  but,  it  was
    suggested by Ms Bhanchu, that   the Immigration Judge had not specified
    what type of evidence he had in mind.  In any evident  it  is  not  the
    appellant's case that he "renounced the Muslim religion".  According to
    paragraph 27 of the appellant's witness statement,  dated  12  December
    2014, his religious beliefs vaguer than  they  were  portrayed  by  the
    Immigration Judge.

19.  Finally,  by  reference  to  paragraph  10  of  Ms  Bhanchu's  skeleton
    argument (where she submits that the appellant had broadcast  over  the
    internet), it was submitted that a detailed assessment of the  evidence
    was needed but that her client appeared to be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Ilam.

20.  Mr Wilding submitted  that  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant were fundamentally flawed.  The Immigration Judge  could  not
    have been more fulsome in his reasoning at paragraph 37.   The  account
    was not found to be credible.  The centre point of the attack was  that
    there have been inconsistencies between what the appellant had said  in
    his witness statements and  the  Immigration  Judge's  findings.   This
    criticism was not made out when a proper analysis of the  decision  was
    embarked on.

21.  The Immigration Judge had explained in paragraph  37  why  he  did  not
    accept that it was credible  the  appellant  could  both  be  attending
    demonstrations in Tehran and residing in Ilam.  It was the  appellant's
    evidence before the FtT that he spent three weeks in  Tehran  but  this
    was rejected by the Immigration Judge in paragraph 37.  The Judge  made
    it clear that he did not  accept  the  appellant's  account  which  was
    inconsistent with other evidence including that relating to the  colour
    of the clothing on the march.

22.  Mr Wilding turned to paragraph 38 of the decision, where the  appellant
    claimed that his uncle and friend (Ihshan) were  arrested  at  a  group
    meeting  on  25  April  2014.   This,  it  was  alleged,   was   before
    "cooperating with the PJAK  Group".   The  Immigration  Judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant's uncle had ever been arrested  and  when  he
    had been "helping families  that  were  over  seven  years  before  his
    arrest".  The Immigration Judge also pointed out that if the  appellant
    was correct in saying that he had been  distributing  "green  material"
    including music, it was  not  considered  plausible  that  the  Iranian
    authorities  would  wait  nine  years  before  taking  his   activities
    seriously.  In any event, it was the appellant's evidence that he would
    only distribute to trusted individuals.  In particular,  the  appellant
    had claimed that he only put leaflets through doors when he  knew  they
    were supporters.

23.  Mr  Wilding  also  pointed  out  that  paragraph  38  of  the  decision
    contained other important adverse findings.  It was not  clear  how  he
    had received the summons from Iran, for example.  He had  claimed  that
    it had been emailed to him.  However, no copy had been  produced.   The
    account of his family home  being  raided  was  also  rejected  by  the
    Immigration Judge.  The Immigration Judge had made a careful assessment
    of all points.

24.  Finally, Mr Wilding dealt with a point raised  by  Ms  Bhanchu  towards
    the end of her submissions.  She suggested that  her  client  had  also
    been blogging in Iran and this  was  an  additional  risk  factor.   Mr
    Wilding pointed out this had not been raised in the grounds  of  appeal
    nor had it been raised  before  the  Immigration  Judge  and  I  should
    therefore discard this comment.  He invited me to find overall that the
    decision was cogent and sustainable.

25.  Ms Bhanchu responded to say that if I found  an  error  of  law  I  was
    invited to hold a fresh hearing.  She had dealt  with  at  least  eight
    points of alleged inconsistency in the decision.  All these points were
    addressed and answered by her client and in her skeleton argument.  She
    pointed out that her reference to blogging was not a new  departure  in
    that it had been referred to in the decision  that  the  appellant  had
    used the internet.  I was invited to remit the matter back for a  fresh
    hearing as the entire case was  flawed.   I  believe  that  Ms  Bhanchu
    suggested at one point this should be to the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

26.  The appellant claims to be an Iranian Kurd from Tehran,  who  was  born
    on 21 September 1982.  His father was from Iraq.   He  claims  to  have
    raised funds for Kurds as to have been part of the green movement.  His
    father was a Supreme Judge, but.  was a  supporter  of  the  movement's
    aims?  His uncle, who employed the appellant in Ilam,  was  sympathetic
    to the movement's aims. The appellant claims to have been  a  supporter
    of Mousavi and claims that the government of Iran believed that he  was
    a supporter of an extremist group called the PJAK.   In  addition,  the
    appellant claims that he is a lapsed member of the  Islamic  faith  and
    that the authorities believe he and his uncle were  activists  for  the
    PJAK.  The appellant attended certain demonstrations in Iran in 2009 in
    support of the movement.  He claims that he distributed leaflets  about
    Mousavi as well as CDs and other items.  He encouraged people  to  vote
    for Mousavi.  The appellant was beaten and kicked  by  police  when  he
    attended demonstrations in Tehran.

27.  The appellant claims to have  travelled  to  the  UK  under  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student visa obtained from the British Consulate  General  in
    Istanbul in 2012.  Having arrived in 2012 the  appellant  remained  and
    completed his studies at Coventry University but claimed asylum at  the
    end of his period of leave.

28.  The Immigration Judge did not  believe  the  appellant's  account.   He
    noted the application was made shortly before  his  leave  was  due  to
    expire and in his view was "wholly fabricated".

29.  The issues before me are:

    (1)  Whether the Immigration Judge  fully  considered  the  appellant's
         explanations  for  any  alleged  inconsistencies  in  his   witness
         statement dated 12 December 2014 and in his other evidence?


    (2)  Linked to (1), whether the Immigration Judge had  given  full  and
         adequate reasons for his decision within the  guidance  offered  in
         the case of MK and whether he adequately identify  which  parts  of
         the case for the appellant he accepted and which parts he rejected,
         having given full reasons for his conclusions?


    (3)  Whether in the light of the appellant's past involvement with anti-
         government forces in Iran, the Immigration Judge had been justified
         in dismissing the appellant's claim?

Conclusions

30.   I  have  fully  considered  Ms  Blanchu's   arguments,   re-read   the
    respondent's detailed reasons for  refusal  and  fully  considered  the
    detailed submissions advanced by Mr Wilding in response.   Having  done
    so I conclude that the Immigration Judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusions that he reached.  As Mr Wilding  submitted,  he  fully  and
    thoroughly considered the arguments for the appellant,  in  particular,
    at paragraphs 37 et seq. of his decision.  There were subtleties in the
    appellant's explanation  contained  in  the  witness  statement  of  12
    December 2012 which were not fully explained by the  Immigration  Judge
    but  these  do  not  alter  his  fundamental  conclusions.   He   found
    sufficient inconsistencies in the appellant's account to be reject that
    account. Additionally,  the  significant  delay  by  the  appellant  in
    advancing his claim enabled the Immigration Judge to conclude  that  it
    was wholly fabricated.  These are not conclusions that any Judge  would
    come to lightly.   If  there  were  gaps  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
    reasoning these were not important  gaps  and  the  chronology  of  the
    appellant's involvement with anti-government groups, going back  as  it
    did to 2009, does not help to establish that he would now be at risk on
    return.  In any event, the Immigration  Judge  fully  considered  these
    aspects including his alleged affiliation with the  PJAK,  the  alleged
    summons and raids on his family's home and all  other  aspects  of  the
    case.  I cannot fault this determination other  than  to  observe  that
    there were aspects that the Immigration Judge could have gone  into  in
    even greater detail than he did.

31.  For these reasons I have concluded that there was no material error  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

I find there was no  material  error  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal and accordingly this appeal is  dismissed.   The  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal on all grounds advanced stands.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity order and I make no order  either.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal made no fee award and I make no fee award either.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

