
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/08467/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On September 22, 2015                |On October 5, 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                            MR AKAM REZGAR KHEDER
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Bandegani, Counsel, instructed by Law Lane Solicitors
Respondent  Mr Parkinson (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq. He arrived in the United Kingdom on
    July 18, 2007. He claimed asylum but his claim was refused on  November
    16, 2007 but he was given discretionary  leave  due  to  his  age.   On
    January 29, 2008 an application was made to remain but  the  respondent
    refused this on February 1, 2010 and on February 3, 2010 a decision  to
    remove him was made. The appellant appealed that decision under section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  his
    appeal was heard on July 26, 2010 but  dismissed  on  August  1,  2010.
    Permission  to  appeal  was  refused  on  September  7,  2010.  Further
    representations  were  made  in  January  2012  for  asylum   but   his
    application was refused by the respondent  on  February  10,  2014  and
    October 7, 2014.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision on October 21, 2014 under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  matter
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hunter on January 5,  2015
    and in a decision promulgated on February 25, 2015 the Tribunal  upheld
    the refusal and dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. The appellant was granted permission to appeal  on  June  11,  2015  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Frances. The matter came before on August 3,  2015
    and at that hearing I found there had been an error in law  because  in
    its examination of internal relocation the Tribunal did not have regard
    to the reasonableness of relocation instead concentrating on  the  risk
    facing the appellant on relocation. I adjourned the hearing  to  enable
    both parties to submit additional evidence and  I  indicated  that  the
    hearing would be confined to oral submissions only.

 4. At the resumed hearing both parties referred me to the  recent  Country
    Information  and  Guidance  Iraq  report:  Humanitarian  situation   in
    Baghdad, the south (including Babil) and the Kurdistan Region  of  Iraq
    July 2015.

 5. In considering the parties' submissions, I have taken  as  my  starting
    point the following findings of fact:

          a. The original findings made by Immigration Judge  Thew  in  his
             decision promulgated on August 3, 2010 in  which  he  rejected
             the appellant's claim about a relationship  with  a  girl  and
             concluded his asylum claim was fabricated.

          b. He found the appellant's claim that his uncle had obtained his
             UK telephone to  lack  credibility  or  that  there  were  any
             threats made by the girl's father.

          c. He found the appellant's explanation for giving up his  Muslim
             religion to lack credibility and that his claim was an attempt
             to bolster his asylum claim.

          d. There was no imminent danger of Baghdad falling into IS hands.



 6. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  direction  and  pursuant  to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I  extend
    that order.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Tarlow relied on the most recent refusal  letter  dated  October  7,
    2010 and he also submitted that following the rejection of his  factual
    appeal the only remaining issue  was  whether  it  was  both  safe  and
    reasonable for him to be returned. He submitted there  was  nothing  in
    any of the material submitted to the First-tier Tribunal or today  that
    meant he could not be returned.  Case  law  established  there  was  no
    article 15(c) threat or article 3 claim if he were returned to  Baghdad
    and there were  facilities  he  could  avail  himself  of  if  he  were
    returned. Whilst there were areas, including his own  area  of  Kirkuk,
    that  had  been  overrun  by  the  IS  forces  the   country   evidence
    demonstrated that returning him to Baghdad was  practical  and  it  was
    neither unduly harsh or unreasonable. He  invited  me  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's claim.

 8. Mr Bandegani reminded me that the appellant had a number of factors  in
    his favour that meant it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  him  to
    relocate within Iraq.  The  appellant  was  a  Sunni  Muslim,  non-Arab
    speaker, undocumented, with no family or support in Baghdad and who had
    been absent from Iraq for eight years. It  was  both  unreasonable  and
    unduly harsh to expect him  to  return  to  Baghdad-a  Shia  city  that
    continued to experience sectarian violence. Whilst  case  law  and  the
    Country reports suggested that he could  be  returned  to  the  country
    where the UNHCR could help with his documents it  was  clear  from  the
    July 2015 report that Iraq was suffering from  a  humanitarian  crisis.
    The country evidence painted the situation as dire and he  referred  me
    to paragraphs 2.4.2, 2.4.3, 7.1.1-7.1.3 and  7.1.8  of  the  July  2015
    report as evidence. There was evidence in the appellant's bundle (pages
    30-31) of attacks on Sunni Muslims by Shia Muslims and whilst the level
    of violence did not reach article 15(c) levels or  article  3  ECHR  he
    would be extremely vulnerable, if returned, as a displaced  person.  It
    was unreasonable to expect him to return to Baghdad and to live in dire
    circumstances whilst he tried to secure  employment  and  documents  to
    enable him to fly to the KRI area. His appeal should be allowed.

 9. I reserved my decision.

    DISCUSSION AND REASONS ON ERROR IN LAW

10. The appellant  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  July  2007  and  two
    applications for asylum had been rejected. When this matter came before
    me on August 3, 2015 I  found  an  error  in  law  but  made  it  clear
    following that hearing that the only issues that concerned be for today
    was whether it was both reasonable and safe for  the  appellant  to  be
    returned to Baghdad. His asylum claim had been rejected by  two  Judges
    and I have heard nothing today that would alter that situation  save  I
    accept that he would be at risk if he asked to return to Kirkuk-a  city
    that he had been living in.

11. The reason he would be at risk is not because of the account he has put
    forward but quite simply because IS forces presently control Kirkuk and
    he would face a real risk of persecution if he were returned there.

12. The issue is whether it would be reasonable and safe to expect  him  to
    relocate.

13. General principles under the Immigration Rules/Qualification Directive.
     Paragraph  339O  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  is  intended  to
    incorporate the Directive, states:

           (i) The Secretary of State will not make:

           (a) a grant of asylum if in part of  the  country  of  origin  a
           person would not have a well founded fear of  being  persecuted,
           and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in  that  part
           of the country; or

           (b) a grant of humanitarian protection if in part of the country
           of return a person would not  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
           serious harm, and the person can reasonably be expected to  stay
           in that part of the country.

           (ii) In examining whether a part of the  country  of  origin  or
           country of return meets the requirements in (i) the Secretary of
           State, when making his decision on whether to  grant  asylum  or
           humanitarian  protection,  will  have  regard  to  the   general
           circumstances prevailing in that part of the country and to  the
           personal circumstances of the person.

           (iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to  return
           to the country of origin or country of return.

14. In SSHD v AH (Sudan) and Others [2007]  UKHL  49  the  House  of  Lords
    pointed out that the test to determine whether internal relocation  was
    available was the test set out in Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL  5,  namely
    that the decision maker should decide whether, taking  account  of  all
    relevant circumstances pertaining  to  the  claimant  and  his  or  her
    country it would be reasonable to expect the claimant  to  relocate  or
    whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him or her to  do  so.   The
    test was one of great generality.  In applying the test enquiry had  to
    be directed to the situation of the particular  claimant;  very  little
    was excluded from consideration  other  than  the  standard  of  rights
    protection which a claimant would enjoy in the country where refuge was
    sought.  Baroness Hale said that all the circumstances of the case  had
    to be  assessed  holistically,  with  specific  reference  to  personal
    circumstances including past persecution or fear thereof, psychological
    or health  conditions,  family  and  social  situations,  and  survival
    capacities,  in  the  context  of  the  conditions  in  the  place   of
    relocation, including basic human rights, security and  socio  economic
    conditions, and access to health care facilities: all with  a  view  to
    determining the impact on the claimant  of  settling  in  the  proposed
    place of relocation and whether the claimant could  live  a  relatively
    normal life without undue hardship.  The House of Lords  said  that  it
    was not a correct  application  of  the  test  to  only  focus  on  the
    comparison between conditions in a claimant's home country as  a  whole
    and those prevailing in the proposed area of relocation.   Nor  was  it
    correct to only compare conditions in the place of  habitual  residence
    from which a claimant had fled and those in the safe haven. It  was  an
    incorrect formulation of the test  to  equate  unreasonable  or  unduly
    harsh conditions in the place of intended relocation with a  real  risk
    of inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment within the  meaning  of
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

15. Mr Bandegani has quite properly highlighted the factors I  should  have
    regard to  and  both  representatives  agreed  that  in  assessing  the
    appellant's case I had to  have  regard  to  the  appellant's  personal
    circumstances as well as the country evidence.

16. Nothing presented by Mr Bandegani persuades  me  that  the  appellant's
    case would be any different  to  a  similar  aged  Sunni  Muslim  being
    returned to Baghdad in similar  circumstances.  His  asylum  claim,  as
    presented, has been  rejected  by  two  Judges  and  I  must  therefore
    consider his claim against that background.

17. The appellant's representatives were given an opportunity to update the
    country evidence but save for the July 2015 nothing additional has been
    submitted.

18. The evidence in the First-tier bundle dates back  to  a  period  before
    December 2014. Mr Bandegani referred me to an article in the bundle  on
    pages 30/31albeit this article dates back to November 2014. Pages 38 to
    89 contain material on the risks  in  Baghdad.  Whilst  these  articles
    identify problems in Baghdad I remind myself that the  Tribunal  in  HM
    and Others (Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT  409  confirms  that  the
    level of violence does not invoke article 15(c) or article 3 ECHR.

19. On page 44 of the bundle there is  an  article  about  an  incident  in
    October 2014 when ISIS forces killed 30  men  in  western  Iraq  albeit
    these incidents did not specifically involve attacks on  Sunni  Muslims
    or occur in Baghdad itself. The  concerns  over  the  advance  of  ISIS
    forces is reflected in the bundle but the  articles  are  now  over  12
    months old and the position  remains  that  ISIS  forces  are  not  the
    predominant force in Baghdad itself.

20. It is clear from the various reports that Baghdad is divided into Sunni
    and Shia neighbourhoods and there are articles on pages 52- 65  of  the
    appellant's bundle (June  to  October  2014)  describing  Shia  militia
    attacks on Sunni civilians partly in revenge for ISIS  attacks  carried
    out on the Shia militia.

21. The Country Information and Guidance Iraq Report April  2015:  Security
    situation in Baghdad, southern governorates and the Kurdistan Region of
    Iraq (KRI) updated the position facing people in Baghdad.  This  report
    confirms Baghdad is 80% Shia but although  there  are  clearly  ongoing
    problems between the Shia and Sunni groups the level  of  violence  has
    not reached a level that would engage either article 15(c) or article 3
    ECHR.

22. The Country Information and Guidance Report for Iraq dated 24  December
    2014 provided further evidence that updated the Tribunal decision of HM
    and confirms that it is not unreasonable to expect a Sunni Muslim  with
    no notable risk factors to return to Baghdad-

           Paragraph  1.3.63-"However  since  these   determinations   were
           promulgated, Iraq has experienced significant civil  unrest  and
           displacement, following widespread territorial  losses  to  non-
           state armed groups, notably ISIL. To consider the reasonableness
           of internal relocation, decision makers must refer to the latest
           country facts and guidance.  Decision  makers  are  reminded  to
           refer to the very  latest  country  information  available.  See
           Annex O: Sources of Country of Origin Information (COI)"

           Paragraph 1.3.66-"In particular reports have shown that  Baghdad
           has become less ethnically and religiously diverse,  with  fewer
           'mixed sect' or Sunni areas. This may  explain  why  in  Baghdad
           IDPs are concerned that the hospitality of  the  host  community
           will not  last  long,  raising  doubts  as  to  whether  Baghdad
           presents a durable option for relocation."

           Paragraph 1.3.67-"Nonetheless Baghdad has for  decades  been  an
           attractive destination for those seeking refuge because  of  its
           close proximity to conflict areas, the  lower  costs  of  living
           compared to KRI, and because it has sizeable Shia and Sunni  IDP
           populations. At the end of October 2014 there were 127,446  IDPs
           residing in Baghdad. According to IOM a significant majority  of
           IDPs in Baghdad were Arab Sunnis."

           Para 1.3.75-"Sectarian factors should be considered by  decision
           makers when assessing relocation to Baghdad  and  to  the  south
           however in general Arab Sunnis; Kurds and Shias will be able  to
           relocate to Baghdad, where it is noted there is a  sizable  Arab
           Sunni IDP population."

           Paragraph 1.3.7-"There is no evidence to  demonstrate  returnees
           would be unable to travel through  checkpoints  following  their
           arrival into ... Baghdad International  Airport.  Returnees  may
           also be able to reacquire documents from family  or  friends  on
           arrival."

23. The importance of the December 2014 report cannot be overlooked because
    it reports on the position as at the  last  hearing.  In  other  words,
    despite the problems facing Sunni Muslims they are able to relocate  to
    Baghdad. Mr Bandegani referred me to the fact he would be  a  displaced
    Sunni Muslim with no family but these arguments were  rejected  in  the
    December 2014. Based on the evidence available at the original  hearing
    I am satisfied it would have been both reasonable and  practicable  for
    the appellant to be returned to Baghdad.

24. The issue is for me is whether circumstances have worsened to  such  an
    extent that the position has changed so that it  would  be  unpractical
    and unduly harsh for the appellant to be returned to Baghdad.

25. There is nothing in  the  April  2015  report  that  alters  the  above
    position but Mr Bandegani invited me to find that the July 2015  report
    demonstrated the position was now worse for this appellant.

26. At paragraph 2.4.1 the report states-

           "Iraq continues to have a  functioning  economy  despite  having
           been in an ongoing state of civil instability since  2003.  This
           instability has impacted on the standard  of  living  generally.
           Unemployment is at 11 per cent and economic growth  over  recent
           years has been significantly compromised  by  the  latest  civil
           unrest over 2014 and into 2015. The International Monetary  Fund
           projects growth at 1.3 per cent for  2015,  although  indicative
           figures suggest this will grow in future years.  Gross  Domestic
           Product for 2013 was US$229.3bn, with a  Gross  National  Income
           (GNI) per capita of US$6,720 in 2013, leading the World Bank  to
           categorise Iraq's income level as  'upper  middle  income'.  The
           majority of jobs in the country are provided by  the  state,  45
           per cent in urban areas and 28 per cent in rural  parts  of  the
           country. The ISIL insurgency has not halted the expansion of the
           oil sector with  exports  expected  to  rise  from  2.5  million
           barrels per day (mbpd) in 2014 to 3.1 mbpd in 2015."

27. At paragraph 2.4.2 the report recognised the humanitarian situation had
    deteriorated with Iraq being categorised as a level  3  emergency  with
    over 400,000 civilians displaced to Baghdad with the conditions  facing
    IDPs  varying  considerably  depending  on  the  social  and   economic
    connections of the persons displaced. The report  makes  clear  that  a
    there should be a consideration of the person's ability  to  cater  for
    his or her most basic needs, such as food,  hygiene  and  shelter,  his
    vulnerability to ill- treatment  and  the  prospect  of  his  situation
    improving within a reasonable time-frame and whether he  or  she  would
    become an IDP.

28. This appellant would be an IDP because he comes from a  contested  area
    and therefore unable to return to his home owing to a well-founded fear
    of persecution of the general security situation.

29. However, the report concludes at paragraph 2.1.1 (found after paragraph
    2.4.6) by stating-

           "Though the humanitarian situation has deteriorated across Iraq,
           in general the situation is not so severe in  the  non-contested
           areas  as  to  make  a  removal   to   Baghdad,   the   southern
           governorates, or the KRI a breach of Article 3."

30. The appellant  has  family,  albeit  living  in  contested  areas,  and
    according to his own evidence he remains in contact with his family  so
    recourse to some  financial  assistance  is  reasonably  likely  to  be
    available for this appellant.

31. The appellant is undocumented  and  the  July  2015  report  states  at
    paragraph 2.4.9-

           "Decision makers must also take into account  whether  a  person
           can regularise their documents, particularly for  those  persons
           not from Baghdad, the southern governorates  or  the  KRI.  This
           will be significant both for employment and in order to allow  a
           person to relocate and reside  in  a  new  place  of  residence,
           including with relatives/family."

32. In MK (documents-relocation) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 126 (IAC) the Tribunal
    stated-

        1) the lack of documentation relating to identity in  the  form  of
           the Civil Status ID (CSID), Iraqi Nationality Certificate  (INC)
           and Public Distribution System (PDS) card (food ration card)  is
           not ordinarily an insuperable problem, it is not a factor likely
           to make return to any part of Iraq unsafe or unreasonable.

        2) Although the general position is that a  person  who  wishes  to
           replace a lost CSID is required to return to their home area  in
           order to do so, there are procedures which make it possible  (i)
           for Iraqis abroad to secure the issue of  a  new  CSID  to  them
           through the offices of the local Iraqi Embassy; (ii) for  Iraqis
           returned  to  Iraq  without  a  CSID  to  obtain   one   without
           necessarily having to travel to their home area. Such procedures
           permit family members to obtain such  documentation  from  their
           home areas on an applicant's behalf or allow for a person to  be
           given a power of attorney to obtain  the  same.  Those  who  are
           unable immediately to establish their  identity  can  ordinarily
           obtain documentation by being presented before a judge from  the
           Civil Status Court, so as to facilitate return to their place of
           origin.

33. The absence of documents will not necessarily lead to the  granting  of
    asylum or any other relief because there are procedures in  place  that
    enable persons with no documents to either obtain them before they  are
    returned or alternatively to obtain them from family members  who  live
    in the KRI. There is no evidence that the ongoing fighting will prevent
    the appellant obtaining the required evidence to enable him  to  return
    to the KRI.

34. Mr Bandegani accepted the circumstances did  not  breach  the  relevant
    threshold for either article 15(c) or article 2 or 3 ECHR.

35. Accordingly, having considered all of the written evidence and the oral
    submissions I am  satisfied  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    claimant to relocate to Baghdad and it would not  be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect him to do so.

    DECISION

36. There was a material error and I set aside the earlier  decisions  save
    the decision under article 8 ECHR which was unchallenged.

37. I have remade the decisions and  dismiss  the  appellant's  claims  for
    asylum, humanitarian protection and under articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

38. I uphold the Tribunal's decision in respect of article 8 ECHR.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
