
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08756/2015
     AA/08758/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 July 2017                               |On 17 August 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NS
                                     VP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Miss S Anzani, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 22 February  2017
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gaskell.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim.

 3. I refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent and to NS and VP, a
    couple from Sri Lanka, as the appellants,  reflecting  their  positions
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The second appellant's claim is wholly
    dependent on the first appellant's claim so I can refer only  to  there
    being one appellant for the purposes of this decision.

Background

 4.  The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gaskell  allowed   the
    protection claim of the appellant.  The basis of that claim was that he
    had been involved in shipping in Sri Lanka working as a bosun for  many
    years.  The last  ship  that  he  worked  on  unbeknownst  to  him  had
    connections to the LTTE.  When he returned to Sri Lanka on 23 June 2006
    after having served on the ship he was arrested.  He was detained until
    1 October 2006 and  seriously  mistreated  during  that  detention.   A
    friend, J, paid a bribe to the contact within the Sri Lankan  Terrorist
    Investigation Division (TID) to obtain the appellant's release.  On his
    release, the appellant was told that he had to report every Sunday.

 5. On return home the appellant  suffered  hostility  from  neighbours  as
    someone believed to be involved with  the  LTTE.   Also,  TID  officers
    continued to go to the appellant's home and made threats. The appellant
    and his wife moved to live with J as a result.  He continued to report.
     Although the visits from the TID ceased after he moved to stay with J,
    the appellant remained concerned.  He decided to leave Sri Lanka, doing
    so in April 2007.  The couple came to the UK having  obtained  a  visit
    visa. Their son was already living here. They  overstayed  their  visas
    but were encountered by Immigration Services on 3 December  2014.  They
    claimed asylum on 12 January  2015.   The  claim  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on 29 May 2015.

 6. In addition to the matter set out above, the appellant maintained  that
    after he had come to the UK, the authorities had realised that  he  had
    gone to live with J and had gone there looking for him as he had failed
    to report to the police station as required.  J became concerned at the
    level of interest and  consulted  a  Sri  Lankan  lawyer  to  establish
    whether an arrest warrant had been issued. The lawyer,  Mr  Rathnayake,
    went to the relevant Magistrates' Court and looked at a  file  for  the
    appellant which included an arrest warrant.  Mr Rathnayake  provided  a
    letter confirming that he had been instructed by J and  confirmed  that
    the documents that were enclosed had  come  from  the  court  file.  He
    provided details of his membership of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka.
     The appellant's solicitor also instructed another Sri  Lankan  lawyer,
    Mr Liyanage, to consult  the  court  file  and  he  provided  a  letter
    indicated that he had visited the court and seen the documents relating
    to the appellant.

 7.  Shortly  before  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   the
    respondent provided a  document  verification  report  (DVR)  dated  19
    August 2016.  It shows that an enquiry  was  made  with  the  Terrorist
    Investigation Division (TID) director by fax using the reference number
    on the court documents and arrest warrant relied on by  the  appellant.
    The DVR indicates that the response from the TID that a court case with
    the reference number provided had not been filed  by  the  TID  and  no
    arrest warrant with the reference number provided had been obtained  by
    the TID.

 8. The appellant's solicitors responded to the DVR in a  letter  dated  18
    November 2016.  The solicitors objected to the matter being referred to
    the director of the TID instead of to the issuing court.  They maintain
    that the TID would not  have  authority  to  reveal  details  of  court
    documents to a third party.  They understood that the correct procedure
    was for a lawyer to  be  instructed  to  inspect  the  court  file  and
    enclosed an authority in order for the respondent to instruct a  lawyer
    to do so.  The solicitors also maintained that it was na�ve  to  expect
    the TID to acknowledge that they had requested an arrest warrant  given
    their history of denying arrests and mistreatment.  The solicitors also
    maintain that the appellant's identity had been revealed to the TID and
    in those circumstances an additional risk to him  on  return  had  been
    identified which would certainly lead to mistreatment on return.

    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. Judge Gaskell dealt with this matter as follows in paragraphs 32 to  37
    of the decision:

         "32. In my judgement, this appeal can essentially  be  disposed  of
             upon  consideration  of  the  certified  copy  of  the  arrest
             warrant.  If the arrest warrant produced by the  appellant  is
             not  a  genuine  document,  then  I  accept  the  respondent's
             submission that its  use  would  severely  undermine  the  1st
             appellant's credibility.  In my judgement, it  would  then  be
             impossible to conclude that he had told the  truth  about  his
             arrest and detention; or his reasons for  leaving  Sri  Lanka.
             This would lead to a conclusion that he was of no interest  to
             the Sri Lankan authorities; and that it was safe  for  him  to
             return.  On the other hand, if I find that the arrest  warrant
             is a genuine document, then, in my judgement, applying  GJ,  I
             must conclude that the 1st  appellant  is  at  risk  upon  his
             return.  Further, the likely treatment he would receive during
             any period of further detention (after having absconded) would
             be  such  as  to  entitle  him  to  asylum  and   humanitarian
             protection.  I will therefore consider  the  question  of  the
             arrest warrant first.

         33.  I must consider whether the DVR is a report upon which  I  can
             rely.  I am concerned that the only enquiries made  on  behalf
             of the respondent were directed to the TID: that is  the  very
             organisation which the appellant claims to be afraid of; there
             is ample evidence in GJ and elsewhere that TID is  the  branch
             of the Sri Lankan  government  is  most  involved  with  human
             rights abuses.  If it is  the  case  that  TID  has  issued  a
             warrant for the appellant's arrest,  that  organisation  would
             fully understand the implications of an enquiry  made  by  the
             British High Commission; the organisation would know  that  if
             the existence of an arrest warrant was confirmed it would make
             it  less  likely  that  the  subject  of  the  warrant   would
             ultimately be returned to Sri  Lanka;  thus  TID's  intentions
             would be frustrated.  There is therefore no incentive for  TID
             to provide an accurate response  to  such  enquiries.   In  my
             judgement, it would have been sensible for the  respondent  to
             make enquiries of the court; or to instruct independent agents
             or staff from the High  Commission  to  visit  the  court  and
             establish for themselves whether the documents exist.

         34.   I  have  available  written  evidence  from  two  Sri  Lankan
             attorneys: the professional integrity and credibility of those
             individuals  has  not  been  questioned;  I  allow   for   the
             possibility that somehow J may have  deceived  Mr  Rathnayake;
             but J was not involved at all in the evidence obtained from Mr
             Liyanage.

         35.  In the circumstances, on the  balance  of  probabilities,  let
             alone on the application of the lower standard of proof, I  am
             satisfied that there is an arrest warrant  pertaining  to  the
             1st appellant.  Accordingly it is highly likely that his  name
             will appear on a 'stop-list' and that upon return to Sri Lanka
             he  will  be  arrested  and  detained  at  least  for  further
             interrogation.

         36.  In my judgement, if the 1st appellant was  to  return  to  Sri
             Lanka he faces further detention and torture.  I have no doubt
             that he is entitled to asylum and to humanitarian  protection.
             To return him to Sri Lanka would also be a breach of Section 6
             of the Human Rights Act 1998 - it  would  violate  his  rights
             under Article 2 and Article 3 ECHR.

         37.  For the sake of completeness I have given consideration to the
             other aspects of the appellant's account; I note the suggested
             inconsistencies identified by  the  respondent  (Paragraph  27
             above); I also take account of the  provisions  of  Section  8
             (Paragraph  28  above);  but  I  have  had  the  advantage  of
             listening to the 1st appellant given  evidence;  I  questioned
             him myself; and I found  him  to  be  a  wholly  credible  and
             truthful witness.  In my judgement, the fact of  his  previous
             arrest  and  detention;  and  his  well-founded  fear   of   a
             repetition; would entitle him to asylum even if there were  no
             arrest warrant."

Submissions on Error of Law

10. The respondent challenged the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gaskell on the following bases:

 a) The First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  its  approach  to  the  arrest
    warrant. The document was considered in isolation from the evidence  as
    a whole, the statement at [32] that the appeal really  turned  only  on
    the arrest warrant was not correct  where  the  respondent  had  raised
    other potentially material concerns about other aspects of the case.

 b) The reasoning was inadequate. The First-tier Tribunal had not indicated
    why the respondent's concerns about, for  example,  the  appellant  not
    claiming asylum for 7 years after coming to the UK and only after being
    arrested was not found to carry weight, paragraph [37], in  particular,
    containing inadequate reasoning for  finding  the  appellant  to  be  a
    "wholly credible and truthful witness".

11. At the hearing before me, Ms  Anzani  maintained  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was correct to find that the existence of  an  arrest  warrant
    requested by TID was sufficient to show a risk on return, referring  to
    the Country Guidance case of GJ and Others (post-civil war:  returnees)
    [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  at  paragraph  7(d)  of  the  head  note  in
    particular:

         "(7) The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised 'stop' list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a 'stop'  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant."

12. Ms Anzani also indicated that where the arrest warrant was requested by
    TID, even if  it  only  referred  to  bail  matters,  that  had  to  be
    sufficient to show a risk on return.

13. With regard to the respondent's second ground Ms Anzani submitted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  at  [33]  gave  sufficient  reasons  for
    rejecting the DVR.  She also maintained that at [37] the judge had done
    enough by way of reasoning as to the  appellant's  overall  credibility
    and the other points made against him by the respondent  including  the
    point regarding a long delay in claiming.  Miss Anzani relied  in  this
    regard on paragraphs [31] and [36] of the case of  JK  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 831:

         "31. These were findings of fact based on the appellant's  evidence
             which Judge Oliver found  to  be  plausible.   The  degree  of
             reasoning required to support a finding of fact must depend on
             the circumstances.   If  a  judge  disbelieves  a  witness  in
             evidence, he must obviously state why he disbelieves  it.   If
             he believes a witness's evidence, there may be not  much  more
             that the judge can say than to refer in summary  to  the  main
             points advanced to the contrary, together with  the  witness's
             response to  them,  in  order  to  show  that  the  judge  has
             considered them, and to express his conclusion that  he  finds
             the witness to be credible.

         ...




         36.  Rejecting, as I would, the broad submission that  it  was  the
             duty of the judge  to  pursue  and  address  individually  the
             particular  points  which  the  presenting  officer  had   not
             pursued, I ask whether on the particular facts  of  this  case
             the points identified by Judge Mather  were  of  such  obvious
             significance that the judge's failure to address them  amounts
             to a failure to give adequate reasons to support his  decision
             accepting the credibility  of  the  appellant.   I  would  not
             accept that submission on the facts of this case. Whether  the
             point made by the Secretary  of  State  by  reference  to  the
             particular  extracts  which  he  took  from  the   appellant's
             original interview was  a  particularly  strong  point  was  a
             matter of judgment."

14. I was also referred to the following paragraph from Tarlochan  Singh  v
    SSHD [1999] EWCA Civ 1773:

         "I have to say with respect that it might - and I say only might  -
         be a criticism of the way in which the Special Adjudicator set  out
         parts of his determination that it did not go into the attack on Mr
         Singh's evidence and credibility  as  fully  as  some  Adjudicators
         might have done.  That however is a far cry from  saying  that  for
         that reason, or for any other, his determination can be said to  be
         perverse.   The  Special  Adjudicator  was  quite  clear  that   an
         important part  of  his  analysis  depended  on  his  view  of  the
         applicant as a witness and he made that clear in two passages  that
         I have already read.

         The approach of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, I have to say with
         respect,  to  some  extent  presents  the  matter  in  a  way  that
         undermines and  gives  insufficient  weight  to  the  Adjudicator's
         assessment of Mr Singh as a witness.  To complain that no  reasoned
         basis was given for preferring Mr Singh's evidence on those  points
         really misses the point.  The Adjudicator was entitled to say  that
         he accepted Mr Singh's evidence because, looking at the case  as  a
         whole, he found it credible.  So far as reasoning is concerned,  it
         is  difficult  to  see  how  much  further  he  could  have   gone.
         Certainly, in my judgment,  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  was
         wrong to say, for the reasons they gave, that  the  conclusion  was
         against the weight of the evidence  or  was  perverse.   They  were
         wrong to criticise or differ from the Adjudicator on that ground."

Findings

15. It is my conclusion that the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gaskell does contain an error of law such that it must be set aside  to
    be remade.

16. Certainly, the arrest warrant was an important  document  and  one,  if
    found to be reliable,  after  consideration  in  the  round,  following
    Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439*, capable of showing a risk on return.
    The First-tier Tribunal judge here referred to Tanveer Ahmed* at  [12]-
    [13] but the reasoning at [32]-[37] of the decision does not apply  the
    correct approach to the arrest warrant. The reasoning in [33] that  the
    DVR was not reliable is not objectionable. The decision then goes on to
    find that the supporting evidence of the two  Sri  Lankan  lawyers  was
    sufficient for the arrest warrant to be found to be reliable.  That  is
    also uncontroversial in so far as it goes but the assessment then  ends
    and no consideration is given to the wider evidence, specifically other
    credibility issues raised by the respondent.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    was clearly aware of some of those issues as they are set out at  [27]-
    [28]. Consideration is not given to them until [37], however, after the
    conclusion in [35] on the arrest warrant.

17. Even if it were to be accepted that  the  consideration  in  [37]  took
    place as part of the assessment of the  arrest  warrant  and  before  a
    conclusion on that document was reached, the reasoning at [37]  is  not
    adequate. A judge does not have to address and give  reasons  on  every
    aspect of a case, as indicated in the case law set  out  above,  relied
    upon by the appellant. There is a requirement for  points  of  "obvious
    significance" to be addressed, however. This decision at [37] does  not
    indicate what reasons were found for not placing weight on the  7  year
    delay  in  claiming  asylum,  for  example,  a   matter   of   "obvious
    significance" in my judgment. There is also nothing indicating what the
    appellant's response to the points made against him was  and  why  this
    led to the First-tier Tribunal finding him credible; see [31] of  JK  v
    SSHD.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore in  error  in  the
    approach to the assessment  of  the  arrest  warrant  and  adequacy  of
    reasoning and must be set aside to be re-made de novo. The parties were
    in agreement that  the  case  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as the credibility findings must be re-made entirely.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.

The appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal before  a  judge  other
than Judge Gaskell.  The appeal will be heard at Taylor House.



Signed   [pic]                               Date:  16 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
