
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08305/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th February 2016                          |On 11th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     hkm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Moffatt Counsel instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Cameroon born  on  15th  September
    1980.  The Appellant arrived in the UK on 24th March  2013  with  entry
    clearance and was given leave to enter until  19th  August  2013.   The
    Appellant applied for asylum on 10th July 2013.  That  application  was
    refused for the reasons  given  in  the  Respondent's  letter  of  30th
    September 2014.  The Appellant appealed, and her appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge N Bennett (the Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross
    on 19th June 2015.  He dismissed the appeal for the  reasons  given  in
    his Decision dated 17th July  2015.   The  Appellant  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision, and on 22nd  October  2015  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  It was the  Appellant's
    case that she was at risk on return  to  Cameroon  because  she  was  a
    lesbian.  She had attended a meeting of a woman's group at  the  Hilton
    Hotel in Yaounde in April 2013.  Following this meeting, the  Appellant
    had commenced a relationship with a woman known as Cathy.  In  December
    2013 Cathy had been involved in an altercation with local people  which
    had been reported to the police.  On 10th January  2013  the  Appellant
    had received a summons to attend a police station after which  she  had
    been detained for  three  days  and  questioned  about  her  sexuality.
    During her detention, she had been  beaten  by  the  police  and  other
    inmates and raped.  After her release, she had been attacked  again  on
    4th February 2013 and knocked unconscious.  As a  consequence  she  had
    spent three  days  in  hospital.   Two  days  after  her  release,  the
    Appellant had received a second summons to  attend  a  police  station.
    Instead of going, she had fled the country.

 3. She had suffered from Post Traumatic Stress  Disorder  (PTSD)  and  was
    suicidal about the thought of returning to Cameroon.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal because he did not find credible much of
    the Appellant's account.  He noted that homosexuality was  contrary  to
    the Cameroon Penal Code, and he  considered  a  medical  report  of  Dr
    Cohen.  He accepted that the Appellant had at some time been beaten  or
    whipped, raped, and burnt with cigarettes,  but  he  found  that  these
    injuries and the Appellant's PTSD may have been caused by  means  other
    than those claimed  by  the  Appellant,  and  found  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant was a lesbian who was at risk  on  return.
    He further found that the  Appellant  would  not  be  deprived  of  any
    appropriate medication during the removal process  and  therefore  that
    there was not any real risk of her committing suicide.  In reaching his
    conclusion as to the credibility of the Appellant, the Judge identified
    a number of inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence which  he  also
    found to be implausible in places.  He took into account the fact  that
    the Appellant had delayed in applying for asylum in the UK.

 5. At the hearing, Ms Moffatt referred to the grounds of  application  and
    her Skeleton Argument and argued that the Judge had erred in law in his
    findings.  The Judge had failed to engage with the detailed analysis of
    the Appellant's injuries and medical condition given by Dr Cohen in his
    report.  Dr  Cohen  had  expressed  an  opinion  that  the  Appellant's
    injuries could not have been caused in any way other than that given by
    the Appellant.  Further, when deciding the issue  of  credibility,  the
    Judge had not considered the effect of PTSD on the Appellant's  memory.
    The Judge had resorted to speculation when deciding that  some  of  the
    Appellant's account was implausible.

 6. Ms Moffatt then argued that the Judge  had  further  erred  in  law  by
    failing to take account of the medical evidence from Dr  Orlin  Michev,
    and the fact that the Appellant was receiving therapy from Freedom from
    Torture and Islington Mind.

 7. In response, Mr Clarke referred to his Rule 24 response and argued that
    there had been no such error of law.  The Judge had given a  number  of
    reasons for his finding as to credibility which was a finding  open  to
    him on the evidence before him.  The evidence of Dr Michev did not take
    the Appellant's case any further than that explained by Dr Cohen.   The
    Judge had accepted that the Appellant suffered from PTSD and  that  she
    had received injuries in some  way  in  Cameroon.   The  Appellant  had
    stated herself at pages 41 to 43 of her Bundle that she wanted to live.



 8. I find that there was an error of law in  the  decision  of  the  Judge
    which I therefore set aside.  It is true to say that the Judge  carried
    out a thorough analysis of the evidence of the Appellant and also  that
    of Dr Cohen and that he gave a number of cogent reasons for  not  being
    satisfied as  to  the  Appellant's  credibility.   However,  the  Judge
    omitted to consider all of the medical evidence.  However, he  did  not
    deal at all with the evidence of Dr Michev  which  is  highly  relevant
    because it confirms the cause of the Appellant's injuries and describes
    features of her PTSD such as flashbacks and nightmares  which  confirms
    the cause of her PTSD.  In my view this evidence should have been dealt
    with by the Judge when considering credibility, and it was an error  of
    law for him to omit to do so.

 9. I did not proceed to re-make the decision.   I  decided  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be re-made  there
    in accordance with paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice  Statements.   None
    of the findings of fact and as to credibility made by the Judge will be
    preserved for the purpose of the re-made decision.

Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

11. I set aside that decision.

12. The decision will be re-made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  which
    purpose none of the findings of fact and as to credibility made by  the
    Judge will be preserved.

Anonymity

13. The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity which I continue.


Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
