
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08017/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 31 March 2016 and 23 June 2016          |On 22 July 2016                  |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)


                                   Between

                                     AM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Lagunju of Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
                    Solicitors (31 March 2016)
     Ms S Panagiotopoulou, Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors (23
                    June 2016)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer (31
March 2016)
     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer (23 June 2016)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Telford)  dismissing  his  appeal  on   asylum,
    humanitarian  protection  and  human   rights   grounds   against   the
    respondent's decision made on  1  May  2015  to  remove  the  appellant
    following the refusal of his claim for asylum.


Background

2.   In a brief outline the background to this appeal is  as  follows.   The
    appellant is a citizen of Lebanon born on [ ] 1983.  He entered the  UK
    as a student in September 2011 and was granted leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 Migrant until 19  April  2015.   However,  in  August  2014  his
    college's licence  was  revoked.   On  21  November  2014  he  made  an
    appointment with the respondent claiming asylum  on  1  December  2014.
    His application was refused for the reasons set  out  in  the  decision
    letter dated 1 May 2015.   Although  the  appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Lebanon, he was born in Libya, subsequently moving at a  young  age  to
    Syria where he lived all his life prior to coming to the UK to study.

3.   He claimed to be at risk in Syria because he was Druze and at  risk  of
    being killed by ISIS.  He  feared  returning  to  Lebanon  because  his
    family did not own any property there, he had no relatives there and he
    would be homeless.  He was also at risk of being treated  as  a  Syrian
    because of his accent.  The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had a genuine fear of returning to Lebanon.   He  was  not  a
    Syrian national and his application was considered only on the basis of
    a return to Lebanon.  In so far as the appellant claimed to be at  risk
    because of his Syrian accent, it was the respondent's view  that  there
    was no risk in the light of the number of Syrians in  Lebanon  and  the
    freedom of movement there.  The appellant had claimed that he would not
    have a home or  be  able  to  work  if  returned  to  Lebanon  but  the
    respondent noted that he had studied and  worked  in  the  UK  and  had
    acquired skills and experience that would assist him on return.  He had
    previously travelled from Syria to Lebanon and had found accommodation,
    albeit temporary, and therefore it  was  considered  reasonably  likely
    that he would have the knowledge to  find  accommodation  and  work  on
    return.   The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  there  would   be
    substantial grounds for believing that the appellant would be  at  risk
    of treatment contrary to articles 2 and 3 on return to Lebanon and that
    his return would be in breach of article 8.

The Hearing before the Immigration Judge

4.   At the hearing before the judge it was accepted  at  the  beginning  of
    the hearing [3] that this was no longer an asylum appeal but  that  the
    appellant would be relying on para 276ADE of HC 395 as amended, private
    life rights under article 8 and harsh treatment under article  3.   The
    judge said that he did not find the evidence on the core issues of fear
    of harm to the appellant to be credible either  as  a  person  who  had
    suffered any harm in Lebanon in the past or as a person at risk of harm
    in the future as a Druze or a  Lebanese  with  a  Syrian  accent.   The
    background evidence showed that the police  and  judicial  systems  tin
    Lebanon had problems but there was no overall basis for  claiming  that
    there was no system in place for protection for Druze, with or  without
    Syrian accents [6].

5.   The judge commented  on  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  made  an
    application to come to the UK but had failed  to  mention  any  of  the
    allegations he had later made in his asylum claim, which had  now  been
    withdrawn.  He took into account s.8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 as the appellant had  not  made
    his asylum claim at the earliest opportunity when entering  in  the  UK
    but only after three years of living  and  studying  here.   The  judge
    found that this claim had been made not to have a right to live in  the
    UK due to his private  life  but  because  the  appellant  knew  as  an
    educated, intelligent and resourceful person that it  would  delay  his
    return to his country of nationality [8].

6.   The judge found that the appellant's claim did not engage  the  Refugee
    Convention.  He went on to consider humanitarian protection  but  found
    that there was no evidence of any risk of harm for any of the specified
    reasons [15].  He then went on to  consider  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  which
    required the appellant to  show  that  as  an  adult  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into the country to  which  he
    would have to go if required to leave the UK.  The judge commented that
    the appellant had failed even to come close  to  establishing  that  he
    would face such obstacles.  He presented as a mature adult, 32 years of
    age with language skills in at least two languages, with family  in  or
    around Syria and the Lebanon, who would be prepared to help him, and as
    a person with evident intelligence and qualifications with a character,
    which included resourcefulness and strength of mind.  He noted that the
    appellant's family had travelled from Syria  to  Lebanon  in  2015  and
    stayed there before returning and that this practice had been  repeated
    many times over the years to renew their visas.  The judge  found  when
    considering article 8  that  private  life  but  not  family  life  was
    engaged.   However,  this  was  undermined  because  he  had   a   poor
    immigration history from early 2014 and had  made  a  false  claim  for
    asylum in November 2014.  Accordingly, his appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

7.   Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal, UTJ McWilliam, commenting that there was
    an arguable Robinson point in that the decision to dismiss  the  appeal
    on asylum grounds and under articles 2 and 3 was inadequately reasoned.

8.   The grounds essentially raise the following issues.   They  argue  that
    the judge erred in law by failing to consider  and  assess  article  3,
    failed properly to consider the documentary evidence in the  round  and
    had simply determined that the appellant was not at risk due  to  minor
    inconsistencies and so failed to apply the  lower  standard  of  proof.
    The judge had erred by concluding the appellant had made a false asylum
    claim.  He had been unrepresented and it was only  on  obtaining  legal
    advice that he no longer appealed the adverse asylum decision.  He  had
    not deceived the authorities by making a false claim.  In order to make
    an article 3 claim, so it is argued, he would have to  go  through  the
    asylum route and  he  was  therefore  not  deceiving  the  authorities.
    Finally, it is argued that the judge whilst referring to s.117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 had not given any  reasons
    why the appellant did not meet this section and finally, that the judge
    erred in law by completely failing to assess properly articles 3 and 8.

9.   Ms Lagunju submitted that as the asylum claim had  been  withdrawn  the
    judge had erred by making findings on that  issue.   Even  so,  he  had
    failed to make any reference to the background evidence  submitted  and
    made no proper finding on the credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim,
    particularly in the light of the  fact  that  he  had  never  lived  in
    Lebanon.  The claim the appellant was seeking to put forward on article
    3 grounds, that he would suffer discrimination and hardship on  return,
    had not been properly considered, if at all.  The issues set out in the
    skeleton argument and in the appellant's witness statements had, so she
    argued, not been properly recorded or dealt with.  At the heart of  the
    appellant's case was his claim that he would be at risk of serious  ill
    treatment as a Lebanese returnee from Syria  and  would  encounter  the
    same ill treatment that Syrian refugees were currently  exposed  to  in
    Lebanon.

10.  Mr Clarke submitted that whilst it might be the  case  that  the  judge
    had not dealt fully with the appellant's article  3  case,  that  error
    would not be material as the evidence did not go nearly far  enough  to
    reach the high threshold for a breach of article 3.  The judge had been
    entitled to draw an adverse inference from the fact that the  appellant
    had made an asylum claim which had failed.  His findings in relation to
    private life under para 276ADE were clearly open to  him  as  were  his
    findings under article 8.

Assessment of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in Law

11.  I must consider whether the judge erred in law such that  his  decision
    should be set aside.  The argument put forward by the  appellant  under
    article 3 was that, given his identity  as  a  Lebanese  returnee  from
    Syria with no links to Lebanon, he would be harassed, denied access  to
    basic needs and stigmatised as a burden on  the  Lebanese  authorities,
    all of which would be equivalent to inhuman  and  degrading  treatment:
    see 2.6 of the skeleton argument produced at  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This  refers  to  and  relies  on  the  documents
    produced in the appellant's bundle and in particular those at 32  -  56
    dealing with the background situation in Lebanon.

12.  These documents cover the period from December 2013 to  September  2015
    and include reports which  are  at  least  capable  of  supporting  the
    appellant's claim: see for example Human Rights Watch - Lebanon: Rising
    Violence Targets Syrian Refugees 30 September 2014 at 73 to 84 and  the
    Amnesty International Report, Syrian Refugees in Lebanon 21 May 2014 at
    70 - 72.  The appellant also set out in his witness statement dated  29
    September 2015 his reasons for claiming that he would be at risk of ill
    treatment in Lebanon (see paras 11 - 17), which were supported to  some
    extent by the statements of the two witnesses at 12 - 16 of his bundle.
     I am not satisfied that the judge dealt adequately with this evidence.

13.  The judge recorded at [11] that the background evidence was before  him
    and accepted by both  sides  but,  when  dealing  with  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds, the judge simply said that  there  was
    no evidence of any risk of harm for any  reason,  which  did  not  come
    within the Refugee Convention.  When  dealing  with  the  claims  under
    articles 2 and 3, the judge said that they were not made  out  as  they
    stood or fell with the Refugee Convention claim, which had  been  found
    not to be credible [20].  However, this was an appeal where there was a
    distinct article 3 claim which did  not  necessarily  depend  upon  the
    outcome of the claim under the Refugee Convention.

14.  I am also satisfied that  the  evidence  produced  in  support  of  the
    article 3 claim was relevant to the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant
    would face significant obstacles in integrating into Lebanon and  to  a
    lesser degree with the question of interference to  his  private  life.
    For this reasons I am satisfied that the judge erred in law  either  by
    failing to take relevant matters into account or  by  failing  to  give
    adequate reasons for his decision.  The decision should accordingly  be
    set aside.  At the hearing before me Ms Lagunju submitted that if there
    is an error of law the appeal should go back to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a rehearing whereas Mr Clarke argued that the decision should be re-
    made in the Upper Tribunal.  My view is that the proper course  is  for
    the matter to remain in  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  the  appeal  being
    relisted to hear submissions on whether the appeal should be allowed or
    dismissed.

15.  Following the directions made at the conclusion of  the  error  of  law
    hearing, the appellant filed a bundle of further evidence (2A)  indexed
    and paginated 1 - 321 and relied on the bundle  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (1A) indexed  and  paginated  1  -  115.   Ms  Panagiotopoulou
    submitted a skeleton argument dated 22 June 2016.  She  indicated  that
    she did not intend to call any  further  oral  evidence  and  that  the
    appeal would proceed by  submissions  only.   The  background  evidence
    primarily relied on by the parties is referred to in the summary of the
    submissions.

The Appellant's Witness Statement

16.  The appellant in his statement dated 29 September  2015  confirms  that
    he has never lived in Lebanon but only travelled there occasionally for
    the purpose of renewing his residency in Syria.  After he left for  the
    UK his family continued to travel back to  Lebanon  every  six  months.
    Most times they just crossed the border and then returned back to their
    home in Syria on the same day.  On his last visit to Syria in July 2011
    he witnessed the  deterioration  of  the  security  situation  and  the
    escalation of violence there and following his arrival in  the  UK  the
    situation in Syria continued  to  deteriorate.   He  confirms  that  he
    speaks the Syrian dialect of Arabic and that he would be identified  as
    a Syrian given the considerable time he has lived in Syria even  though
    he is  a  Lebanese  citizen.   His  identity  would  be  determined  in
    accordance with his  dialect,  values  and  lack  of  familiarity  with
    Lebanon.  He knows nothing about the country and would be  singled  out
    as non-Lebanese and subjected to ill-treatment.

The Witness Statements of RB and WS

17.  RB is a Syrian national and  a  recognised  refugee  in  the  UK.   The
    appellant is his maternal  cousin.   He  confirms  that  the  appellant
    speaks Syrian Arabic fluently  but  does  not  speak  in  the  Lebanese
    dialect.  He says that  the  appellant  does  not  have  any  familial,
    cultural or social ties and would not be able to relocate  in  Lebanon.
    He would be treated as a foreigner  there.   In  his  statement  WS,  a
    British national originally from Syria, says that he is a friend of the
    appellant.  He had always known the appellant as a Syrian and had never
    questioned his origins.  The appellant had never mentioned that he  was
    Lebanese.  His mother is a full Syrian national and his father retained
    his Lebanese nationality by descent.  He says that the appellant  would
    be lost if he had to return to Lebanon where he has no-one.  He has  no
    social, cultural or familial ties there.  He says that in July 2013 his
    mother and brother visited  Lebanon  to  make  an  application  at  the
    British Embassy for entry clearance to visit him in  the  UK  but  when
    they were identified as Syrians at the border, they were  subjected  to
    very poor treatment and harassment.  He was told by his family that the
    Lebanese people are very hostile towards  anyone  they  suspect  to  be
    Syrian.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

18.  Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted that the appellant would be at  real  risk
    of treatment contrary to article 3 as he had never lived in the Lebanon
    even though he was a Lebanese national and had no family or social ties
    there.  He would be perceived as a Syrian due to his Syrian accent  and
    his lack of familiarity with and connections to Lebanon.  As a Lebanese
    returnee from Syria, he would encounter  the  same  ill  treatment  and
    discrimination that  Syrian  refugees  were  currently  exposed  to  in
    Lebanon.  He would be  harassed,  denied  access  to  basic  needs  and
    stigmatised as a burden on Lebanese resources and thus  be  exposed  to
    inhuman and degrading treatment contrary to article 3.  In  particular,
    she relied on the background evidence in 1A and  to  the  International
    Organisation for Migration (IOM) "Refugees  at  Home  -  A  Livelihoods
    Assessment of Lebanese Returnees from Syria - November 2014" at
     1A, 32 - 53.  This confirmed that many Lebanese  returnees  from  Syria
    had Syrian accents and were seen by much  of  Lebanon's  population  as
    Syrian (59).  There was evidence that there was an inability to  access
    basic services, find employment or be accepted by other Lebanese people
    and that this was hampered by people's perceptions as they were seen by
    much of Lebanon's population as Syrian.

19.  There was clear evidence, so she submitted, of an  increased  hostility
    in Lebanon towards Syrian refugees set out in the European  Commission,
    Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection report June 2015 at 1A, 67 -  69.
    The treatment of Syrian refugees in Lebanon was set out  in  the  Human
    Rights  Watch  Report,  "Lebanon:  Rising   Violence   Targets   Syrian
    Refugees", 30 September 2014.  This recorded that  the  authorities  in
    Lebanon were failing to take adequate steps to  prevent  and  prosecute
    increasing violence by private citizens against Syrians and that  there
    had  in  some  cases  been  attempts  to  expel  Syrians  from  certain
    neighbourhoods and violent attacks against  unarmed  Syrians  or  those
    perceived to be Syrians by Lebanese citizens.

20.  She further relied on  the  document  at  2A,  1  -  106,  "Unprotected
    Refugees", prepared by the Lebanese Institute for Democracy  and  Human
    Rights, which records in the introduction that the Lebanese  government
    considers the growing number of Syrian refugees  in  Lebanon  to  be  a
    serious  threat  to  the  security,  political,  economic  and   social
    stability, as well as the job market and infrastructure  in  a  country
    already struggling  in  all  of  these  fields.   It  describes  Syrian
    refugees as being trapped in a huge concentration camp  named  Lebanon.
    It records receiving many complaints from Syrian nationals about having
    been mistreated in Lebanese  police  stations  and  that  the  Lebanese
    government has issued a decision depriving Syrian refugees  in  Lebanon
    of the right to work.  She referred to the IOM  report,  "Returnees  at
    Risk: Profiling Lebanese Returnees from the Syrian Arab  Republic  Four
    Years into the Crisis", 2015, at 2A,  261  and  in  particular  to  268
    setting out key findings including that despite being Lebanese citizens
    returnees' economic status and living conditions more closely resembled
    those of displaced Syrians and that a significant portion of  returnees
    faced difficulty accessing healthcare, 19% of households reported being
    unable to receive primary healthcare and 16%  being  unable  to  obtain
    secondary/specialised healthcare and hospitalisation.

21.  She further submitted that if the appellant had to  return  to  Lebanon
    he would be exposed to harassment  and  discrimination.   His  position
    would inevitably be precarious.  Although he  had  travelled  with  his
    family regularly to renew his permit to live in Syria it had only  been
    a day and in any event was before the influx of  Syrian  refugees.   In
    addition, the appellant was a member of the  Druze  faith,  a  minority
    group regarded in Syria as being allied to the regime.  The reality  of
    the position was, so she submitted, that the appellant was Lebanese  in
    name only and would be treated as if Syrian on return to Lebanon.   She
    further argued that his situation was such  that  he  could  show  that
    there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  him  integrating  into
    Lebanon and he therefore met the requirements  of  para  276ADE(1)(vi).
    If his claim could not succeed under  article  3,  he  had  a  properly
    arguable claim under article 8.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

22.  Mr Avery submitted that whilst the evidence showed very  real  problems
    faced both by the Lebanese authorities and refugees from Syria it would
    not establish that Syrian refugees were at risk of article 3  treatment
    in Lebanon.  The reports referred to a number of  incidents  but  these
    had to be looked at in the context of the number  of  Syrian  refugees.
    However, the position of Lebanese citizens returning  to  Lebanon  from
    Syria could not be equated  with  the  situation  of  Syrian  refugees.
    There may be some similarities in the difficulties they  faced  but  no
    more.  The two IOM reports relied on did disclose difficulties but  not
    such as to approach the higher threshold required to establish a breach
    of article 3.  Further, that report had to be read in  the  context  of
    the findings at 295 where a large majority (86%) of Lebanese  returnees
    describe their relations with Lebanese host communities as being either
    positive or very positive, 12% characterised their relations as neutral
    and 2% as negative or very  negative.   Mr  Avery  submitted  that  the
    appellant was unable to meet the higher threshold of showing  a  breach
    of article 3 and could not meet the requirements of para 276(1)(vi) nor
    were there any circumstances  justifying  further  consideration  under
    article 8.

Assessment of the Issues

23.  It is not in dispute that the appellant is a Lebanese national who  has
    lived most of his life in Syria.  According to the respondent's records
    the appellant last left Syria in September 2011 following a visit  from
    July to September and was granted leave to remain as a Tier 4  Migrant.
    The appellant's case is that he came to the UK  in  2006  and  this  is
    consistent with the Respondent's records that the appellant applied for
    a student visa in Damascus on 23 October 2006. He continued his studies
    until they were interrupted by his college losing  its  licence.    The
    appellant claimed asylum on 1 December 2014  and  his  application  was
    refused for the reasons set out in the  detailed  reasons  for  refusal
    annexed to the  respondent's  decision  of  1  May  2015  refusing  his
    application not only on asylum  but  also  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds, under the rules and under  articles  3  and  8.   It  was  the
    respondent's view that he had failed to establish that he would  be  at
    real risk of serious harm on return to Lebanon because of homelessness,
    his Druze faith, lack of work or how he would be treated because of his
    Syrian accent.

24.  The respondent referred to the Lebanese Constitution and the fact  that
    this protects  against  arbitrary  arrest  or  detention  and  provides
    protection for private ownership and the right to be  secure  in  one's
    own  domicile.   It  also  guarantees  religious  freedom,  freedom  of
    education, freedom of speech, association and freedom of the press.  It
    was  the  respondent's  view  that  the  appellant  would  not   suffer
    mistreatment because of having a Syrian accent and, although he claimed
    he would not have a home on return to  Lebanon,  he  would  be  offered
    information about the Assisted Voluntary  Return  scheme  and,  in  any
    event, he had travelled regularly  from  Syria  to  Lebanon  and  found
    accommodation, albeit temporary.  It was  also  the  respondent's  view
    that he had failed to demonstrate that the authorities in Lebanon would
    be unable or unwilling to offer him protection if he sought it.

25.  The appellant has based his claim primarily on the fact that  he  would
    be at risk of discrimination and ill-treatment as a  Lebanese  returnee
    from Syria and as he has a Syrian  accent  he  will  be  perceived  and
    treated as a Syrian.

26.  It is clear from the background evidence that the Lebanese  authorities
    are having to cope with a substantial influx of Syrian refugees and the
    problems have been highlighted by Ms Panagiotopoulou in her  references
    to  the  country  evidence.   The  fact  that  there  are  problems  is
    understandable as according to a report from the  Washington  Times  13
    May 2014, 1A, 64, Lebanon has more refugees in need of humanitarian aid
    than international  agencies  can  accommodate  and  the  situation  is
    worsening as Syrians enter the country to  escape  civil  war.   It  is
    reported that refugees account for one  third  of  Lebanon's  4,430,000
    people, straining the finances and resources of the  host  country  and
    aid agencies such as the World Food Programme and the UNHCR.   This  is
    confirmed by the European Commission report at 1A,  67  recording  that
    Lebanon, as the neighbouring country, is  hardest  hit  by  the  Syrian
    crisis, having more than 1,100,000 Syrian refugees which, combined with
    the other refugee communities there, makes  it  the  country  with  the
    world's largest number of refugees per capita.

27.  The situation in Syria has led to  Lebanese  nationals  resident  there
    returning to Lebanon.  The Displaced Lebanese report of September  2015
    says that Lebanese returnees are referred to the Lebanese  government's
    High Relief Commission (HRC) and the IOM.  They have been working  with
    various local international NGOs to assess where returnees are  located
    and what their needs are.  In a report about the situation released  in
    December 2013 it was estimated that the true number at  that  time  was
    around 29,000 individuals and it was  projected  that  there  would  be
    50,000 returnees by the end of 2014.  The most recent evidence relating
    to the returnees is in the IOM report 2015 at 2A,  261,  which,  whilst
    setting out the difficulties faced by the authorities  in  Lebanon  and
    the problems faced by returnees, does  not  support  an  argument  that
    Lebanese returnees generally are at real risk of treatment contrary  to
    article 3.

28.  If anything the situation, although bleak, has improved.   At  2A,  292
    it is recorded that in 2013 when returnees were first registered by HRC
    and IOM 84% of households said  they  had  not  received  any  type  of
    assistance since arriving in Lebanon whereas in 2015 by contrast, fully
    half of Lebanese returnee households reported receiving  some  form  of
    humanitarian assistance within the previous three months.  The  setting
    up of a registration system described  in  this  report  in  itself  is
    evidence that the HRC and IOM are attempting to identify the  needs  of
    returnees.  It is also significant in  the  light  of  the  appellant's
    fears that he would be regarded as a  Syrian  and  treated  accordingly
    that Lebanese returnees taken into consideration in the report showed a
    large majority describing their  relations  with  their  Lebanese  host
    communities as being either positive or very  positive.   The  evidence
    therefore does not satisfy me that the situation for Lebanese returnees
    generally is such that there are substantial grounds for believing that
    they are at risk of treatment contrary to article  3.   The  background
    evidence, when  considered  as  a  whole,  does  not  substantiate  the
    concerns expressed by the appellant and his witnesses  as  set  out  in
    their statements.

29.  Further, I am  not  satisfied  that  there  are  any  specific  factors
    relating to the appellant which would put him at risk.  He has been  in
    the UK since 2006 and has been studying.  The fact  that  he  has  been
    studying as  a  foreign  student  indicates  that  he  must  have  been
    receiving financial support from his family.  He accepts this but makes
    the point that in the light of the current civil war  in  Syria  he  no
    longer receives such support.  Nonetheless, he would  be  returning  to
    Lebanon as someone who has been educated and to that extent he is in  a
    better position than a Lebanese returnee with no qualifications.

30.  The appellant has also relied on the fact that he is a  member  of  the
    Druze religion but I am  not  satisfied  that  there  is  any  risk  of
    treatment under article 3 in this context.  There is some  evidence  in
    the background  documents  about  Druze  being  killed  in  the  Syrian
    conflict, 1A, 97, and further articles about the risk to  Syrian  Druze
    in 2A, 227  -  240,  but  the  fact  remains  that  the  Druze  are  an
    established community in Lebanon and there is no cogent evidence before
    me to show that this factor would put the appellant at risk there.

31.  It is further argued that the appellant  would  face  very  significant
    difficulties in  integrating  into  Lebanon  and  therefore  meets  the
    requirements of para 276ADE(1)(vi). Whilst I accept that there will  be
    problems, I am not satisfied that  they  can  be  categorised  as  very
    significant in the light of  the  evidence,  particularly  in  the  IOM
    report, and the procedures which have  been  set  up  by  the  Lebanese
    authorities to register returnees with a view to providing them with at
    least basic assistance.   There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the
    appellant would have any difficulty in establishing his citizenship  as
    he holds a Lebanese passport or that he would be unable to  access  the
    assistance being offered by the Lebanese authorities.

32.  In respect of article 8 I accept that removal would interfere with  his
    private life but I am not  satisfied  that  there  are  any  compelling
    circumstances not covered by the  rules  which  would  justify  further
    consideration under article 8 or, taking into account the provisions of
    s.117B of the 2002 Act, support an  argument  that  in  his  particular
    circumstances removal would be disproportionate to a legitimate aim.

33.   In  summary,  the  evidence  fails  to  satisfy  me  that  there   are
    substantial grounds for believing that the appellant would be  at  risk
    of treatment contrary to article 3 on return to Lebanon.  He  does  not
    meet the requirements of para 276ADE and there is no basis on which his
    claim can succeed under article 8 outside the rules.

Decision

34.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and its decision is set aside.   I
    re-make the decision by dismissing  the  appeal  on  all  grounds.   No
    application has been made to vary or discharge the anonymity order made
    by the First-tier Tribunal and accordingly it remains in force.






Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 21 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

