
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08896/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 February 2014                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                     VM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Anzani, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, born on 4 February 1990, is a  national  of  Sri  Lanka.
    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in January 2011 on  a  visa
    valid until 29 July 2011.  He travelled on a passport issued in his own
    name by the Sri Lankan authorities.  Subsequently  he  applied  for  an
    extension of leave to remain as a  student  but  that  was  refused  in
    January 2013.  Thereafter he sought to claim asylum.

2.   That claim was refused by the respondent which resulted  in  an  appeal
    hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters on 10  December  2013.
    The Judge found the appellant to lack credibility in all  respects  and
    dismissed his appeal on all grounds.

3.    Grounds  of  appeal  were  submitted  that  the  Judge  erred  in  his
    assessment of certain material facts  including  medical  evidence  and
    that accordingly the assessment of credibility and of  risk  on  return
    was flawed.

4.   Permission was granted particularly  in  the  light  of  the  grant  of
    permission made by the Court of Appeal in  respect  of  GJ  and  Others
    (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC),
    circulated on 5 July 2013.

5.   Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of the grant of leave.

6.   In essence the appellant's claim is that his brother was involved  with
    the LTTE and was detained  in  2006  before  leaving  the  country  and
    seeking asylum elsewhere.  The appellant himself  claims  that  he  was
    arrested on 26 October 2006 and questioned by the authorities but  that
    at the time he was only 16 years  of  age.   His  release  was  secured
    through the good offices of a teacher and the involvement of either his
    mother or father.

7.   The next incident is said to have been in  October  2009  when  he  was
    once again arrested and detained.  He was released from that  detention
    having been ill-treated by the authorities.  He remained in  Sri  Lanka
    for a year or more following his  release,  thereafter  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom.

8.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge has  made  a  number  of  findings  in  a
    detailed determination.

9.   In respect of the detention in 2006, the Judge does not find that  that
    took place.  The Judge notes  in  particular  the  overall  immigration
    history of the appellant and his delay in claiming asylum in the United
    Kingdom as undermining his credibility to some extent.  In  particular,
    so far as the events of 2006 are concerned, material inconsistencies in
    the accounts of the appellant and his elder brother and of  his  father
    are noted in paragraphs 51 to 54.

10.  It is argued before me by Miss Anzani, who  represents  the  appellant,
    that there are not in  fact  inconsistencies  but  merely  an  expanded
    account of  involvement.    It  does  not  really  matter  whether  the
    appellant's mother and a teacher secured his  release  or  whether  his
    father and teacher secured his release, what was important was that the
    evidence from  his brother, the appellant and his father  were  largely
    consistent on that point.  I was asked to find therefore  that  it  was
    unfair or unreasonable of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to dismiss  the
    arrest simply on a very narrow basis.

11.  Mr Richards, who represents the respondent, invited  me  to  find  that
    they were material inconsistencies particularly relating as  these  did
    to his release.

12.  It seems to me, and I so find, that it was open to  the  Judge  in  the
    light of the context as a whole to make the findings which were made so
    far as 2006 is concerned.

13.  Criticism is also made of the Judge's finding that the lapse  of  three
    years between 26 October 2006 and 8 October 2009 demonstrates a lack of
    interest in the appellant by the authorities.  That is to ignore, it is
    submitted by Miss Anzani, the reality of the  ceasefire  and  all  that
    flowed from it.  That may be so but the reality of the matter  is  that
    the  appellant  seemingly  did  not  come  to  the  attention  of   the
    authorities before 2009.  In 2009, as has been  recognised,  there  was
    renewed interest by the authorities making  enquiries  in  relation  to
    LTTE individuals and activities. That is  an  interest  that  has  been
    highlighted in the case of GJ.

14.  I have some concerns as  to  what  the  Judge  is  seeking  to  say  in
    relation to the detention in 2009 and whether or  not  it  is  accepted
    that having taken place.  It is  not  a  finding  that  is  necessarily
    clearly made, as can be seen from the context of paragraphs 65  and  66
    of the  determination. The fact of  the  detention  would  seem  to  be
    supported by a letter from  an  attorney,  Kosala  Wijayatilake,  in  a
    letter of 4 October 2013 written to the appellant's representatives  in
    response to their previous request.

15.  He indicates that he was instructed on 9 October 2009, a day after  the
    appellant was arrested.  He was instructed by the  appellant's  mother.
    The appellant was detained on suspicion of links with the LTTE and held
    in the headquarters of the Criminal Investigation Department.   He  was
    not formally charged with any offence nor was  he  brought  before  the
    courts, nor was he convicted of any offence.   He  was  released  on  4
    January 2010 by the police.  The lawyer was not aware of any  condition
    attached to his release.

16.  It is perhaps surprising what  the  letter  does  not  say  by  way  of
    detail, namely details of the allegations that were being made and  the
    circumstances of his release.  If the lawyer was instructed as  claimed
    it is perhaps surprising that he did not know that.  It is the case  of
    the appellant that he was released by way of a bribe.

17.  It is of course significant, if correct,  that  the  appellant  was  in
    detention for approaching three months, which is a long  time.   It  is
    surprising therefore that the lawyer who  claims  to  have  represented
    him over that period, did not give or volunteer any further detail.

18.  The  letter  has  significance  in  one  way  in  that  it  is  perhaps
    reasonable to expect that ,if the appellant received the  ill-treatment
    which he claims to have received  at  the  hands  of  the  authorities,
    there would have been some reference made to it to his lawyer.

19.  In his statement the  appellant  claims  that  he  was  questioned  and
    tortured in detention. He was stabbed on the right knee with a bayonet.
     His left arm was hurt through beating and he believes that a bone  was
    cracked.  He was beaten and questioned at the  beginning  but  when  he
    denied things he was stabbed and ill-treated in  ways  as  set  out  in
    question 4.1 of the screening interview.  He said that  that  made  him
    confess that he had helped the LTTE.   He signed a confession  to  that
    effect.

20.  It is perhaps surprising that if the  appellant  indeed  had  confessed
    to pro-LTTE activities  he would have been released at all.  There is a
    medical report prepared by Professor Lingam arising from an examination
    of the appellant on 30 October 2013.  It is   singularly  uninformative
    as a report.  The appellant indicated that he had been  beaten in  2006
    with wooden poles over the back of his head and all over his  body  and
    that  his face had been banged on the table causing lacerations to  the
    face and forehead.  The response by Professor Lingam was to say

         "clinically I would say that such lacerations on the  face  can  be
         caused from wounds from accidents and traumas other than the trauma
         described by the patient.  It is for this reason I  have  indicated
         that the findings here  are  highly  consistent  with  the  history
         acknowledging that any trauma can leave such scars."

     This is not perhaps the most helpful of statements.

21.  However the doctor records the contention by the appellant that he  was
    beaten with wooden poles on the second  occasion,  kicked  with  booted
    feet and stabbed with a bayonet of a rifle in the right knee.

22.  It may reasonably be expected that the stabbing of the bayonet  to  the
    right knee would have been a significant injury to have  focused  upon.
    Professor Lingam says, however, "as regards the causation all  I  would
    say is that these scars are consistent with the history as  any  wounds
    from any cause can leave scars like this".  However the doctor goes  on
    to note the problems with asthma and with fissures to his  tongue.   He
    seems not to offer any particular causation of such fissures.

23.  The Judge in the determination notes the report of Professor Lingam  in
    paragraph  63  and  finds  that  it  is  not  very   helpful   in   the
    circumstances.  Given the somewhat generalised comments that  are  made
    in the report there is perhaps some justification for that  conclusion.
    However, as I have indicated, if such action had happened it  would  be
    reasonable to expect that the appellant would have mentioned it to  his
    lawyer but nothing is said in the letter of the lawyer concerning  such
    significant matters.

24.  It seems to be accepted by the Judge that the  appellant  was  detained
    but thereafter released. The appellant  remains  in  Sri  Lanka  for  a
    further year or so before coming to the United Kingdom.

25.  It is not entirely clear from the determination, and particularly  from
    paragraphs 75 to 78, whether the  Judge  specifically  considered  that
    three month period of detention in the context of a risk  or  potential
    risk on return.  Nevertheless the Judge has indicated that he has taken
    account of any risk to the appellant in the light of GJ and Others.

26.  The appellant left  Sri  Lanka  on  his  own  passport  and  the  Judge
    considers that is significant as a feature indicating that he is not of
    any interest to the authorities. Challenge is made to  that  conclusion
    in the grounds of appeal on  the  basis  that  such  documents  can  be
    obtained by bribery and that it is very easy for a person to leave even
    in their own identity to the airport.  It is said that the  Judge ought
    not to have given such weight to that factor as was given.

27.  It seems to me that the Judge was looking at various  factors  for  and
    against and that its is a factor which is properly to be relied upon in
    the overall context of the claim.

28.  A matter of concern, however, is whether the Judge has articulated  the
    three month detention in terms of risk on return.

29.  It is  to  be  noted  in  that  context  that  the  appellant  remained
    thereafter  in  Sri  Lanka  seemingly  left  the  jurisdiction  without
    difficulty, thereafter failing to claim asylum, at a time when it would
    perhaps have been reasonable to expect him to have done so.

30.  The risk factors are set out by the Tribunal particularly in  its  head
    note in GJ, particularly headnote 7(a) to (d).   In  considering  those
    risk factors it is clear that those do not apply to the appellant.   It
    is  in  that  connection  that  the  lawyer's  letter  is  particularly
    unhelpful in not clarifying  the nature and reason  for  the  detention
    and the reason therefore for the release.

31.  If the appellant had been  suspected of being an LTTE activist in  2006
    and again in 2009 it is surprising in the extreme that  he  would  have
    been released in the circumstances which he claims to have been.

32.  I recognise that leave has been  granted against  the  decision  of  GJ
    and that it cannot simply be assumed  that if a person  is  not  within
    the specified risk  categories  of  that  case  he  or  she  would  not
    otherwise be at  risk  upon  return.   The  Judge  notes,  however,  at
    paragraph 78 that the appellant has done nothing in the United  Kingdom
    to draw attention to himself by the authorities and did not  find  that
    there is any profile adverse to the appellant which would place him  at
    risk on  return.   That  the  appellant  may  have  been  detained  for
    questioning without more even though such a  lengthy  period  does  not
    necessarily create a profile recognised or set out in GJ.

33.  As Mr Richards submits, it is for the appellant to  show why  he  would
    be of any risk upon return, particularly as the period of detention  in
    2009, even if accepted as taking place, resulted as the Judge found, in
    no ill-treatment and release.

34.  It is to be noted that the appellant has subsequently claimed that  his
    younger brother disappeared in June 2013 following his detention in May
    2013.  The Judge noted, however, that there was a lack of  evidence  on
    that matter and was not  bound  to  accept  what  is  said,  given  the
    findings of credibility that have been  made.

35.  I recognise in  fairness  to  the  appellant  that  it  may  have  been
    somewhat of an oversight by the Tribunal Judge not to have specifically
    identified his findings as to the detention in 2009  and  whether  such
    standing by itself constitutes a risk to the appellant  within  in  the
    ambit of GJ or elsewhere.

36.  That having been  said I do not find  that  the  appellant's  situation
    and circumstances is one which falls within GJ even with the caveat  as
    addressed to it by the Court of Appeal.

37.  Overall I find that the Judge made sustainable findings  of  fact  that
    were not irrational or manifestly unfounded.  I  find  that  the  Judge
    properly analysed the context of the claim and came  to  findings  that
    were properly open to be made.

38.  Accordingly the decision shall stand and the appellant's appeal  before
    the Upper Tribunal dismissed.

39.  The decision of Judge Walters shall stand namely  that the  appellant's
    asylum appeal is dismissed, the appeal for humanitarian  protection  is
    dismissed and the human rights appeal is also dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

