
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08663/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 August 2014                              |On 6 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                        VINCENT DE PAUL KUIDJA HOUMI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, Alfred James Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon and his  date  of  birth  is  13
    June 1968.  He made an application for asylum which was refused by  the
    Secretary of State in a decision of 10 September 2013.  The appellant's
    evidence is that he is a member of  the  Bamileke  tribe  and  that  he
    worked  for  Cameroon  Telecommunications.  During  his  employment  he
    discovered phone tapping by the  government  and  he  was  subsequently
    taken to a police station on 30 September 2011 and  released  the  same
    day.

2.   On 7 October 2011 he was taken to a  police  station  again  and  asked
    whether he had told  anybody  about  the  phone  tapping  that  he  had
    discovered. He was held in detention for a period of five  days  before
    being released from prison as a result of intervention by his lawyer.

3.   He continued working until he was suspended in  October  2011.   On  11
    July 2012 he revealed what he had discovered about the phone taping  to
    the national newspapers and  on  13  July  2013  he  was  arrested  and
    detained for fifteen days during which time he was  tortured.   He  was
    then taken to prison in Douala where he was further  tortured.   During
    his time in prison he met an  individual  called  Mr  Hipolte  who  was
    making a documentary on torture in prisons.  He was able to escape from
    prison assisted by a doctor.  He was taken to a  hospital  and  he  was
    subsequently assisted by his brother-in-law to flee Cameroon.

4.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Pears
    in a determination of 16 March 2014 following a  hearing  on  the  same
    day.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor  on
    14 May 2014 and the grant of permission reads as follows:

         "It is arguable that, given the purpose of the screening  interview
         and the appellant's evidence  provided in answer  to  Q105  of  his
         substantive asylum interview,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
         treating as a matter adverse to  the  appellant's  credibility  his
         failure  to  refer  in  his  screening  interview  to  having  been
         tortured. It is further arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred
         in its consideration of the expert  medical  evidence.   The  other
         grounds  have  little  merit  and  add  nothing  to  this   appeal;
         nevertheless, I do not refuse permission to argue them."

6.   The grounds argue that the judge erred in consideration of  the  expert
    medical evidence and the judge applied a too high standard of proof.

7.    I  heard  oral  submissions  from  both  representatives.   Mr  Reza's
    submissions were in the context of his skeleton argument which  broadly
    speaking was an expansion of the grounds of appeal for permission.   Mr
    Tufan argued that there was no error of law in the determination.   The
    medical evidence was considered in the round and the  application  must
    be considered in the context of the significant  and  numerous  adverse
    credibility findings.

8.   There was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  an  expert  medical  report
    prepared by Dr J Hajioff.  From  the  introduction  of  the  report  it
    appears that Dr  Hajioff  is  a  registered  medical  practitioner  and
    consultant  psychiatrist.   He  noted  that  the  small  scars  on  the
    appellant's hands were typical of cigarette burns.  In accordance  with
    the appellant's evidence in addition the scars on the appellant's head,
    right ear,  back  and  feet  were  consistently  with  the  appellant's
    description of causes.   Dr Hajioff's opinion  is  that  the  appellant
    suffers from chronic post-traumatic stress disorder and has  some  form
    of depression and that his evidence of injury is consistent with how he
    was treated in Cameroon.

9.   The judge made a number of findings and paragraphs 49 to 52 and  60  to
    64 as follows:

         "49.  At page 11 is a psychiatric report on the appellant by  Dr  J
             Hajioff and  the  appellant's  representative  explained  that
             because Helen Bamber could not report in time for  the  appeal
             they had  to  resort  to  this  expert.   However  although  a
             psychiatrist Dr  Hajioff  has  expressed  his  view  on  other
             medical issues giving, on page 12 (the reference  are  to  the
             appellant's  bundle),   his  expertise  for  so   doing.   The
             appellant's account to the doctor for  what  happened  to  him
             seems to have details that  have  not  been  mentioned  before
             .e.g. guards urinating on him and being pursued naked into the
             open areas of the police station.


         50.      The doctor's assessment is on page 17ff and he reports  at
             paragraph 36 that the appellant is on no medication. There  is
             a  body  map  at  page  22.   He  finds  small  scars  on  the
             appellant's hands which the appellant  says were inflicted  by
             cigarettes of the  guards   which  the  doctor  concludes  are
             typical for the injuries alleged by the appellant.   The  word
             'typical' in the Istanbul Convention means  they  are  usually
             found in this type of trauma but  there  were  other  possible
             causes. It is perhaps significant both that  the  doctor  does
             not try to date them and the  appellant  has  never  mentioned
             them before.


         51.   The doctor then says he found scars on  his head, right  ear,
             back and feet and I cannot find where the  appellant  accounts
             for them individually  in  the  report  or  where  the  doctor
             assesses their date. However he says that are consistent  with
             his description and that means in  Istanbul  Convention  terms
             that they could have been caused as described  but  there  are
             many other possible causes.  None for the injuries are said to
             be 'diagnostic' or 'highly consistent' in Istanbul  Convention
             terms.


         52.  The doctor concludes the appellant is suffering  from  chronic
             PTSD and some symptoms of depression."

         "60.  In relation to his account of torture, it seems clear me that
             if a person had been tortured in the way he  claims  it  would
             have emerged earlier than it did and it also seems to me  that
             his account has had elements added to it which in  my  finding
             undermines  its  credibility  as  a  claim.   Further  en  the
             appellant's case he alleges he was  tortured  extensively  and
             yet there is no extensive damage which has been  found  to  be
             either 'diagnostic' or  'highly consistent' of what he alleges
             or said to be from the date he claims  it  was  inflicted.   I
             find the doctor's report has the  flaws  in  it  that  I  have
             mentioned.


         61.      I find his credibility is  decreased  by  his  failure  to
             claim asylum in  Belgium  and  his  failure  to  claim  asylum
             earlier  than  he  did   together   with   the   contradictory
             explanation of his failure to do so - see paragraph 43.


         62.  Further in relation to general credibility  of  his  claim  it
             seems to me that if he was accused of  treason  he  would  not
             have been able to apply for a passport, live in  Cameroon  for
             the period between October 2012 and June 2013  and  then  take
             the risk of  leaving the country on his own passport .


         63.      In relation to other matters I accept that plausibility be
             approached with caution but on his case he was able to  escape
             from two guards through a window after an unknown  doctor  had
             whispered a detailed instruction to him and  he  was  able  to
             escape in a waiting car and that I do not accept as plausible


         64.      I cannot find that any psychiatric condition  or  that  he
             has nightmares is corroborative of him being  tortured  or  of
             his case as they might  have  an  origin  connected  with  his
             childhood or any other numerous causes.


         65.      I agree with the country expert that if I had found he had
             been  previously been detained in 2012, been tortured and left
             Cameroon during an investigation relating to  his  involvement
             with cutting  telephone  cables  for  people  who  were  under
             suspicion he would be at risk on return  but  I  have  not  so
             found."


10.  In my view the judge did not consider the psychiatric evidence  in  the
    round.  The fact that the appellant had been diagnosed by a  consultant
    psychiatrist  as  having  chronic  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  is
    corroborative of his claim to have been tortured and it was not open to
    the judge to find that it was not corroborative.

11.  In my view the judge did not consider this evidence in  the  round  and
    this amounts to a material error of law.  Having  said  this  I  accept
    that the judge was entitled to comment on the fact that the expert  had
    not attempted to date the injuries and I  note that the expert did  not
    have before him a copy of the refusal letter and there is no indication
    that the expert was aware that credibility was an issue in  this  case.



12.  In my view the judge also applied too high a  standard  of  proof.   He
    found at paragraph 56 that the appellant's case is not  credible  based
    on the absence of evidence that he said he would or  might  produce  or
    which he could have produced since the refusal decision.   There is  no
    legal requirement for corroboration.

13.  As a result I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

14.  Mr  Tufan  submitted  that  the  matter  should  remain  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  However in light of the fact that the material error is such
    that none of the credibility findings are in my view sustainable  there
    will need to be  a  de  novo  hearing  which  will  involves  extensive
    judicial fact finding by the Tribunal and I remit the  matter  pursuant
    to the Practice Statement of the Senior President of the  Tribunals  of
    25 September 2012.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

