
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08681/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 15 January 2015                   |On 22 January 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                               MR NATI ALAMNEW
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty of counsel instructed by Kesar
    & Co
    For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding a Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant may be a citizen of Eritrea born on  21  June  1995.  The
    question of his nationality is the main issue in this  appeal.  He  has
    been  given  permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of  First-Tier
    Tribunal Judge Mrs RJNB Morris ("the FTTJ") who  dismissed  his  appeal
    against the respondent's decision of 13 August 2013 to give  directions
    for his removal from the UK following the refusal of asylum.

 2. The appellant claimed that he left Eritrea with his parents when he was
    six months old and stayed with them in Ethiopia for  five  years.  They
    were deported back to Eritrea in 2000 and lived there until  2005.  The
    appellant and his mother then left Eritrea illegally and went  to  live
    in Sudan. They were in Sudan from 2005 until 2008. They  then  flew  to
    Turkey, stayed in Istanbul for one week and then moved  on  to  Greece.
    They remained in Greece for five years until they were threatened  with
    deportation. The appellant left his mother in Greece and flew to France
    with the assistance of an agent. He remained in France  for  less  than
    the day before travelling to the UK illegally hidden  in  a  lorry.  He
    arrived here on 27 December 2012 and claimed asylum the same day.

 3. The appellant claimed to  fear  persecution  from  the  authorities  in
    Eritrea because he was a Pentecostal Christian.  His  father  had  been
    arrested and it was not known what had happened to him although it  was
    feared that he had been killed.  He  also  feared  persecution  by  the
    authorities in Eritrea because he left the country  illegally  and  had
    not yet undertaken his military service.

 4. The respondent did not believe the appellant's account  of  events.  It
    was not believed that he was a Pentecostal Christian, that he had  left
    Eritrea illegally or that he had ever been of any adverse  interest  to
    the authorities there. The respondent had  doubts  as  to  whether  the
    appellant was a citizen of Eritrea.  I  will  need  to  return  to  the
    questions of how these doubts were expressed, whether the  respondent's
    conclusion in the reasons  for  refusal  letter  put  the  question  of
    nationality in issue, amounted to a concession  that  he  was  Eritrean
    (and if so to what extent and for  what  purpose)  or  whether  it  was
    unclear.

 5. The appellant appealed and the FTTJ heard  his  appeal  on  15  October
    2013. Both parties were represented and the  appellant  gave  evidence.
    The FTTJ made detailed findings of fact which are set out in paragraphs
    21 to 35 of the determination. She concluded that the appellant was not
    a credible witness. His account of events was not believed.  His  story
    had been constructed so as to meet the criteria which would enable  him
    to show that he was at real risk if he was to return to Eritrea. He was
    not from Eritrea. His Article 8 human rights  grounds  were  considered
    but rejected. The FTTJ dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.

 6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and the application was refused by a judge in the First-Tier  Tribunal.
    On renewal to the Upper Tribunal the application  was  granted  on  the
    basis that, whilst the challenge to the  adverse  credibility  findings
    might be little more than a disagreement there was  arguable  merit  in
    the grounds relating to the FTTJ's approach to nationality and  country
    of return. It was accepted that all the grounds could be argued.

 7. There are two sets of grounds of appeal, to the First-Tier Tribunal and
    to the Upper Tribunal. Both are relied on. The second  set  of  grounds
    also address the reasons given for the first refusal of  permission  to
    appeal. The grounds submit that the FTTJ erred  in  law.  Firstly,  the
    FTTJ failed  to  recognise  and  deal  with  the  fact  that  that  the
    respondent had accepted that the appellant's nationality  was  Eritrean
    and that his representatives had properly prepared  his  case  on  this
    basis. The FTTJ should  not  have  gone  behind  this  concession.  The
    appellant had been denied a fair opportunity to secure evidence to help
    him establish his Eritrean nationality. Secondly, if it was found  that
    the respondent had not made this  concession  the  refusal  letter  was
    legally flawed for lack of clarity. Thirdly, the credibility assessment
    was flawed because there was no evidential basis for findings as to the
    appellant's evidence as to when Easter fell and why the authorities  in
    Eritrea did not persecute the appellant or his mother  after  they  had
    arrested his  father.  There  were  no  inconsistencies.  Fourthly,  in
    relation to the appellant's claim to be  a  Pentecostal  Christian  the
    FTTJ had inverted the standard of proof. Fifthly, the  FTTJ  failed  to
    have proper regard to  the  contents  of  the  Multi-Assessment  report
    prepared by the London Borough of Hounslow.

 8. There is a Rule 24 response from the respondent which seeks to  clarify
    the respondent's position and submits that there is no  material  error
    of law.

 9.  Ms  Easty  relied  on  both   sets   of   grounds.   The   appellant's
    representatives had prepared his case on the basis that nationality was
    not disputed. This was made clear in the skeleton argument  before  the
    FTTJ. She took me to paragraphs 13 and 16 of the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter. Neither  the  respondent's  Presenting  Officer  nor  the  FTTJ
    recognised that the respondent had accepted that the  appellant  was  a
    citizen of Eritrea. The respondent now said  that  there  had  been  no
    concession but the appellant and his representatives were  entitled  to
    interpret the reasons for refusal letter on the basis that  there  was.
    If the appellant and his representatives had known that nationality was
    in dispute they would have sought evidence to prove it which was likely
    to have been in the form of language analysis, an expert report  as  to
    his knowledge of Eritrea, attempts to contact people in his  home  area
    in Eritrea who would have known him and trying  to  find  any  relevant
    documents which shed any light on  his  nationality.  In  reply  to  my
    question as to  why  this  had  not  been  done  either  prior  to  the
    respondent's decision or after the determination of the FTTJ, Ms  Easty
    submitted that prior to the respondent's decision the appellant did not
    know whether his nationality was going to be disputed  and,  after  the
    determination had been received, he was not likely to  get  funding  to
    make these enquiries until the question of any error of  law  had  been
    decided.

10. In reply to my question as to whether the FTTJ's  decision  would  bind
    the respondent so that she could not return him to Eritrea  which  was,
    in part, what he was seeking, Ms Easty submitted that if the  Secretary
    of State made a  new  decision  to  return  the  appellant  to  another
    country, probably Ethiopia, this would create a fresh right of  appeal.
    However, if she did not or if there was  delay  this  would  leave  the
    appellant in limbo unable to work and probably without support.

11. Ms Easty  relied  on  the  other  grounds  of  appeal  without  further
    submissions.

12. Mr Wilding submitted that the Asylum Policy Instructions indicated that
    there were disputed nationality cases and doubtful  nationality  cases.
    What the respondent said in the reasons for  refusal  letter  indicated
    that this was a doubtful nationality case. He accepted that  the  words
    "for the purposes of this document" in paragraph 16  defined  both  the
    respondent's position in relation to  the  appellant's  claim  and  the
    basis on which the appeal had to be considered by the FTTJ.  He  argued
    that the words "will be recorded as Eritrean" were not the same as  "is
    Eritrean"  but  conceded  that  the  word  "doubtful"  did  not  appear
    anywhere. The respondent's position was that read as a whole paragraphs
    13 to 16 of the refusal letter amounted to a clear indication that  the
    appellant's claimed Eritrean nationality was considered to be doubtful.

13. Mr Wilding accepted that  paragraph  3a  of  the  appellant's  skeleton
    argument before the FTTJ appeared to indicate that he  considered  that
    the respondent had accepted his Eritrean nationality. He submitted that
    the appellant had addressed matters  relating  to  his  nationality  in
    paragraphs 8 to 12 of his witness statement dated 15 October  2013  and
    that this and the skeleton argument dealt  with  his  position  on  the
    question of nationality. In the light of the Asylum Policy Instructions
    the respondent  took  the  correct  position.  She  did  not  say  that
    nationality was  disputed  because  she  had  no  evidence  of  another
    nationality. There were three  options  open  to  her;  to  accept  his
    nationality, to say that  it  was  doubtful  or  to  say  that  it  was
    disputed.

14. Mr Wilding submitted that there was no error of law in relation to  the
    FTTJ's treatment of  the  nationality  question.  Whether  or  not  the
    appellant would be left in limbo as a result of the decision was not  a
    matter for the Tribunal but for a future decision.

15. In relation  to  the  other  grounds  Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  the
    determination was well structured and well-reasoned. The  FTTJ  gave  a
    number of reasons for the adverse credibility finding and  the  grounds
    of appeal were in substance no more than disagreement with  conclusions
    properly reached on the evidence. Overall there was no error of law and
    I was asked to dismiss the appeal.

16. In her reply Ms Easty submitted  that  even  if  paragraph  16  of  the
    refusal letter did not amount to a clear acceptance that the  appellant
    was Eritrean then it was unclear. The appellant and his representatives
    were entitled to interpret and treat it as a  concession  that  he  was
    Eritrean.  The  FTT  should  have  spotted   the   point   and   sought
    clarification. The matters addressed in the skeleton argument  and  the
    appellant's witness statement went to credibility generally.

17. Ms Easty asked me to find that there were material errors  of  law,  to
    set aside the decision and to direct that it be reheard in  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal with no findings of credibility  or  fact  preserved.  Mr
    Wilding agreed, save that he asked me to consider whether the  findings
    of credibility and fact could be preserved, other than the  finding  in
    relation to the appellant's nationality.

18. I reserved my determination.

19. The appellant claimed to be a  citizen  of  Eritrea.  The  respondent's
    position in relation to his nationality and  identity  is  set  out  in
    paragraphs 13 to 16 of the reasons for refusal letter dated  12  August
    2013. Paragraphs 13 to 15 set out the respondent's detailed  assessment
    of aspects of the appellant's evidence relating to his nationality  and
    the question of whether he had lived in Eritrea. All of this  leads  to
    the conclusion in paragraph 16; "However,  given  the  absence  of  any
    documentary evidence which would give reasonable  grounds  to  formally
    dispute your nationality, it has been considered that for the  purposes
    of this document your nationality will be recorded as Eritrean".

20.  Mr  Wilding  said,  and  I  accept,  that  under  the  Asylum   Policy
    Instructions the respondent  had  three  alternatives.  These  were  to
    accept the claimant's nationality, to treat  it  is  "doubtful"  or  to
    treat it as "disputed".  Neither  the  word  "doubtful"  nor  the  word
    "disputed" appears in the refusal letter. The words "However, given the
    absence of any documentary evidence which would give reasonable grounds
    to formally dispute your nationality" give support to the view that the
    respondent was not treating the nationality claim as "disputed" leaving
    "doubtful" as one of the  two  possible  alternative  conclusions.  Set
    against this I find that the final words "it has been  considered  that
    for the purposes of this document your nationality will be recorded  as
    Eritrean" begs the question of what the respondent's  final  conclusion
    and position was. I find, as Mr Wilding accepts, that "for the purposes
    of this document" means that this was the  respondent's  position  both
    for the refusal of the appellant's application  and  in  any  resulting
    appeal to the Tribunal. "Will be recorded as Eritrean" does not  go  as
    far as and is not as clear as "is Eritrean" but begs  the  question  of
    what it does mean. I find that the meaning is not clear but comes close
    to acceptance that the appellant "is Eritrean". I  also  find  that  it
    would be reasonable for the appellant and  those  representing  him  to
    interpret this as acceptance on the part of  the  respondent  that,  at
    least for the purposes of the refusal and the subsequent appeal, he was
    Eritrean. The fact that that is what  the  appellant's  representatives
    did is borne out by the skeleton argument before the FTTJ in which,  at
    paragraph 3, they set out what the appellant  believed  the  respondent
    had  accepted.  This  states;  "3.  Respondent  accepts:  a.  that  the
    appellant's nationality and identity (he is accepted to be  a  national
    of Eritrean (sic) born on 21st of June 1995 (RFRL 2013), para 16......"

21. I find that is said in the skeleton  and  in  the  appellant's  witness
    statement, whilst addressing points taken in the refusal  letter,  does
    not indicate that the appellant was approaching the appeal on any basis
    other than that nationality was conceded.

22. The FTTJ said, in paragraph 1; "his nationality is in issue between the
    appellant and the respondent" before going  on  to  say,  in  the  same
    paragraph, that in the refusal letter "his nationality is  recorded  as
    Eritrean". In paragraph 14 what is said in paragraph 16 of the  refusal
    letter is set out in full. The FTT returned to the question as part  of
    her  findings  in  paragraph  23.  The  first  sentence   reads;   "the
    appellant's nationality and identity have  not  been  accepted  by  the
    respondent". I can find no mention of the appellant's position as it is
    set out in the skeleton argument. In the light of this I find that  the
    FTTJ should have been aware that the respondent's position  did  amount
    to conceding nationality or, in the alternative, was  unclear  and  the
    appellant and his representatives regarded it as a  concession  and  it
    was reasonable for them to do so. Had  this  been  addressed  the  FTTJ
    should have  asked  the  respondent's  representative  to  clarify  the
    position. If that clarification was that nationality was  not  conceded
    and the respondent intended to treat it as doubtful then in  the  light
    of the appellant's position  fairness  would  have  dictated  that  the
    appellant was entitled to an adjournment  in  order  to  be  given  the
    opportunity to produce further evidence relating  to  his  nationality.
    This amounts to a material error of law.

23. I find no merit in the other grounds of appeal. They are  in  substance
    no more than disagreements with findings properly reached by  the  FTTJ
    on all the evidence. However, my finding in relation to the nationality
    point means that  the  findings  of  credibility  and  fact  cannot  be
    preserved. If the appellant had been given the opportunity  to  produce
    further evidence relevant to his nationality then, if  accepted,  these
    would inevitably have had a knock-on effect on credibility as a whole.

24. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction  and  can  see  no
    good reason to do so.

25. I find that error of law is such that the decision must be  set  aside.
    No findings of credibility or fact are preserved. The appeal should  be
    reheard in the First-Tier Tribunal, by a Judge  other  than  First-Tier
    Tribunal Judge Mrs RJNB Morris.



    .............................................
    Signed        Date 16 January 2015
    Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden


