
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/08058/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 August 2016               |On 10 August 2016                 |
|                               |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. R.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Constable, Counsel, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant claimed asylum in the UK on 21 November 2014, and  said
       that he had entered the UK illegally earlier that day. His claim  was
       based upon his assertion that he was a citizen  of  Eritrea,  and  as
       such faced a real risk of harm upon  removal  from  the  UK  to  that
       country.

    2. Although the Respondent accepted that the Appellant was a citizen  of
       Eritrea, his asylum application was refused on  5  May  2015,  and  a
       decision was made to remove him  from  the  UK  in  consequence.  The
       Appellant duly appealed that immigration decision and his appeal  was
       in due course heard by First Tier Tribunal Judge Fisher.  The  appeal
       was dismissed in a decision promulgated on 10 February  2015  in  the
       course of which  his  account  of  his  experiences  in  Eritrea  was
       rejected as untrue.

    3. The Appellant lodged an application with the First Tier Tribunal  for
       permission to appeal. The application was refused by  Judge  Cruthers
       on 15 March 2016 on the basis that it was no more than a disagreement
       with the Judge's findings and identified no arguable  material  error
       of law. Undaunted the Appellant renewed the application to the  Upper
       Tribunal, asserting that in finding that he  was  not  satisfied  the
       Appellant had left Eritrea illegally, the Judge had failed to  follow
       the guidance to be found in  MO  (illegal  exit  -  risk  on  return)
       Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 190. That application  was  granted  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Bruce on 12 April 2016.

    4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 3 May  2016.  She  pointed
       out that the Judge's adverse credibility findings were  unchallenged,
       and that it was therefore open to the Judge to  conclude  as  he  had
       (after referring himself to the guidance in MO)  that  the  Appellant
       had not established that he left Eritrea illegally.

    5. The Appellant made no application pursuant  to  Rule  15(2A)  of  the
       Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.

    6. Thus the matter came before me.


  Error of law?

    7. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Constable accepted that  in  order  for
       the Appellant to have left Eritrea legally he must have  been  issued
       with a legitimate exit visa, which would also  require  him  to  have
       been issued with a legitimate Eritrean passport  in  order  for  that
       visa to be entered into it. He also accepted that such documents were
       issued, albeit rarely, and that if they were issued that there  would
       be likely to be a record of the issue of such documents that was held
       by the Eritrean authorities.

    8. I would add, that if, which the Appellant denied, such documents  had
       been issued to him, there is no reason for the Tribunal to assume  in
       his favour that they  have  subsequently  been  lost,  or  have  been
       destroyed by him. However,  even  if  such  documents  were  lost  or
       destroyed the Appellant and his family would be in a position to give
       details of when they had been issued to him, the  office  from  which
       they had been issued, and in the case of an exit visa the basis  upon
       which it had been issued.

    9. Mr Constable accepted that the Appellant's challenge to  the  Judge's
       decision, upon which permission had been granted, did not  extent  to
       any of the adverse credibility findings concerning the evidence  that
       the  Appellant  had  relied  upon.  His   evidence   concerning   his
       experiences in Eritrea was roundly rejected,  and  those  conclusions
       were entirely properly reasoned  and  open  to  the  Judge  upon  the
       evidence, after his application of the correct burden and standard of
       proof. There is nothing in the decision to  suggest  that  the  Judge
       accepted either his claim as to when, or how, he  had  left  Eritrea,
       and it is plain that he did not.

   10. The argument that Mr Constable advanced was an extremely narrow  one;
       namely to rely simply upon paragraph (v) of the headnote to MO and to
       argue that this meant that all of those returned to Eritrea  faced  a
       real risk of being perceived as having left  Eritrea  illegally,  and
       thus all returnees to Eritrea faced persecution, however they had  in
       fact left. Such a bald proposition is in my judgement logically quite
       unsustainable, and moreover it is clearly at  odds  with  the  expert
       evidence that was before the Upper Tribunal in MO. Nor was the  Judge
       required to identify the basis upon  which  the  Appellant  had  left
       Eritrea legitimately and to make a positive finding as to  the  basis
       upon which an exit visa had been issued to him. It was enough in  the
       circumstances for the Judge to conclude that  he  was  not  satisfied
       that the Appellant was telling the truth when he claimed to have left
       illegally, having taken into account the fact that the vast  majority
       of those departing Eritrea did so illegally; MA (Eritrea) [2014] EWCA
       Civ 1608. This was not a case in which the Appellant must  have  left
       illegally, whatever the truth of the  rest  of  his  account  of  his
       experiences.

   11.  In  the  circumstances,  and  notwithstanding  the  terms  in  which
       permission to appeal was granted, the grounds  disclose  no  arguable
       error of law in the Judge's approach to the evidence.  The  Appellant
       has therefore failed to establish that there was  any  error  of  law
       that requires the decision to be set aside and remade.  The  decision
       to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.



   DECISION


 The Decision of the First  Tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  10
 February 2016 did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law  in  the
 decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to be set aside
 and remade. The decision to dismiss the appeal is accordingly confirmed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

      Unless and until the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
 granted anonymity. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
 indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to the Appellant  and
 to the Respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to
 proceedings being brought for contempt of court.







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 9 August 2016
