
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08192/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 3 October 2014                             |On 7th October 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     RG
                           (anonymity Order MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr R. Toal, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


   DECISION UNDER RULE 17 OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES
                                    2008


    1. On the above date I provided to the parties a rough  and  incomplete
       draft of this decision, showing  only  the  bare  bones  of  what  I
       proposed to record, so as to allow for any comments  or  submissions
       by the parties. It was drafted after the issues referred  to  in  it
       had been canvassed. As now written, it does not precisely mirror the
       draft that was shown to the parties,  it  now  being  the  completed
       document. However, subject  possibly  to  the  last  paragraph  that
       refers to SM (withdrawal  of  appealed  decision:  effect)  Pakistan
       [2014] UKUT 00064 (IAC), nothing of substance has been changed, this
       final document making minor grammatical  and  other  inconsequential
       corrections or additions.

    2. This appeal came before me on the above date for a  case  management
       hearing, it having previously been listed for a substantive  hearing
       on asylum and human rights grounds  against  a  decision  to  refuse
       leave to enter the UK.

    3. The further background  and  history  of  the  appeal  need  not  be
       rehearsed here. Suffice to say there has been an appeal  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal, with further proceedings in the Upper Tribunal,
       then the Court of Appeal, with the appeal then remitted to the Upper
       Tribunal for re-hearing. It was originally thought that  the  appeal
       would be suitable for country guidance in relation to, very  broadly
       put: honour killings in Turkey.

    4. At the hearing before me, the Secretary of State considered that  it
       was appropriate for the decision to withdrawn. That is a decision to
       refuse leave to enter dated 31 July 2009, a decision  predicated  on
       the refusal of the appellant's claim for asylum.

    5. As was canvassed at the hearing  before  me  however,  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ("the 2008 rules") do not make
       provision for the Secretary of State  to  withdraw  a  decision.  Of
       course, it is a matter for the Secretary of State if she  wishes  to
       withdraw a decision but the effect so far as the Upper  Tribunal  is
       concerned in terms of an appeal is governed by the 2008  rules.  The
       draft quoted an earlier version of the  2008  rules.   Rule  17,  as
       amended, provides as follows:
              "17.-(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a party may give notice  of
                 the withdrawal of its case, or any part of it -


              (a) by sending or delivering to the Upper Tribunal  a  written
                     notice of withdrawal; or


              (b) orally at a hearing.


             (2)   Notice of withdrawal will  not  take  effect  unless  the
                 Upper  Tribunal  consents  to  the  withdrawal  except   in
                 relation to an application for permission to appeal."

    6. I gave my consent to the withdrawal  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
       case, that case being that the appellant is not entitled to leave to
       enter. The  parties  were  in  agreement  that  the  effect  of  the
       withdrawal  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  (founded  on  the
       immigration decision) is that a further decision will be made taking
       into account the history of the appeal proceedings  and  the  up-to-
       date position in relation to the  appellant's  family  and  personal
       circumstances in the UK.

    7. It was agreed on behalf of the respondent that any new decision will
       take as part of the agreed factual background the matters set out in
       the appellant's witness statement dated 30 October 2009, and  stated
       in Immigration Judge Elek's determination at [8] to have been signed
       before her on 3 November 2009. It was  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
       Secretary of State before me  by  Mr  Duffy  in  the  light  of  the
       findings made by Judge Elek, which were considered by Laws LJ in his
       judgment following the hearing  before  him  on  11  November  2010,
       reported as RG (Turkey) [2010] EWCA  Civ  1510,  that  that  witness
       statement is agreed and accepted as to its facts. That is  the  case
       except in so far as the witness statement  makes  assertions  as  to
       actual or established risk on return.

    8. This decision of the Upper Tribunal however,  does  not  purport  to
       make any factual findings or to make any decisions on the merits  of
       any asylum or human rights claim.

    9. I refer at [1] above to the decision in SM,  which  having  reminded
       myself of it after the hearing, it is as well to flag it up for  the
       parties' consideration.   I  am  inclined  to  the  view  that  that
       decision does not require the  Upper  Tribunal  to  do,  or  decide,
       anything further in this case, and in  the  light  of  the  complete
       agreement between the parties does not affect this written decision.
       If either party takes a different view, that party should  make  any
       written representations on the point no later  than  14  days  after
       this Decision is sent out.










Upper   Tribunal    Judge    Kopieczek                               3/10/14

