

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08486/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 8 May 2017                         |On 8 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between


                                     B A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Casely, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan. His  application  for  asylum
   was refused by the Respondent on 19 September 2014. He  appealed  against
   this decision under section 82 (1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
   Asylum Act 2002 (NIAA). His first appeal was dismissed by the  First-tier
   Tribunal. Upper Tribunal Judge Martin  found  an  error  of  law  in  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remitted it for a fresh  hearing.
   His remitted appeal was dismissed on asylum and human rights  grounds  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rouke in a decision promulgated on 19  August
   2016.  Permission to appeal against that decision was granted on  renewal
   by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb.


2. Judge O'Rouke accepted that the Appellant would be at risk  in  his  home
   area. The grounds of appeal challenge the First-tier Tribunal's  findings
   on internal relocation and the Article 8 decision.  Upper Tribunal  Judge
   Grubb granted permission on all grounds, finding  that  it  was  arguable
   that the Judge failed  properly  to  consider  the  medical,  expert  and
   background evidence concerning the  Appellant's  circumstances,  and  any
   risk to him as a "Westernized" person if returned to Kabul.  Further,  he
   found that it was arguably speculation that  the  Appellant's  family  in
   Afghanistan could assist him there. He further  found  that  the  Judge's
   finding in respect of paragraph 276ADE appeared  to  be  based  upon  his
   finding in respect of internal relocation and that, therefore, there were
   not  therefore  very  significant   difficulties   in   the   Appellant's
   reintegration into Afghanistan. This  finding  was  therefore  contingent
   upon the finding challenged in the  grounds  in  relation  to  relocation
   being upheld.

3. At the hearing Ms Casey expanded on the Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal.
   Mr  Diwnycz  conceded  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   displayed a lack of adequate reasoning on the majority of points.

4. In light of the Respondent's concession and  having  had  regard  to  the
   evidence before the First-tier Tribunal I find that there was a  material
   error of law in the decision. In considering  the  question  of  internal
   relocation, the First-tier Tribunal found at paragraphs 30  (v)  (a)  and
   (c) that the Appellant was suffering some mental  trauma  and  depression
   but that this stemmed from the failure of his asylum application and  the
   possibility of return to Afghanistan, not  past  events.  He  found  that
   although much had been made of his  lack  of  maturity  he  was  able  to
   journey to the UK on his own and establish a life  here  and  would  have
   'considerable  resilience'.  He  found  that  he  would,  on  return   to
   Afghanistan, be capable of looking after himself.

5. The Appellant's grounds challenge these findings firstly,  at  ground  1,
   on the basis that there  was  a  failure  to  take  account  of  relevant
   evidence with regard to the Appellant's mental ill-health and poor coping
   skills and secondly at ground 3 that inadequate reasons  had  been  given
   for the dismissal of Dr Battersby's expert report. It  is  asserted  that
   the evidence of GARAS, a refugee support  organisation,  and  his  social
   worker as to his mental  vulnerability,  distress,  immaturity  and  poor
   coping skills contradicted the First-tier Tribunal's findings  about  the
   Appellant's resilience and the First-tier Tribunal,  it  is  argued,  was
   required to give reasons for rejecting this evidence. It is also asserted
   that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  substituted   its   own,   non-qualified
   assessment of the Appellant's mental health for the professional  opinion
   of Dr Battersby who had carried out a critical and objective analysis  of
   the symptoms and diagnosed the Appellant with complex PTSD and  concluded
   that the most likely causation of his mental health problems was from the
   events that he described.

6. There was a substantial evidence from the Appellant's  foster  carer  and
   social workers at A15  to  21  of  his  bundle  that  the  Appellant  had
   insufficient mental resilience, maturity or independence skills  to  live
   unsupported and that he was functioning in a  manner  consistent  with  a
   teenage child of an age considerably below his actual age.  The  evidence
   of his former social worker was that he was struggling  to  maintain  his
   wellbeing, self- confidence and sleep and eating  regime.   In  light  of
   this evidence, I find that the First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that  the
   Appellant had considerable resilience was not adequately reasoned. Whilst
   the Appellant may have been able to find his way to the  UK  on  his  own
   with an agent the Tribunal was obliged to engage with this  evidence  and
   explain why he did not accept those conclusions.

7. Further, Dr Battersby had diagnosed the Appellant with complex  PTSD  and
   concluded that she was unable to elicit any other events in  his  history
   that would account for a presentation of complex PTSD (AB25). The  First-
   tier Tribunal accepted that the Appellant might be  suffering  from  some
   mental trauma and depression but found that this stemmed from the failure
   of his asylum application and the possibility of return  to  Afghanistan.
   He then speculated that the Appellant may  have  exaggerated  or  wrongly
   attributed them in order to achieve the desired outcome.


8. Although credibility is a matter for  the  Tribunal,  Judges  should  not
   indulge in speculation about as to alternative causation of psychological
   injuries as they are not medically qualified. Further,  in  dealing  with
   the medical report and the  Appellant's  depression  in  the  context  of
   internal relocation, the First-tier Tribunal Judge directed himself  that
   "in any event, KH indicates that the withdrawal of medical treatment  was
   not a very exceptional ground such as to engage Article 3". This test was
   irrelevant to the  consideration  of  reasonableness  and  the  direction
   indicates that too high a threshold was applied. In the  circumstances  I
   find that the reasoning in relation to  the  medical  evidence  disclosed
   errors of law.


9. Further, the First-tier Tribunal  had  before  it  the  country  expert's
   report of Mr Foxley who concluded that the Appellant was likely  to  face
   significant difficulties in Kabul for a number of  reasons.   The  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge did not address the expert's reasoned conclusions  in
   paragraph 30 of the  decision  where  his  reasoning  regarding  internal
   relocation is set out. In view of the failure to address this  report,  I
   find the First-tier Tribunal failed to engage with material evidence  and
   the reasoning therefore was also inadequate.


10. In the circumstances therefore I find that the findings  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal in relation to internal flight cannot stand,  and  it  also
   follows that since these findings feed into  the  Article  8  assessment,
   that this also is infected by a material error of law.  The  findings  in
   relation to the risk in the Appellant's home area stand.


11. Both representatives agreed that  this  was  a  matter  that  should  be
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal due to the extent of the fact-finding
   required.




Notice of decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
asylum and human rights grounds involved the making of a material  error  of
law.

I set the decision aside and the appeal will be determined  de  novo  having
regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statements  due
to the nature and extent of fact finding required  by  a  Judge  other  than
Judge O'Rourke. The finding that the Appellant is at risk in his  home  area
is preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date: 7 JUNE 2017




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
