
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08069/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th January 2016                          |On 1st April 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                  miss M K
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Din, Solicitor instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. This is an appeal, with permission, against the decision of the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  20th  October  2015   dismissing   the
    appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated  6th
    May 2015, refusing her asylum, humanitarian protection  and  protection
    under the European Convention.  The Secretary of State  considered  the
    application under the Immigration Rules.

History

 2. The appellant is a national of Gambia born on [ ] 1976 and she  claimed
    that she would be perceived as a member of a particular social group on
    the basis of her links to a  relative  who  was  President  of  Gambia,
    because of her advocacy and opposition to the  Gambian  government  and
    because of her advocacy on behalf of the  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual  and
    transgender community  (LGBT).   The  appellant  claims  that  she  has
    engaged in public broadcasts and demonstrations in  opposition  to  the
    Gambian government and she claims she was the granddaughter of a former
    Gambian President and had experienced difficulties for this reason.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered her immigration  history,  the
    documentation  supplied  and  the  oral  evidence  together  with   the
    representations made on her behalf.

 4. The grounds for permission to appeal were not drafted entirely clearly.
     They noted, however, that the appellant entered the United Kingdom  as
    a student and subsequently claimed asylum on 1st  December  2014.   The
    respondent refused the claim on 6th May 2015 and the appellant's appeal
    was heard on 30th September 2015 by the First-tier Tribunal who  issued
    the relevant impugned determination on 20th October 2015.

 5. The grounds set out some of the findings of  the  judge  and  submitted
    that notwithstanding the judge's findings at paragraphs 70  to  71  the
    appellant had sought to rely on  documentation  to  support  her  media
    activities with Kibaro.  The judge did not make a finding that  he  did
    not accept  the  appellant's  media  commitment  and  he  accepted  the
    association of the appellant with Kibaro a radio station.

 6. Therefore, it was asserted, that regardless of whether the  appellant's
    activities were  self-serving,  at  paragraph  71  the  judge  was  not
    entitled to conclude  that  the  appellant  had  "a  genuine  political
    profile" [sic] (I think this was meant to  read  no  genuine  political
    profile') or that she has not "come to the adverse attention of Gambian
    authorities".

 7. In the light of her public profile it was asserted she was at real risk
    of being interviewed upon her arrival in Gambia and especially  as  she
    would be documented failed asylum seeker.

 8. There was evidence to support this fear in the form of  a  letter  from
    the Sene-Gambian Human  Rights  Defence,  a  report  from  the  Gambian
    Consultative Council and  country  background  evidence.   Against  the
    background of such an  oppressive  regime  and  given  the  appellant's
    public profile it was submitted that even if the  appellant's  position
    was  self-serving  the  Gambian  authorities  may  nonetheless  "be  of
    interest to her should she return  to  Gambia  -  again  especially  as
    someone who would be documented as a failed asylum seeker."

 9. Therefore she was somebody who held a  number  of  risk  factors  which
    would expose her to persecution  upon  return.   The  judge  failed  to
    consider the factors of the appeal by relying  on  adverse  credibility
    findings and neglecting the risk factors to find that  she  may  be  of
    interest to the Gambian authorities.

10. At the hearing before me Mr Din submitted that  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence the appellant did have a public profile and the judge accepted
    her association with Kibaro and it was clear that she would be returned
    as a failed asylum seeker to an oppressive regime.  She  would  not  be
    expected to lie on her return.

11. Ms Sreeraman relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that  looking
    at the decision in its entirety which started at paragraph 51 the judge
    rejected the core of the appellant's claim and noted  at  paragraph  57
    that the authorities did not monitor online activities.  There  was  an
    absence of her evidence at demonstrations.  The judge  found  that  her
    sur  place  activity   was   not   credible.    There   were   manifest
    inconsistencies with  the  level  of  activity  here.   The  judge  had
    considered  the  witness  evidence  but  found   that   wanting.    The
    association with Kibaro was merely a self-serving  attempt  to  bolster
    her claim.  There was no reliable evidence of her involvement with  the
    opposition to the Gambian government and the decision was  reasoned  as
    to why on the evidence it was considered that she would not be at risk.
     HJ had been addressed paragraph 73.  The judge had looked at  the  sur
    place activities and found that they were not genuine  in  relation  to
    her politics or her LGBT activities.

12. Mr Din submitted that Ms Sreeraman had attempted to piece together  the
    evidence  but  the  judge  had  not  put  the  risk  factors   together
    systematically.

13. In conclusion it is clear that the judge has set out the  key  elements
    of the appellant's claim as to whether she would  attract  the  adverse
    attention of the Gambian authorities  on  her  return  because  of  her
    public opposition to them in her broadcasts and demonstrations.  It  is
    recorded that she claims that she is the granddaughter  of  the  former
    Gambian President  and  has  also  experienced  difficulties  for  this
    reason.  The judge referred to the appellant's advocacy  on  behalf  of
    the LGBT and whether it will be perceived to be a member  of  the  LGBT
    community.  The judge considered those various factors of the claim  in
    sequence.

14. Turning to the experience of the appellant from her connection  with  a
    previous president, in fact it was her claim in her  witness  statement
    that the President was a great uncle, not her  grandfather,  and  there
    appeared to be no mention of him in  her  representations  of  November
    2012.

15. Even if that were not the case the judge rejects  her  claim  regarding
    the risk from this association.  He recalls at paragraph  43  that  the
    appellant relied on the evidence that a family had been  merely  caused
    distress by the appellant's political activities in  the  UK  and  that
    that stems from one verbal warning issued  to  the  appellant's  sister
    shortly after the after the appellant attended a demonstration in 2012.
     The judge recorded that the appellant confirmed that she had  received
    no other warnings paragraph 44.  On the one hand the appellant  claimed
    alleged restrictions on communication but on the other hand  the  judge
    found the appellant 'appeared to be available at will' on social  media
    (45).  Indeed the judge rejected the fears based on a "random encounter
    between the appellant's  sister  and  a  stranger  who  approached  the
    appellant's sister when she was selling food near her  home  in  2012".
    The appellant had made no enquiries about why the family  should  place
    weight on an encounter with a stranger. The judge found this to  be  an
    entirely speculative fear and not based on any reasoned conclusion.

16. As to  her  political  profile,  the  judge  rejected  the  appellant's
    evidence about her image being published at [48] finding  that  on  the
    one hand she claimed to have her image in a newspaper and on the  other
    hand it was printed on line in the UK.  Even then the  judge  found  at
    [49] that the Gambian authorities do not monitor on line activities  in
    the UK and would not have knowledge of her activities in the  UK  [50].
    The judge found at [58] that the appellant was engaged with  Kibaro  on
    an informal basis, at best,  because  of  her  reliance  on  Ms  C  for
    financial and domestic support.  Indeed the judge commented on the lack
    of interest by the authorities in Ms C, because she had passed  through
    the Gambian borders without incident, and therefore the appellant.

17.  Although  the  judge  concluded  at  paragraph  50  that  the  Gambian
    authorities had no  knowledge  of  the  appellant's  alleged  political
    activities he nonetheless continued to consider the  appellant's  claim
    that she was actively engaged for the Gambian  political  community  in
    the UK and that she was an active member of the  council  and  attended
    meetings on a weekly basis at minimum.  That said, the judge  found  it
    was not credible that the appellant would  be  unable  to  provide  any
    meaningful evidence of the  demonstrations  that  she  had  claimed  to
    attend since 2012 despite claiming  to  be  actively  involved  in  the
    organisation of  those  demonstrations  [52].   Mr  Din  confirmed  the
    evidence in support of the appellant's  claim  that  she  was  actively
    involved essentially relied on her own witness statement.    The  judge
    found clearly at paragraph 53 that the appellant's evidence  was  vague
    in relation to her  involvement  with  demonstrations  in  the  UK  and
    considered the "limited number of demonstrations and her  alleged  role
    in these events," undermined her claim.   Indeed  the  judge  found  at
    paragraph 52 that the appellant was unable to  provide  any  meaningful
    evidence as to the demonstrations that she had claimed to attend.  This
    the judge found damaged her credibility and  in  relation  to  her  sur
    place activity, or rather lack of it,  and he did not find her to be at
    risk on return [52].

18. The judge at paragraphs [54] to  [56]  considered  the  representations
    made on the appellant's behalf dated 8th November 2012  which  referred
    to the membership of the United Democratic Party and  her  activity  in
    Gambia.  He judge refers in paragraph  55  to  the  difference  in  the
    representations between 8th November 2012 and those currently,  whereby
    she claimed she had been a member of the party since its was founded in
    1996 and campaigned at opposition rallies and  helped  to  recruit  new
    members into the party in Gambia.  In her previous representations  the
    appellant claimed that she engaged  in  political  activity  in  Gambia
    whilst her  current  claim  was  now  essentially  claiming  sur  place
    activity in the UK. In effect the appellant had  ample  time  to  claim
    asylum and did not - she had applied for leave as  a  student  on  16th
    September 2000 and subsequently extended her  leave  until  15th  April
    2009 when  she  applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  thirteen  separate
    occasions between 24th February 2008 and 11th August 2014 all of  which
    were refused (in some cases she made two applications).   She  did  not
    claim asylum until 1st December 2014 and the judge took the  Section  8
    point against her.

19. The judge also considered the evidence of the  witnesses  in  turn  and
    found that they too undermined  the  evidence  of  the  appellant.   In
    relation to her activities in the UK the judge found that Miss  C,  one
    of the witnesses, was able to pass through the Gambian  border  control
    without  incident  despite  her  claimed  close  association  with  the
    appellant and marriage to the appellant's family, which, in the judge's
    view, did not demonstrate sophisticated surveillance on the part of the
    Gambian authority.  The judge further, found at paragraph 60  that  the
    witness contradicted the appellant's own claim that  she  had  received
    many warnings (witness statement paragraph 8 of the appellant's  bundle
    page 15).

20. The judge also considered the evidence of Mr B D noting his absence  at
    the hearing, the absence of a signature on his  witness  statement  and
    noted the disparity in the number of demonstrations that were  said  to
    have been attended.  The judge noted there was a lack of coherence  and
    consistency between shared political ideology and the  presentation  of
    the evidence of Mr B D did not assist the appellant's appeal.

21. Indeed the judge found that the witnesses appeared to have no knowledge
    of the appellant's allegiance to the LGBT community and  this  in  turn
    undermined her claim that she was indeed active  on  their  behalf  and
    would come to the attention of the  Gambian  authorities  as  a  result
    [71].

22. The judge referred to the letter  of  the  Sene-Gambian  Humans  Rights
    Defence  League  [65]  and  noted  that  the  letter  referred  to  the
    appellant's participation in a demonstration on 22nd  August  2015  but
    that event was not within the appellant's reasonable contemplation  and
    thus genuinely occur. This in turn undermined of the  contents  of  the
    letter and the credibility of the appellant.

23. Overall the judge found that the appellant's evidence was contradictory
    and undermining of her claim.  It is right to say  that  the  judge  at
    paragraph 70 found the appellant's association with  Kibaro  was  self-
    serving.  The question is whether the appellant had  demonstrated  that
    she had been at risk whilst in the  Gambia,  which  the  judge  clearly
    found that she had not, whether she had demonstrated reliable  evidence
    of a genuine political conviction in which case how would she have been
    act and be perceived on her return.

24. The judge found that the appellant had failed  to  demonstrate  genuine
    political conviction or that she had or would come to the attention  of
    the Gambian authorities on her return.  With regard to her  involvement
    with the Kibaro radio at paragraph 71 the judge stated  that  this  was
    the facilitation of other's opinions at best and there was no  reliable
    evidence to demonstrate  that  she  was  of  interest  to  the  Gambian
    authorities.  Indeed the judge's finding regarding the evidence of  the
    appellant's activities as a whole were that she was  not  credible  and
    this would include Kibaro and further that  the  association  was  only
    'informal' through her reliance on  domestic  arrangements  with  Ms  C
    [58].

25. As the judge states at paragraph 57  the  representations  referred  to
    active monitoring by the Gambian authorities and the murder of a family
    member but the appellant consistently maintained in her  current  claim
    that her public  activities  were  online  and  therefore  outside  the
    knowledge and control of the authorities.  He found that  "her  current
    fear is based upon hearsay evidence."

26. In some of the appellant's witnesses also appeared to have

    "no knowledge of her commitment to the LGBT community or  simply  refer
    to this issue in a cursory manner" (72).

    He concluded that there could be no assumption that the author  of  the
    statement was homosexual and secondly that the appellant  had  imported
    "the most tenuous of inferences to promote her claim in this regard."

27. In effect the judge concluded that there was no  reliable  evidence  of
    the appellant's profile or her activities.   The  appellant's  evidence
    was contradictory and the letters and witness evidence was undermining.
     The judge, however, stated that notwithstanding her  lack  of  genuine
    political conviction he addressed the question of whether she would  be
    at risk but found on the evidence that she had and would  not  come  to
    the risk of the authorities [71].

28. There is no identifiable firm evidence  that  a  failed  asylum  seeker
    would be of interest to the authorities for that reason.   The  OGN  on
    Gambia 2013 as produced at the First tier Tribunal specifically states

    6.1 There is no policy which  precludes  the  enforced  return  to  the
    Gambia of failed asylum seekers who have no legal basis of stay in  the
    United Kingdom.

29. As there was no evidence that the Gambian authorities had the power  to
    survey within the UK and because the judge finds that her political and
    sexual advocacy was not genuine for the reasons  given  throughout  the
    determination it is reasonable to conclude that he has dealt  with  the
    HJ point.  Indeed at paragraph 73 the judge states the following.

         "The evidence demonstrates that the appellant is associated with  a
         discussion of visa marriages  (respondent's  bundle  page  H2)  yet
         there is no suggestion that she  endorses  such  practice.   It  is
         reasonable  to  apply  the  same  principle  to  the  assertion  of
         perceived sexual orientation.  When the evidence is  considered  in
         the round it is reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  has
         imported the most tenuous of inferences to promote her claim.   She
         also contrives circumstances to promote the appearance of political
         opinions and ideology which d not exist."

30. On an overall reading of the determination as the judge concluded  that
    she had no genuine political commitment or to either  the  UDP  or  the
    LGBT cause such that she would not need to lie on return  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker should she be interviewed.  This is not the case  of  sur
    place activity which was genuinely believed or which had been  surveyed
    or which would cause her to be perceived as a political opponent on her
    return to Gambia.  On a reading of the determination as a whole I  find
    that there is no error of law and the decision shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 10th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

