
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08627/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st March 2016                            |On 13th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                               Farideh Hassani
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Bhachu, instructed by Messrs J M Wilson
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan whose  claim  for  asylum  in
    this country had been refused by the Secretary of State.  The  core  of
    the her claim was that she was at real risk if returned to  Afghanistan
    as her daughter had worked for  the  Ministry  of  Women's  Affairs  in
    Afghanistan, as a result of which the daughter had been  threatened  as
    had other members of the family and in time the daughter was killed  by
    the Taliban and the rest of the family fled in fear.  The Secretary  of
    State did not accept that  the  daughter  had  been  killed,  that  the
    Appellant was wanted by the Taliban or that she would  be  at  risk  in
    Afghanistan if returned.

 2. Her appeal against the refusal of asylum and removal decision was heard
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J  Pacey  and  dismissed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 19th October 2015.  The Appellant  applied  for
    permission to appeal to this Tribunal.  In brief the Grounds of  Appeal
    were that the judge had applied the  wrong  standard  of  proof  as  at
    paragraph 84 of her decision she had referred to "the  lower  level  of
    the balance of probabilities", which was the wrong  standard.  She  had
    also failed, it was said, to give any reasons as to  why  she  had  not
    accepted as reliable a  letter  confirming  the  circumstances  of  the
    daughter's death which appeared on  government  letterhead  written  on
    behalf of elders of the village and verified by the provincial council.
     The original letter and envelope had been produced at the hearing  but
    the judge had failed to make any  finding  as  to  why  no  weight  was
    attached to that evidence.  Reference was made to the reported decision
    in MK  (Duty  to  give  reasons)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  00641  (IAC).
    Permission to appeal was granted on both grounds.  In a response  under
    Upper Tribunal Procedure Rule 24 the Secretary of State indicated  that
    the appeal was opposed and submitted that the judge had given  adequate
    reasons for her findings.  It was argued that she had directed  herself
    correctly as to the standard of proof at paragraph 5 of  her  decision.
    As to the reference at paragraph 54 it was stated that when  the  judge
    said "even on the lower level of the balance of probabilities" she  had
    meant lower than  the  balance  of  probabilities,  which  would  be  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood.

 3. At the commencement of the hearing before me Mr  Mills  confirmed  that
    the appeal was opposed.  Miss Bhachu relied upon the grounds and handed
    in copies of authorities relating to the correct standard of  proof  in
    asylum appeals namely Mohammed Imran Ali v SSHD 19298,  a  decision  of
    the Immigration Appeal Tribunal from  1999  and  Santhirakumar  v  SSHD
    [2002] UKIAT 01583.  Both these decisions are  of  some  antiquity  but
    there was no objection to their being handed in and relied upon.   Miss
    Bhachu said that what was stated in the  response  under  Rule  24  was
    speculative and simply suggested a different interpretation but it  was
    not what the judge had stated at paragraph 84 of her decision.  It  was
    axiomatic that the correct standard must be applied and the  judge  had
    referred to the balance of probabilities, which was incorrect.  In  the
    case of Ali the judge there had at one  point  identified  the  correct
    standard of proof but later a conflicting standard had been used.  That
    too had been a political asylum case and the  Tribunal  had  overturned
    the decision.  Whilst the judge had  stated  the  correct  standard  at
    paragraph 5 she had subsequently applied a different standard.

 4. With regard to the letter from the villagers the judge had referred  to
    that in the evidence and the original envelope and original letter  had
    been produced at the hearing.  The  villagers  stated  that  they  were
    witnesses to the killing of the daughter but  the  judge  had  made  no
    findings whatever on that document,  although  she  commented  that  no
    death certificate as such had been obtained.  It was clear from MK that
    a Tribunal must give reasons as to why no weight or little  weight  has
    been given to a document or to evidence but the judge made no  findings
    at all in respect of that document.  She had  made  no  finding  as  to
    whether the daughter was alive or dead and the Appellant  was  entitled
    to know why she had won or lost.   The  letter  in  question  had  been
    confirmed by the authorities including the police and village  council.



 5. In response Mr Mills said that the standard of proof was  mentioned  on
    only two occasions, at paragraphs 5 and 84 and that at no  point  other
    than in paragraph 84 was there any hint of the incorrect standard being
    used.  He said the judge in question was experienced and she should  be
    given the benefit of the doubt.  The response under Rule  24  went  one
    step further.  Paragraph 5 set out  the  correct  standard.   What  the
    judge had written at paragraph 84 in fact made no sense and it would be
    unfair to think that the judge had applied the wrong standard.  It  was
    true that the judge had failed  to  refer  to  the  document  from  the
    villagers but he submitted there was no ambiguity in the  view  of  the
    judge upon the Appellant's evidence.  Most of the  adverse  credibility
    findings had nothing to do with corroboration.  It was difficult to see
    that if the judge had expressly addressed the document  it  could  have
    made any difference.  He went on to suggest that at paragraphs  81  and
    82 it could be considered that the judge had addressed the  issue.   At
    paragraph 81 the judge stated that persons who could have confirmed the
    death had not done so and at 82 that there was no death certificate and
    the judge questioned why the villagers who were stated  to  be  helpful
    had not  obtained  one.   The  Appellant  had  failed  to  answer  that
    question.  There, he said, the judge was addressing the lack of  proper
    corroboration.  He submitted that within that finding it could be taken
    that the judge had rejected the letter from the villagers  but  in  the
    round it could make no difference.  It was clear why the Appellant  had
    lost.

 6. Finally Miss Bhachu said that the document in question was  significant
    evidence.  At paragraphs 80 and 81 the judge was saying  there  was  no
    corroborative evidence but there had been corroborative evidence in the
    form of the letter which was stamped and verified by the police.   That
    could well have made a material difference had it been considered.  The
    judge was saying that there was no supportive evidence but  there  was.
    What the judge had done fell far short of the standard required  in  MK
    as she had not even rejected the letter.  As to the standard  of  proof
    there might be ambiguity but it  was  not  clear  that  the  judge  had
    applied the correct standard.  If the benefit of the doubt  was  to  be
    given to anyone it should be to the Appellant not to the judge.

 7. Having heard those submissions I reserved my decision which I now give.
     As to the standard of proof it is the case that at paragraph 5 of  her
    decision the judge set out  a  perfectly  appropriate  summary  of  the
    correct standard referring to "a reasonable likelihood" or  "a  serious
    possibility" and stating that  this  was  a  lower  standard  than  the
    balance of probabilities.  However paragraph 84 reads as follows:

         "If the agent merely promised to get them to a safe place,  as  the
         Appellant argues, then it is reasonable to suppose  that  he  would
         have  considered  his  function  fulfilled  when  they  arrived  in
         Belgium.  She had told him that she had a daughter in the UK and to
         my mind, even on the lower level of the balance  of  probabilities,
         her intention was not to seek asylum in the first safe country,  on
         the basis of a well-founded fear of persecution, but to  reach  the
         UK, where she has a daughter."

 8. As Mr Mills submitted it is  the  case  that  the  judge  gave  various
    reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account but  the  application  of
    the correct standard of proof in reaching those findings  is  critical.
    To my mind the phrase "even on  the  lower  level  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities" could have several interpretations.  The judge may  have
    intended, as was suggested in  the  Rule  24  response,  that  she  was
    applying a standard lower than the balance of probabilities but that is
    not what she set out in the  decision.   The  phrase  however  is  also
    capable of an interpretation that she had previously applied  a  higher
    standard but even on a lower level i.e. the  balance  of  probabilities
    the Appellant's intention was not to seek asylum.  Such ambiguity  does
    undermine the reliability of the findings and amount to an error of law
    potentially material to the outcome.

 9. With regard to the letters from the villagers it is the case  that  the
    judge described this in terms at paragraph  49  of  her  decision.   At
    paragraph 33 it was  also  mentioned  and  stated  that  the  Appellant
    produced the original letter and envelope at the hearing.  There is  no
    subsequent consideration of the letter however.  It is the case that at
    paragraphs 81 and 82 the judge commented on a lack of information  from
    the Ministry of Women's Affairs and that there was no death certificate
    as such for the daughter but she made no reference to  what  weight  if
    any she placed upon the letter from the villagers  which  was  said  to
    have been endorsed by the authorities.  The headnote  to  MK  (Duty  to
    give reasons) Pakistan reads as follows:

         "(1) It is axiomatic that a  determination  discloses  clearly  the
             reasons for a Tribunal's decision.

         (2)   If  a  Tribunal  finds  oral  evidence  to  be   implausible,
             incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth  no  weight
             whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the determination and
             for  such  findings  to  be  supported  by  reasons.   A  bare
             statement that a witness was not believed or that  a  document
             was afforded no weight is unlikely to satisfy the  requirement
             to give reasons."

10. It is the case that the judge made no assessment of the  worth  of  the
    document from the villagers.  That failed to meet  the  requirement  to
    give reasons as expressed in MK.  It was also the case that it was  not
    apparent that the evidence had been considered in  the  round,  a  duty
    that has been made clear in  numerous  cases  including  in  particular
    Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367.  The errors of law identified  were
    potentially material to the outcome  and  I  therefore  set  aside  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  had  canvassed  with  the
    representatives the appropriate course if the decision  was  set  aside
    and it was clear that the appeal would have to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing, no findings being preserved, in accordance
    with Statement 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements  for  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal and under  the  provisions  of
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision by the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  errors  on
points of law and that decision is set aside.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing,  no  findings  being  preserved,  in
accordance with the directions below.

No anonymity order was requested and none is made.






Signed                              Date 7 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French



  DIRECTION FOR REHEARING (SECTIONS 12(3)(A) AND 12(3)(B) OF THE TRIBUNALS,
                       COURTS AND ENFORCEMENT ACT 2007


 1. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal are set aside and the appeal is
    to be heard afresh, no findings being preserved.

 2. The members of the First-tier Tribunal who are to reconsider the appeal
    should not include Judges of the First-tier Tribunal J  Pacey  or  J  M
    Reid.

 3. The appropriate hearing centre is  Birmingham  and  the  time  estimate
    three hours.  A Dari interpreter will be required.

 4. Each party shall serve upon the other party  and  upon  the  First-tier
    Tribunal copies of any witness statements or other documents upon which
    reliance is intended to be  placed  at  least  seven  days  before  the
    hearing.






Signed                              Date 7 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
