
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08366/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 13 December 2013                             |On 27 January 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                            Blessing Esohe Amode
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Worthington, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Archibald, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Blessing Esohe Amode, was born on 19 October 1979 and is
    a female citizen of Nigeria.  She appeals against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Batiste) which is  dated  10  October  2013.
    Judge Batiste dismissed her appeal against a decision of the respondent
    dated 18 August 2013 to refuse her leave to enter the United Kingdom.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal.  The first  ground  asserts  that  the
    judge "erred in law in failing to consider [the  appellant's]  evidence
    in the round."  The appellant relied on an expert report from the Poppy
    Project prepared by a Mary Baillie.  [25],  the  judge  made  what  the
    grounds described as a "preliminary finding" to the effect that he  was
    "entitled to consider [Miss Baillie] as an expert witness  due  to  her
    experience in dealing with women claiming  to  have  been  trafficked."
    The grounds then complain [7] that the judge had rejected the  evidence
    of the appellant and that provided by Miss Baillie.

 3. [39], Judge Batiste wrote:

         I do also note  that  whilst  [Miss  Baillie]  is  entitled  to  be
         regarded as having expertise due to experience over the  last  four
         years of work, I note that she does not  have  qualifications  that
         would give her further expertise beyond that.  Equally  whilst  she
         has been on courses and has a background  in  mental  health  work,
         there is little evidence that she  has  had  specialist  skills  in
         being able to assess the plausibility of individual claimants.

 4. Earlier, at [37], Judge Batiste discussed the oral  evidence  given  by
    Miss  Baillie  at  the  hearing.   He  noted  that  "she  assessed  the
    appellant's account as to having been trafficked as being plausible and
    consistent with other victims in general research."  The judge went  on
    to note [38] Miss Baillie had accepted "a very much higher" portion  of
    Poppy Project clients as having been genuinely trafficked.   The  judge
    considered that this called her "judgments" into question.

 5. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, Mr Worthington  sought  to  expand  upon
    this ground of appeal, he referred to me to a passage in Miss Baillie's
    report:

         [the appellant's] reaction is consistent with Poppy research around
         women's fears of reporting to the  police,  particularly  when  the
         police in their home country have high levels of  corruption.   Due
         to [the appellant's] current vulnerability it is my assessment that
         pressuring her to make a formal statement at this time is likely to
         cause her significant and unreasonable distress.

 6. At [32] and [35], the judge noted that the appellant had not sought the
    assistance of the police or other United Kingdom authorities  following
    her escape from the "clutches of Mr Sherrif [trafficker]."   [35],  the
    judge noted the delay of the appellant in claiming asylum.  He  records
    that the reason given by the appellant for  not  claiming  earlier  was
    that she was "unaware of the asylum process of concept (sic)."

 7. I reject that ground of appeal.   The written grounds and Mr  Wilkinson
    in his oral submissions sought to criticise Judge Batiste for,  on  the
    one hand, finding that Miss Baillie was  an  expert  witness  but  then
    going on to reject her evidence.  The criticism  is  unfounded.   Judge
    Batiste was right to seek to define the nature of the evidence given by
    Miss Baillie.  As an expert witness (unlike a witness of fact) she  was
    entitled to give  opinion  evidence.   However,  the  fact  that  Judge
    Batiste accepted Miss Baillie as an expert witness did not, of  course,
    mean that he had to attach weight to the evidence which  she  gave.   I
    find that Judge Batiste was entitled to have regard to  Miss  Baillie's
    particular record of believing the accounts are clients  compared  with
    other workers for the Poppy Project.  The judge has done  exactly  what
    he was required to do, that is to weigh and assess the witness evidence
    and to give clear and cogent reasons in support.

 8. Further, it was the judge's role to consider  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant and he was right not to delegate  that  task  to  the  expert
    witness.  Expert evidence can be useful in assisting  the  Tribunal  in
    matters of credibility but there was no  obligation  on  the  judge  to
    accept the appellant as a credible witness simply  because  the  expert
    witness believed that she was telling the truth.

 9. Having given good reasons for rejecting Miss Baillie's  view  that  the
    appellant was a credible witness, I have no doubt that  the  judge  had
    regard to those elements of her report which offer background  evidence
    regarding trafficked women.  For example, the  passage  of  the  report
    which I have quoted above referring to  the  reluctance  of  trafficked
    women to engage with the police is part of the background  evidence  to
    which I find the judge had proper regard; as he noted at  [42]  he  had
    considered "all the evidence in the round."

10. In conclusion, I find that the judge was not obliged to agree with  the
    opinions of Miss Baillie simply  because  he  accepted  that  she  gave
    evidence as an expert witness.   The  judge  made  findings  about  the
    appellant's credibility and  rejected  her  explanations  for  delaying
    claiming asylum and seeking help from the United Kingdom authorities in
    the light of the background material provided by the expert.   On  that
    latter point, I note that the  judge  has  engaged  directly  with  the
    explanations  given  by  the  appellant  which  differ  from  the  more
    generalised observations contained in Miss Baillie's report.   Finally,
    I find that it is very clear that the  judge  has  considered  all  the
    evidence, including the expert report, before reaching any findings  of
    fact or concluding his assessment of the credibility of the appellant's
    account.

11. For the reasons I have given above, this appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

12. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 16 January 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

