
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08448/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 7 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                        Mr KAJENTHIRAN SHANMUGNATHAN
                       (ANONYMITY Direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel (instructed by AP
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Simpson on 6 August 2015  against  the  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Miller made in  a  decision  and  reasons
         promulgated on 6  July  2015  dismissing  the  Appellant's  asylum,
         humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 9  June  1985.
         He had appealed against his removal  from  the  United  Kingdom,  a
         decision taken by the Respondent on 12 August  2013  (not  1983  as
         inadvertently stated in the determination at [2]).   The  Appellant
         had entered the United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
         Migrant on 23  June  2010.    He  applied  to  extend  his  Tier  4
         (General) Student Migrant visa which  was  refused  on  5  February
         2012.  His appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed on 2 May
         2014.  The Appellant commenced the asylum claim process on 13  July
         2014.   He stated that he feared to return to Sri Lanka because  of
         his LTTE involvement and family connections.

    3.     When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Simpson considered that it was arguable that Judge Miller had erred
         in his approach to the medical evidence and had  not  assessed  the
         risk posed by diaspora activism. (No Article 8 ECHR claim had  been
         pursued.)

    4.     The Respondent filed notice under rule 24 dated 24  August  2015
         indicating that the appeal was opposed.  Standard  directions  were
         made by the tribunal and the appeal was listed for adjudication  of
         whether or not there was a material error of law.

    Submissions

    5.     Ms Jegarajah for  the  Appellant  raised  no  challenge  to  the
         judge's treatment  of  the  medical  evidence  or  his  credibility
         findings.  Counsel submitted that the real issue with the  decision
         and reasons was that the judge had erred in  his  approach  to  the
         Appellant's sur place activity in the United Kingdom.  The analysis
         at [36] of the decision was inadequate.  The evidence recorded  was
         that   the   Appellant   had   been   photographed   addressing   a
         demonstration.  It was not a question of whether the evidence  was,
         as the judge had put  it,  "self  serving".   The  judge  had  been
         required to address whether any risk was posed as  a  result.   The
         Appellant was likely to be asked about his  activities  on  return.
         The connection to proscribed organisations such as the BTF was  all
         that mattered, not why the Appellant had  joined.   Once  that  was
         known, the emergency law applied.  The decision and reasons  should
         be set aside.

    6.     Mr Walker for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's rule  24
         notice.  He submitted that the decision and  reasons  disclosed  no
         error of law.  The Appellant's  complaints  at  most  were  just  a
         disagreement with the judge.  The judge had explained why he  found
         that there was no real depth to the evidence and that the Appellant
         was not credible.  The decision and reasons should stand.

    7.     Ms Jegarajah in reply emphasised that whether the Appellant  had
         produced supporting witnesses was  irrelevant  in  the  context  of
         diaspora activities.  The Appellant had produced  letters  relating
         to him.  The proscription of the BTF was a post GJ and Others (post-
         civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  fact.
         Involvement led to risk. The tribunal should direct that the appeal
         should be reheard by another judge in the First-tier Tribunal.

    No material error of law

    8.     In the tribunal's view, the terms of the grant of permission  to
         appeal were far too generous a response to what was mostly a feeble
         reasons challenge.  Ms Jegarajah rightly focussed on the only issue
         which was arguable, namely whether the judge had  given  sufficient
         reasons for finding that, in effect, the  Appellant's  claimed  sur
         place activities amounted to nothing and were not a source of  real
         risk on return.

    9.     The fact that the Upper Tribunal  has  had  to  provide  country
         guidance on claims from Sri Lanka at various times is an indication
         of the large number of appeals from that source.   Indeed,  despite
         the defeat of the LTTE on 17 May 2009, now over 6 years ago, asylum
         claims continue to be made.  Some claims  are  recognised  as  well
         founded by the Home Office and hence are never seen on  appeal,  so
         that judges see only the contested claims  which  as  a  group  are
         likely to be weaker.  It is beyond dispute that  Sri  Lanka  is  an
         endemically corrupt country,  where  false  documents  are  readily
         available: for a striking example  in  the  public  domain  of  the
         depths of such corruption see the www.Tamilnation.org report on the
         Katunayaka Airport bombing by the  LTTE  on  24  July  2001,  which
         states that Sri Lankan military officers were bribed.   It is  also
         almost too trite to say, but asylum claimants in the United Kingdom
         have little or nothing to lose from pursuing the process as far  as
         they can.  The worst that can happen is that they might be returned
         at no expense to themselves at the end of what is all too  often  a
         long  drawn  out  appeals  process,  during  which  time  they  are
         supported by the state if unable to work.  Establishing  the  truth
         (or rather, the facts to the standard of a  reasonable  likelihood)
         can often be a difficult process.

    10.    Experienced First-tier Tribunal  judges  such  as  Judge  Miller
         would be expected to recognise  certain  familiar  elements  to  an
         appeal such as that advanced by the  present  Appellant,  of  which
         entry to the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant,
         a long and unsatisfactorily  explained  delay  in  claiming  asylum
         (measured in this instance in years) and the absence  of  any  live
         evidence from the  Appellant  on  psychiatric/medical  grounds  are
         frequently encountered.  Evidence was  provided  by  experts  whose
         names are familiar  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   That  was  the
         background to the appeal.  It was on its face a weak  and  possibly
         contrived claim.

    11.    Despite those familiar and unpromising elements noted above, and
         without alluding to  them  in  any  manner  whatsoever,  the  judge
         examined the case put forward by the Appellant in the  round,  with
         evident  anxious  scrutiny:  see,  for  example,   Judge   Miller's
         discussion and careful analysis of the medical evidence at [34](i),
         (ii), (iii) and (iv) of the determination.   The  judge  concluded,
         for good and sustainable reasons, that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
         reliable witness.

    12.    At [35]  of  the  determination  the  judge  recorded  that  the
         Appellant on his own account had never belonged  to  the  LTTE  and
         found that (even if he were to be believed) the Appellant's limited
         involvement had not become known to the authorities  in  2010,  nor
         would be the source of interest in 2015.  Again, it was almost  too
         obvious to require to be stated, but if  Appellant  had  ever  done
         anything for the LTTE, the likelihood was that it was under duress,
         as refusal of the LTTE's requests was well  known  to  be  severely
         punished.  The LTTE had also been the de facto government of  parts
         of northern Sri Lanka for a significant period.

    13.    The judge examined the Appellant's claimed  diaspora  activities
         in logical order, in the light of  his  other  adverse  credibility
         findings.  At [36] of his determination he found that  the  letters
         from  the  BTF  and  TGTE  were  produced  solely  to  promote  the
         Appellant's weak claim and attracted no weight.

    14.    It was open to the judge to draw an adverse inference  from  the
         absence of relevant witnesses such as the  Appellant's  uncle  when
         assessing the likely significance  or  impact  of  the  Appellant's
         attendance at demonstrations in the United Kingdom.  Similarly, the
         judge placed no weight on  the  photographs  of  the  Appellant  at
         demonstrations, obviously  events  attended  by  large  numbers  of
         people as was not in dispute.  At [335] and [336] of GJ and  Others
         (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)
         the Upper Tribunal found that attendance at demonstrations  outside
         Sri Lanka was not in itself sufficient to create  a  real  risk  of
         adverse attention on return to Sri Lanka.

    15.    Danian [1999] EWCA Civ  3000  remains  good  authority  for  the
         proposition that an appellant's motive for involvement in sur place
         activities is irrelevant since the issue  for  risk  on  return  is
         whether such activity would be become known and  how  it  would  be
         perceived.  That authority was not cited to the judge  or  referred
         to.  Perhaps the judge's use of  the  phrase  "self  serving"  when
         describing the Appellant's diaspora involvement was not ideal,  but
         the substance of the judge's finding  was  clear,  i.e.,  that  the
         Appellant's activities in the United Kingdom  were  not  enough  to
         create a risk of future  attention  in  a  person  who  was  of  no
         interest to the authorities and who was in effect a liar.

    16.    It is true that, at the time GJ was decided, the  BTF  and  TGTE
         had not been placed on the list of  proscribed  organisations,  but
         the judge found that  of  the  Appellant's  connection  with  those
         organisations was purely nominal, i.e., they meant nothing  to  him
         and the membership documents had been produced  solely  to  promote
         his claim.  The judge had earlier noted at [34](v) of his  decision
         the Appellant's father's  correspondence  with  successive  British
         Prime Ministers, all faithfully and  courteously  acknowledged,  in
         which remarkably the Appellant's father had made  no  reference  to
         the Appellant's alleged treatment by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.
         That was a further indication of a complete lack  of  substance  to
         the Appellant's claims.

    17.    In the tribunal's judgment, the judge dealt adequately with  the
         Appellant's limited diaspora activities.   The  Appellant  who  had
         travelled on his own passport was of no conceivable interest to the
         authorities (see, e.g.,  [34](vi),  [34]  (vii)  and  [35]  of  the
         determination) and his whole claim was a sham.   There was  nothing
         reasonably likely to cause the Sri Lankan authorities  to  question
         the Appellant on return, whether at the  airport  or  subsequently.
         He had left as a student without hindrance and anything he had done
         while abroad was not capable  of  arousing  the  attention  of  the
         authorities. The judge's decision was a comprehensive reflection on
         the various issues raised in the appeal.   There  was  no  material
         error of law.  There is no basis for interfering with  the  judge's
         decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal,  which  dismissal  must
         stand.

    DECISION

    The tribunal finds that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    original decision, which stands unchanged




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


