

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08705/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 24 January 2017                            |On 31 January 2017           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                   M J S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Coll ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 25 July 2016, in  which
    she dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal of his  asylum
    claim.

 2. An anonymity direction was  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    maintain it in this Tribunal.

Background

 3. The appellant is a Sri Lankan citizen of Tamil ethnicity who claims  to
    have been detained and tortured by the authorities in Sri Lanka on  the
    grounds of suspected involvement with the LTTE. The respondent  refused
    his asylum claim.  The appellant's appeal was heard on 15 October 2013.
    It was dismissed appeal in a determination promulgated  on  6  November
    2013.  On 23 January 2014 the decision was set aside by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Drabu due to an error of law.  There were a number of  procedural
    delays which are  of  no  relevance  to  this  appeal;  eventually  the
    rehearing of the appeal came before FTTJ Coll on 14 June 2016.


 4. FTTJ Coll dismissed the appeal principally  on  the  grounds  that  the
    appellant's account was not "entirely  credible"  (see  [81])  and  not
    corroborated by the medical and documentary evidence,  ([66]  and  [76]
    refer).

 5. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul
    because it was "arguable that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Coll  erred
    commencing her analysis of the appellant's credibility by reference  to
    section 8 of the 2004 Act and, also, as appears from  her  decision  at
    [79] that she failed properly to apply JT (Cameroon)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    878 and/or SM (Iran) [2005]  UKIAT  00116."    Nonetheless  he  granted
    permission on all grounds. Hence the matter came before me.

Submissions

 6. Mr Jafar, for the appellant, submitted the FTTJ had given undue  weight
    to the appellant's delay in claiming asylum:  the  appellant  had  been
    granted leave to remain as a student and relied on  the  advice  of  an
    agent; delay did not reflect the absence of fear. The FTTJ's  reasoning
    on this issue was not coherent. She had started with a finding pursuant
    to s8 and proceeded on the basis of  her  adverse  credibility  finding
    made pursuant to that section.  She had not engaged at  [55]  with  the
    appellant's  explanation.  There  was  no  rounded  appraisal  of   the
    evidence.  Mr Jafar accepted that if  the  remaining  analysis  of  the
    appellant's evidence relating to  credibility  were  sustainable,  this
    ground of appeal would fail.  Turning to the  FTTJ's  analysis  of  the
    medical evidence, Mr Jafar, submitted the FTTJ had failed to give  this
    evidence anxious scrutiny; furthermore, she had  made  findings  "as  a
    medical  expert".  She  had  not  taken  into  account   the   experts'
    qualifications. There was insufficient reasoning to justify the adverse
    finding. It was an error for  the  FTTJ  to  criticise  Dr  Frazer  for
    failing to engage with other possible causes  than  those  claimed;  KV
    (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC) did not
    require it.  Further, there were no  presenting  features  raising  the
    possibility of self-infliction by proxy (SIBP). Dr Mason's  report  was
    well grounded and consistent  with  the  other  evidence.  Insufficient
    weight was given to the whole of the report.  The  two  reports  should
    have been taken into account in considering whether the  appellant  was
    telling the truth.  The  evidence  of  the  lawyers  should  have  been
    evaluated overall; that evidence was dismissed after FTTJ had  rejected
    the  high  court  documents,  preferring  the   respondent's   document
    verification report.  The FTTJ took inappropriate  judicial  notice  at
    [71] and [72]. The FTTJ failed to make a finding on whether or not  the
    appellant's father had been missing, as the appellant claimed.


 7. In response, Mr Clarke for the respondent submitted that the weight  to
    be given to the evidence before the tribunal was a matter for the FTTJ.
     The FTTJ had cited s8 and directed herself appropriately. She had made
    a global assessment, reverting to the s8 point at [79].  As regards the
    medical evidence, it was for the FTTJ to consider the  probative  value
    of the  medical  evidence  and  how  it  impacted  on  the  appellant's
    credibility.  The amount of detail in the report would not unreasonably
    affect the weight given to it.  The FTTJ had referred at  [63]  to  all
    the appellant's claimed injuries sustained in  detention;  the  experts
    had failed to engage with all those individually.  It  was  appropriate
    for her to criticise the reports for lack of a  thorough  investigation
    of all the claimed injuries, as  she  had  cited  them  at  [63].   The
    criticisms of the  assessment  of  the  legal  documents  and  lawyers'
    correspondence were an attempt to relitigate the issue:  the  FTTJ  had
    adequately reasoned why  she  preferred  the  DVR  to  the  appellant's
    evidence. She rejected the appellant's explanations for  good  reasons.
    This was a textbook approach to documentary evidence in an asylum case.
     The FTTJ was entitled to take judicial notice of matters  which  could
    be anticipated.  The failure to make  a  finding  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's father's claimed disappearance was immaterial: the FTTJ had
    found the appellant not credible.

Discussion

 8. On the face of it, it appears from [55] and [56] that the FTTJ made  an
    adverse credibility finding at the outset, treating s8 as the  starting
    point for the assessment of credibility, contrary to the guidance in SM
    (Iran).  However, it is clear from the decision as a  whole,  which  is
    detailed  and  comprehensive,  that  the  FTTJ  scrutinised   all   the
    appellant's  evidence  carefully  and  identified  various  issues   of
    concern, in addition to the delay in seeking asylum.  See, for example,
    her assessment of the reliability of the appellant's documents and  his
    mother's letter. Thus she  carried  out  a  global  assessment  of  the
    evidence before concluding the appellant's account was not credible  (R
    (Sivakumar) v SSHD [2003] UKHL 14 and JT (Cameroon)).  It follows that,
    even if s8 were her starting point, this was not a  material  error  of
    law; it is clear from the lengthy and detailed analysis that  the  FTTJ
    took all the evidence  into  account  in  reaching  her  conclusion  on
    credibility of the appellant's claim. That finding  is  sustainable  on
    the evidence and was a conclusion open to her.


 9. As regards the medical evidence, the FTTJ has not  considered  this  in
    isolation.  She has noted at  [63]  the  appellant's  claimed  injuries
    sustained in detention. She has noted the two medical  reports  do  not
    address all these claimed injuries, only some of them.  Her  criticisms
    of the report of Dr Frazer are appropriate, given the  content  of  his
    report.  Her approach to his report is balanced  and  she  has  clearly
    considered it carefully.  She notes Dr  Frazer  has  not  engaged  with
    other causes of scarring and that he is required to do this pursuant to
    KV.  Paragraph 2 of the headnote to KV states "Doctors preparing medico-
    legal reports for asylum seekers must consider all possible  causes  of
    scarring". Paragraph 246 also refers to "the need for a medical  expert
    to approach matters in terms of possible causes is well-established  by
    case law ...".   As regards, Dr Mason's report, generally the  concerns
    of the FTTJ are grounded in the report.  It was not appropriate for the
    FTTJ to suggest Dr Mason should  have  addressed  SIBP.  No  presenting
    features had been identified to put  this  possibility  in  the  frame.
    However, this criticism has no material impact on the  outcome  of  the
    assessment and, in any event, it is not an issue raised in the  grounds
    of appeal before me. The FTTJ notes Dr Mason undertakes no analysis  of
    the other parts of the  body  which  the  appellant  claimed  had  been
    injured in detention. Importantly, the FTTJ does  not  wholly  discount
    the content of the two reports. Instead, she places "little weight"  on
    them. The amount of evidential weight given to  expert  evidence  is  a
    matter for her, based, as it is, on the evidence.  Her conclusions  are
    sustainable given the appellant's own  evidence  on  all  the  injuries
    sustained, the fact the two reports do not address  all  those  claimed
    injuries and the relative brevity of the  reports  in  terms  of  their
    findings.  Taking the  expert  evidence  as  a  whole  and  noting  her
    misgivings about it, the FTTJ's decision at [66] that  the  reports  do
    not "corroborate that the Appellant suffered ill-treatment at the hands
    of the authorities in Sri Lanka" is sustainable.  The criticisms raised
    by the appellant in this appeal  amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    FTTJ's assessment, an  assessment  which  took  into  account  all  the
    evidence,  including  that  of  the  appellant  himself.   Whilst   not
    submitted, I have also  considered  whether  the  expert  evidence  was
    assessed on the premise the appellant was not a credible witness;  that
    was not the case: the medical evidence was considered in the round  and
    in the light of the appellant's own account as summarised at [63].


10. The FTTJ carried out  an  appropriate  assessment  of  the  documentary
    evidence.  She preferred the DVR produced by  the  respondent  and  her
    reasons for so doing are sustainable and open to  her.  The  respondent
    had identified a discrepancy in the case reference on  the  high  court
    documents. She considered the explanation proffered but rejected it  in
    the light of the evidence. Her reasons are at [70] and [71]. Whilst the
    FTTJ states she takes "judicial notice" of the way in which  cases  are
    numbered, in fact, as is clear from [71] and [73]  she  simply  prefers
    the evidence of the respondent in the DVR as to  the  numbering  system
    employed in the Trincomalee High Court. Thus, while  her  reference  to
    taking judicial notice is unfortunate, it is not a  material  error  of
    law since it is clear that she has  relied  on  the  DVR  to  find  the
    numbering is wrong; that is  a  reasonable  conclusion,  based  on  the
    content of the DVR.

11. I do not accept the FTTJ made an error of law  at  [80]  by  making  an
    assumption as to how National Insurance numbers are issued.  It is  not
    unreasonable to conclude a government department would  not  accept  an
    uncertified copy of a person's passport, without other  identification,
    as a basis for issuing a national insurance number.

12. There was no need for the FTTJ to make a specific finding as to whether
    or not she accepted the appellant's father had  disappeared  given  her
    finding that the  appellant's  evidence  was  reliable.  That  evidence
    encompasses the claimed disappearance of the appellant's father.

13. For these reasons, there is no material error  of  law  in  the  FTTJ's
    decision.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve a
    material error of law and the decision is preserved.


15. This appeal is dismissed.


A M Black
Signed                                             Date  30 January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

A M Black
Signed                                              Date       30    January
    2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



