

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08055/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 February 2014                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Hodgetts instructed by Migrant Legal Project

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience,
      I will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

Introduction

   3. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on 3 June 1994.
       He arrived in the UK clandestinely on 1 July 2009.  He claimed asylum
      the next day.  On 26 October 2009, the Secretary of State refused  the
      appellant's  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection.    The
      appellant appealed and on  29  August  2010  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (Judge Holder) dismissed his appeal.  However, on  further  appeal  to
      the Upper Tribunal it was accepted that the  Secretary  of  State  had
      failed to consider her duty under s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
      Immigration Act 2009 and  her  policy  in  relation  to  unaccompanied
      children.  Subsequently, the appellant was granted discretionary leave
      until 3 December 2011.

   4. On 2 December 2011, he  made  an  application  for  further  leave  to
      remain.  On 8  August  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  that
      application. The appellant again appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.
      In a determination dated 8 October 2013, Judge  Archer  dismissed  the
      appellant's  appeal  in  reliance  upon  the  Refugee  Convention  and
      Articles 2 and 3 of the  ECHR.   However,  Judge  Archer  allowed  the
      appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.   Judge  Archer  found
      that the appellant had "developed a high degree of private life in the
      UK" (see para 55  of  the  determination)  and  that  the  appellant's
      removal would be a disproportionate  interference  with  that  private
      life.

   5. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal  against  the  decision  that  Art  8  was  breached  by  the
      Respondent's decision on two grounds.  First the Judge erred in law in
      failing to have  regard  to  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  as  an
      expression of government  policy  (Ground  1).   Secondly,  the  Judge
      failed to give adequate reasons for his finding that  the  appellant's
      remove would be disproportionate, in particular in the  light  of  the
      evidence that the appellant had family in Afghanistan.   Further,  the
      Judge erred in finding that there had  been  a  significant  delay  in
      dealing with the appellant's asylum application (some 20  months)  and
      whilst delay was a weighty factor in assessing proportionality it  was
      not determinative (Ground 2).

   6. On 28 October 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kamara) granted the
      Secretary of State permission to appeal:

           "3.   In an  otherwise  well-reasoned  determination  the  Judge
                 arguably erred in law in failing to have any regard to  the
                 Immigration Rules  in  making  his  Article  8  assessment,
                 particularly  in   a   case   where   the   appellant   was
                 unrepresented."

   7. Thus, the appeal came before me.





Submissions

   8. On behalf of the Secretary of  State,  Mr  Richards  relied  upon  the
      grounds of appeal.

   9. First, he submitted that the Judge was required to take  into  account
      that the appellant could not succeed under the Immigration  Rules,  in
      particular the 'private life' provision in para  276ADE.   That  fact,
      which reflected Parliament's view on the issue of proportionality, had
      not been factored in by the Judge in his  proportionality  assessment.
      Mr Richards submitted that it was just not  enough  to  say  that  the
      appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules and then cast  it
      aside and determine the appeal under Article 8.

  10. Secondly, Mr Richards submitted that the Judge had accepted  that  the
      appellant had family in Afghanistan but he had not in  any  meaningful
      way put that factor into the balance when determining proportionality.
       In relation to the issue of  delay  in  determining  the  appellant's
      asylum application, Mr Richards candidly acknowledged  that,  contrary
      to the assertion in the grounds, the Judge had specifically stated  in
      para  56  of  his  determination  that  delay  in   itself   was   not
      determinative of the appellant's claim.

  11. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Hodgetts submitted that the  Judge  had
      not erred in law.

  12. As regards ground 1, he submitted that  this  was  misconceived.   The
      Judge had recognised that the appellant could not  succeed  under  the
      Rules (see para 53 of the determination) and that he  was  considering
      the appellant's  claim  "outside  the  Rules"  (see  para  23  of  the
      determination).  Mr Hodgetts submitted that the Judge was required  to
      do no  more.   He  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  made  a  "perfect
      direction"  in  determining  the  appellant's  Article  8   claim   in
      accordance with Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 (see para 53 of  the  judgment).
      Mr Hodgetts submitted that the grounds did not assert that  the  Judge
      was wrong to consider the appellant's Article 8  claim  in  accordance
      with Razgar.

  13. In relation to ground 2, Mr Hodgetts  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
      given adequate reasons for his findings.   He  pointed  out  that  the
      grounds did  not  challenge  the  findings  themselves.   Mr  Hodgetts
      referred me to a number of paragraphs in  the  Judge's  determination.
      At para 41, Mr Hodgetts  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  taken  into
      account  that  the  appellant  had   "various   family   members"   in
      Afghanistan.  At paras 42-52 the Judge had set out in some detail  the
      evidence both oral and written relating to the appellant's links  with
      the UK and, in particular, his close relationship with  "RC"  who  has
      autistic spectrum disorder and is blind.   The appellant is  his  only
      friend and, RC's father gave evidence that there was a "special  bond"
      between the appellant and RC.  Mr Hodgetts submitted  that  the  Judge
      was entitled to take into account this very close  relationship  which
      was not challenged in the grounds.

  14. Mr Hodgetts submitted that the  grounds'  reliance  upon  the  Judge's
      reference to delay was misconceived.  It was clear from para 56 of the
      determination  that  the  Judge  recognised   that   delay   was   not
      "determinative" and that, in accordance with the  case  law,  he  took
      that into account as relevant to  the  appellant  developing  stronger
      ties in the UK during a significant period in his life aged between 17
      and 19.  Mr Hodgetts submitted that the Judge's reasoning was adequate
      and he invited me to dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

Discussion

  15. Ground 1 is in the following terms:

           "1.   The Tribunal failed to  have  regard  to  the  Immigration
                 Rules in making its Article 8 assessment.  In doing  so  it
                 is respectfully submitted that  it  misdirected  itself  in
                 law.   In  making  a  decision  on  an  application  it  is
                 necessary  for  the  decision-maker  to  consider  all  the
                 legislation relevant to that decision and to  give  reasons
                 for the way that it applies that legislation to  the  facts
                 of the case.  In this instance the Tribunal had  no  regard
                 at all to the relevant sections of the  Immigration  Rules.
                 It is submitted that this simply cannot be  an  appropriate
                 way for a sustainable decision to be made.

           2.     The  Immigration  Rules  are  a  detailed  expression  of
                 Government policy on controlling immigration and protecting
                 the public.  The Article  8  sections  of  the  Immigration
                 Rules reflect the Secretary of State's view as to where the
                 balance lies between the individual's rights and the public
                 interest.  They reflect the broad  principles  set  out  in
                 Strasbourg and domestic jurisprudence.  Therefore,  when  a
                 Tribunal considers an individual appeal it should  consider
                 proportionality in the light of this  clear  expression  of
                 public policy; and the Secretary of State would expect  the
                 Courts to defer to her view,  endorsed  by  Parliament,  on
                 how, broadly,  public  policy  considerations  are  weighed
                 against individual family and  private  life  rights,  when
                 assessing Article 8 in any individual case.  The failure to
                 do so means that the decision the Tribunal made on  Article
                 8 is incomplete and that it is  also  unsustainable  as  it
                 failed to consider a key element in the assessment of  this
                 case."

  16. There is no doubt that the fact that the appellant could  not  succeed
      under the Immigration Rules was relevant to the Judge's assessment  of
      proportionality in that the Rules reflect  the  Secretary  of  State's
      policy on how the  public  interest  is  to  be  weighted  against  an
      individual's family or private life.   In particular, in  this  appeal
      the relevant rule is para 276ADE which deals  with  the  circumstances
      when an individual can succeed in establishing a right  to  remain  in
      the UK based upon his  or  her  private  life.   This  appeal  is  not
      concerned with any family life  of  the  appellant  in  the  UK.   The
      private life rule (para 276ADE) and the family life rule (Appendix FM)
      do not, however, exclude  consideration  of  Article  8  'outside  the
      Rules'.  This was made clear by the Upper Tribunal in Izuazu  (Article
      8 - New Rules)  [2013]  UKUT  0045  (IAC).   At  [40]-[43]  the  Upper
      Tribunal provided the following guidance:

           "40.   We  accordingly  further  endorse  the  Upper  Tribunal's
                 observation in [MF (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  [2012]
                 UKUT 00393 (IAC)] that judges called on to  make  decisions
                 about the application of Article 8 in cases  to  which  the
                 new  rules  apply,  should  proceed  by  first  considering
                 whether a claimant is able to benefit under the  applicable
                 provisions of the Immigration  Rules  designed  to  address
                 Article 8 claims.  If he or she does, there will be no need
                 to go on to consider Article 8 generally.  The  appeal  can
                 be allowed because the decision is not in  accordance  with
                 the rule.

             41. Where the claimant does not meet the  requirements  of  the
                 rules it will be necessary for the judge to go on  to  make
                 an  assessment  of  Article   8   applying   the   criteria
                 established by law.

             42. When considering whether  the  immigration  decision  is  a
                 justified interference with  the  right  to  family  and/or
                 private life, the provisions of the rules or other relevant
                 statement of policy may again re-enter the debate but  this
                 time as part of the proportionality evaluation.   Here  the
                 judge  will  be  asking  whether  the  interference  was  a
                 proportionate means of  achieving  the  legitimate  aim  in
                 question and a fair balance as to the competing interests.

             43. The weight to be attached to any reason  for  rejection  of
                 the human rights claim indicated by  particular  provisions
                 of the rules will depend both on the particular facts found
                 by the judge in the case in hand and the  extent  that  the
                 rules themselves reflect criteria approved in the  previous
                 case law of the Human Rights Court at  Strasbourg  and  the
                 higher courts in the United Kingdom."

  17. That guidance was, with one "slight modification", approved by Sales J
      in R (On the application of Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin)  at
      [30].

  18. Having cited, with approval, [40]-[43] of Izuazu, at [30] Sales J said
      this:

           "30.  The  only  slight  modification  I  would  make,  for  the
                 purposes of clarity, is to say that if, after  the  process
                 of applying the new rules and finding that  the  claim  for
                 leave to remain under them fails, the relevant official  or
                 tribunal judge considers it is clear that the consideration
                 under the Rules has fully  addressed  any  family  life  or
                 private life issues arising under Article 8,  it  would  be
                 sufficient simply to say that; they would not  have  to  go
                 on, in addition, to consider the case separately  from  the
                 Rules.  If there is no arguable case that there may be good
                 grounds for granting leave to remain outside the  Rules  by
                 reference  to  Article  8,  there  would  be  no  point  in
                 introducing full separate consideration of Article 8  again
                 after having reached  a  decision  on  application  of  the
                 Rules."

  19. As this makes clear, in principle, an  individual  may  have  a  claim
      which transcends the provisions  in  the  Rules.   At  [35],  Sales  J
      reiterated the  importance  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  "residual
      discretion" to grant leave outside the Rules on the basis  of  Article
      8.  He said this:

           "35.  The important points for present purposes are  that  there
                 is full coverage of an individual's rights under Article  8
                 in all cases by a combination of the new rules and (so  far
                 as  may  be  necessary)  under  the  Secretary  of  State's
                 residual discretion to grant leave to  remain  outside  the
                 Rules and that, consequent upon this feature of the overall
                 legal framework, there is no legal requirement that the new
                 rules themselves provide for leave to remain to be  granted
                 under the Rules in every case where Article 8 gives rise to
                 a good claim for an individual to  be  allowed  to  remain.
                 This had always  been  the  position  in  relation  to  the
                 operation of the regime of immigration control prior to the
                 introduction of the new rules, and the introduction of  the
                 new rules has not  changed  these  basic  features  of  the
                 regime."

  20. More recently in Gulshan (Article 8 - New Rules  -  Correct  Approach)
      [2013] UTUT 00640 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal again affirmed  the  point
      (at [24(b)]) that:

           "24(b)      After applying the requirements of the  Rules,  only
                 if they may arguably be good grounds for granting leave  to
                 remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8  purposes
                 to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there   are   compelling
                 circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under   them:
                 Nagre".

  21. At [27] the Upper Tribunal again stated:

           Only if there were arguably good grounds for granting  leave  to
           remain outside the Rules was it necessary for  [the  Judge]  for
           Article 8 purposes to go  on  to  consider  whether  there  were
           compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under  the
           Rules...."

  22. Although I was not referred to MF (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
      1192, nothing in the Court of Appeal's decision runs counter to what I
      have said when it is borne in  mind  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
      considering the deportation rules, in particular para 398  of  HC  395
      (as amended).  Para 398 is in the following terms:

           "398. Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
                 contrary to the UK's obligations under  Article  8  of  the
                 Human Rights Convention, and

                    a)  the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                       conducive to the public good because they  have  been
                       convicted of an offence  for  which  they  have  been
                       sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  4
                       years;

                    b)  the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                       conducive to the public good because they  have  been
                       convicted of an offence  for  which  they  have  been
                       sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than  4
                       years but at least 12 months; or

                    c)  the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                       conducive to the public good because, in the view  of
                       the Secretary of State, their  offending  has  caused
                       serious harm or they are a  persistent  offender  who
                       shows a particular disregard for the law,

                 the  Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
                 consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it
                 does not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that
                 the public interest in deportation will  be  outweighed  by
                 other factors."

  23. The reference to paras 399 and 399A is to provisions, encompassing  in
      essence, respectively family and private  life  issues.   As  will  be
      clear, where an individual cannot succeed under  paras  399  and  399A
      then para 398 on its face states that it:

           "will only be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
           interest in deportation will be outweighed  by  other  factors."
           (my emphasis).

  24. In MF the Court of Appeal concluded at [44]:

           "44.  We would,  therefore,  hold  that  the  new  rules  are  a
                 complete code and that the exceptional circumstances to  be
                 considered  in  the   balancing   exercise   involved   the
                 application of a proportionality test as  required  by  the
                 Strasbourg jurisprudence."

  25. There, unlike cases not concerned with deportation, an individual  may
      succeed in resisting  his  deportation  by  establishing  "exceptional
      circumstances" on the basis, as the Court of Appeal put it at [43]  of
      MF,  that  there  are  "compelling  reasons".   By  contrast,  in  the
      situation contemplated in Nagre  and  in  this  appeal,  there  is  no
      explicit reference to  "exceptional  circumstances"  in  the  relevant
      rules but, nevertheless, as Nagre and subsequent cases recognises,  if
      there are sufficiently  compelling  circumstances  an  individual  may
      succeed under Article 8 despite not being able to  succeed  under  the
      relevant rules dealing with family and private  life.   The  Court  of
      Appeal in MF referred to Nagre  (at  [41]-[42])  without  casting  any
      doubt upon it.

  26.  Therefore,  in  my  judgement,  the  case  law  recognises  that   if
      sufficiently compelling circumstances exist an individual may  succeed
      in a claim under Article 8 even though he  cannot  succeed  under  the
      relevant Immigration Rules.

  27. Reading Judge Archer's determination as a whole, it can be  seen  that
      he in effect followed precisely this line of reasoning.  At  para  53,
      he accepted that the appellant could not succeed under para 276ADE  or
      Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  There is no doubt that  he  had
      that matter fully in mind  when  he  then  went  on  to  consider  the
      appellant's claim under Article 8 'outside the Rules'  (see  paras  53
      and 23).  I therefore reject ground 1 that Judge Archer erred  in  law
      in failing to take into account that the appellant could  not  succeed
      under the Immigration Rules.  As Mr Hodgetts pointed out, the  grounds
      do not argue that the Judge was wrong to consider Article  8  'outside
      the Rules'.  For the reasons I have given, he was entitled  to  do  so
      and the real issue is whether his consideration of Article 8  and  his
      ultimate  finding  that  the  appellant's   removal   would   not   be
      proportionate stands up to scrutiny.

  28. That, then takes me  to  ground  2.   In  large  measure,  this  is  a
      'reasons' challenge.  As regards the issue of the 20 months  which  it
      took the Secretary  of  State  to  determine  the  appellant's  asylum
      application, the Judge dealt with this at para 56 as follows:

           "56.  There has been a significant delay since in  dealing  with
                 the appellant's application and this weakens the legitimate
                 aim of  maintaining  an  effective  system  of  immigration
                 control.  I find that the delay does  not  amount  to  such
                 conspicuous unfairness as to constitute an abuse of  power.
                 Article 8 claimants ought not to be advantaged  because  of
                 deficiencies in the control system.  The delay  is  not  in
                 itself determinative of the  appellant's  claim.   However,
                 the appellant has developed stronger ties to the UK in many
                 respects between the date of his  application  for  further
                 leave to remain and the  refusal  of  8  August  2013.   20
                 months is a hugely  significant  period  for  a  young  man
                 between the ages of 17 and 19.  The evidence clearly  shows
                 that the appellant has developed very deep and  substantial
                 links in the community generally and specifically with  the
                 C family and the families of S and K.  He also  has  strong
                 links to the UK through education and work."

  29. In my judgment, the grounds' challenge to this aspect of  the  Judge's
      reasoning is without merit.  The suggestion in the grounds is that the
      Judge took into account the delay  as  a  "determinative"  factor.  In
      fact, the Judge said precisely the opposite in para 56 namely that  it
      was "not in itself  determinative".   Instead,  the  Judge  took  into
      account that the period of delay had strengthened the appellant's ties
      in the UK,  in  particular  during  a  "significant  period"  for  the
      appellant between the ages of 17 and 19  (see  also  para  42  of  the
      determination set out below).  That is one of the three ways in  which
      Lord Bingham of Cornhill considered that delay could be relevant under
      Article 8 in his speech in EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41 at  [14].
       There, Lord Bingham said this:

           "14.  First, the applicant may during the period  of  any  delay
                 develop closer  personal  and  social  ties  and  establish
                 deeper roots in the community  than  he  could  have  shown
                 earlier.  The longer the period of delay, the likelier this
                 is to be  true.   To  the  extent  that  it  is  true,  the
                 applicant's  claim  under  Art  8   will   necessarily   be
                 strengthened."

  30. The Judge did no more than this as undoubtedly he was entitled  to  do
      on the basis of the evidence he heard from a number  of  witnesses  at
      the hearing and in a number of  other  witness  statements  that  were
      submitted and not challenged before him.

  31. The other matter raised in ground 2 is that the Judge failed  to  give
      adequate reasons why it was disproportionate to remove  the  appellant
      given that the evidence was that he  had  family  in  Afghanistan:  no
      reasons were given by the Judge why he could not resume  contact  with
      them if he returned.  Further, there was no reason why  he  could  not
      maintain contact with his family and friends  in  the  UK  via  modern
      methods of communication.

  32. As I have already indicated, the Judge heard oral evidence  from  four
      witnesses and there was unchallenged written statements from a further
      seven witnesses.   The Judge set out this evidence in some  detail  at
      paras 30 et seq.  There was a significant amount of  evidence  showing
      the appellant's integration into the UK.  At paras  41-42,  the  Judge
      accepted  that  the  appellant  had  "various   family   members"   in
      Afghanistan.  At para 42, however, the Judge said this in relation  to
      the appellant's ties to the UK:

           "42.  ...The appellant is a westernised young  man  who  follows
                 the Christian faith.  I do not accept that  it  is  in  his
                 best interests to return to Afghanistan on the  basis  that
                 he can search for his father, brothers, sister and extended
                 family members within the  context  of  continuity  of  his
                 social and cultural environment.  It is  difficult  to  see
                 how a search for family relatives in a  challenging  region
                 of Afghanistan can be in the appellant's best interests  as
                 compared to  his  current  life  in  [E].   The  underlying
                 reality of this case is that the respondent has contributed
                 to the westernisation of the  appellant  and  his  reliance
                 upon family members and friends in [E] by the long delay in
                 making a decision about his 2011  application  for  further
                 leave to remain in the UK.  He has been in the UK since  he
                 was 14 and his strongest cultural and social ties  are  now
                 in [E]."

  33. No challenge is made to the finding that it is in the appellant's best
      interests  to  remain  in  the  UK.   It  is  plain,  on  reading  the
      determination and evidence as  a  whole,  that  the  Judge  was  fully
      entitled to reach the finding that he did in para 42.  At paras 43-47,
      the  Judge  dealt  with  the  evidence  concerning   the   appellant's
      relationship with RC.  There is no doubt  that  this  evidence  was  a
      significant factor in the Judge's assessment of the proportionality of
      the appellant's removal.  I, therefore, set it out in full:

           "43.  I also heard oral evidence from  Mr  AC  ("A")  who  is  a
                 teacher at the comprehensive school in [...] with extensive
                 experience of dealing  with teenage children.  He adopted a
                 letter dated 9 July 2013 (J31).  The  C  family  are  Irish
                 citizens.   A  states  that  the  appellant  is   a   truly
                 exceptional young man.  When they were first introduced  by
                 one of RC's carers the  appellant  had  only  been  in  the
                 country for a short time.  What made him stand out were his
                 courteousness  and  his  drive  to  become  part   of   the
                 community.  He has a  passion  for  learning  and  is  most
                 grateful for help.  A's wife, D, and his son, RC  are  both
                 disabled and RC has complex medical needs.   The  appellant
                 contributes to the C family and has a special bond with  RC
                 who has autistic  spectrum  disorder.   The  appellant  has
                 broken through the barriers to communicate with RC  and  is
                 now a very special part of his life.  The prospective  loss
                 of the appellant to RC is something that worries the family
                 greatly.  Removal would be a  devastating  blow  to  the  C
                 family.

             44. In oral evidence A confirmed that  the  appellant  is  RC's
                 only friend.  He cannot communicate with others.  He is  18
                 and friends are very important.  RC has Asperger's syndrome
                 and cannot cope  with  change  e.g.  changes  to  his  care
                 package.  He would be distraught and  inconsolable  if  the
                 appellant were  to  be  sent  back  to  Afghanistan.   When
                 changes occur in RC's life the family strategy is  to  talk
                 over the situation and explain over and over again.

             45. I have also seen letters from RC dated 2 August 2011  (J25-
                 26) and  9  July  2013.   RC  is  blind  and  disabled  but
                 nonetheless attended the oral hearing.  He  says  that  the
                 appellant is really kind and helps with  different  things.
                 He takes  the  time  to  speak  to  RC  who  sometimes  has
                 difficulty in hearing because he  has  auditory  processing
                 disorder.  The appellant has learned  to  "sight"  a  blind
                 person and is very good at it, unlike others. He  can  also
                 run as a sighted guide  which  was  helpful  for  the  half
                 marathon.  The appellant regularly cooks  for  the  family.
                 He has introduced the appellant to Afghan music,  food  and
                 games.  They like each other an awful lot and RC hopes that
                 the appellant can stay in the UK.

             46. I have seen a letter dated 19 September 2013 from [...] who
                 is a Clinical Psychologist for  the  Child  and  Adolescent
                 Mental Health Service.  She has known of RC and worked with
                 his parents for 20 months.  RC has complex medical, sensory
                 and psychological needs.   He  has  developed  a  dependent
                 relationship with the appellant over the last  three  years
                 and their natural friendship is crucial for RC's social and
                 emotional development.  The appellant supports RC's  social
                 integration and reduces his isolation which are significant
                 risk  factors  given  his  complex   needs.    Losing   the
                 appellant's friendship in terms of direct contact is likely
                 to have a significant social and  emotional  impact.    The
                 appellant is likely to play an important role in RC's  life
                 long into his adult life.

             47. I find that the appellant is effectively  irreplaceable  in
                 RC's life given that he is  the  only  genuine  friend  and
                 their close bond.  I find that repeated explanation for the
                 appellant's absence might assist RC to deal with  the  loss
                 but will not compensate for the void that  will  inevitably
                 emerge in RC's life.  I find that  removing  the  appellant
                 from the UK will be severely damaging to both the appellant
                 and RC because of the deep  and  unique  relationship  that
                 they have developed over a three year period.  I find  that
                 they will not be able to  communicate  effectively  through
                 modern long distance methods of communication.  Again,  the
                 respondent  has  contributed  to  the  development  of  the
                 relationship because of the delay in making a  decision  in
                 relation to the appellant's 2011  application  for  further
                 leave to remain in the UK."

  34. Given the  evidence  concerning  RC  and  his  relationship  with  the
      appellant, I am in no doubt that it was open to the Judge to  find  in
      para 47 that their relationship could not  be  maintained  effectively
      using "modern long distant methods of communication".

  35. At paras 48-52, the Judge set  out  further  evidence  concerning  the
      appellant's private life in the UK.  At para 54, the  Judge  made  the
      following finding:

           "54.  I find that there is evidence of  development  of  private
                 life in the UK in terms of friends and engagement with  the
                 community.  There is very substantial depth or  breadth  to
                 the appellant's life in the UK as set out above.   None  of
                 the evidence relating to the development of the appellant's
                 private life in the UK is in dispute."

  36. At para 55, the Judge went on to find that the appellant had developed
      "a high degree of private life in the UK" and that his  removal  would
      interfere with that private life.

  37. In my judgment, this was one of those cases where the evidence rightly
      led the Judge to find that the circumstances  justified  consideration
      of  the  appellant's  claim  under  Article  8  'outside  the  Rules'.
      Paragraph 276ADE, in  particular,  does  not  provide  an  avenue  for
      vindication of private life of the "very substantial depth or breadth"
      that the Judge found to exist on the evidence.  At para 57, the  Judge
      weighed the  public  interest  against  the  appellant's  very  strong
      private life as follows:

           "57.  Overall I find that the interference with the  appellant's
                 protected right to private life is not proportionate to the
                 legitimate objective that is sought to  be  achieved.   The
                 appellant has become a valuable  member  of  the  community
                 with a very strong private life in the UK.  The  delay  has
                 significantly weakened the legitimate aim and  strengthened
                 the appellant's ties to  the  UK.   Efforts  to  trace  the
                 appellant's family in  Afghanistan  are  now  underway  but
                 there are no results so  far.  In  all  the  circumstances,
                 removal of the appellant from the UK is not proportionate."

  38. As Mr Hodgetts  submitted,  the  Secretary  of  State's  challenge  is
      essentially a 'reasons' challenge.  In relation  to  that,  the  Upper
      Tribunal gave  the  following  guidance  in   Shizad  (Sufficiency  of
      Reasons: Set Aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) at [10]:

           "10.  We would emphasise that although there is a legal duty  to
                 give a brief explanation of the conclusions on the  central
                 issue on which the appeal is determined, such reasons  need
                 not be extensive if the decision as a  whole  makes  sense,
                 having regard  to  the  material  accepted  by  the  Judge.
                 Although a decision may contain an error of law  where  the
                 requirements to give adequate reasons  are  not  met,  this
                 Tribunal would not normally set aside  a  decision  of  the
                 First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection of
                 law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and  the
                 relevant Country Guidance is taken into account, unless the
                 conclusions that the judge  draws  from  the  primary  data
                 before him were not reasonably open to him."

  39. Shizad was cited with approval in MK (Duty of Give  Reasons)  Pakistan
      [2013] UKUT 0064 (IAC) at [11] per McCloskey J (President).

  40. Reading the determination as a whole, the Judge  carefully  considered
      the evidence  and  made  clear  (unchallenged)  findings  of  fact  in
      relation to the impact upon the appellant and RC if he  were  removed.
      The Judge correctly applied the 5-stage approach in Razgar.  The Judge
      acknowledged  that  the  appellant  could  not   succeed   under   the
      Immigration Rules but, nevertheless, established that the strength  of
      his private life in the UK and  the  impact  upon  it  if  removed  to
      Afghanistan outweighed the public interest.  Reading the evidence  and
      the Judge's findings together, I see no basis for concluding that  his
      reasons were inadequate.  It is entirely clear why  he  found  in  the
      appellant's favour.  That  conclusion  is  not,  in  itself,  directly
      challenged in the grounds.  In my judgment, Judge Archer was  entitled
      to find that this was a case where the appellant could  succeed  under
      Article 8 'outside the Rules' a finding which is  entirely  consistent
      with the jurisprudence on the relationship between the new  Rules  and
      Article 8.

  41. For these reasons, I also reject ground 2.

Decision

  42. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the
      appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR  did  not  involve  the
      making of an error of law.  The decision stands.

  43. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is,  therefore,
      dismissed.






                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:















