
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08281/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th November 2016                |On 6th December 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                    E K K
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs U Sood, Counsel instructed by 1st Call
Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Namibia born on  16th  June  1982.
    She first arrived in the UK on 8th March 2004 when she was given  leave
    to enter as a working holidaymaker until 8th  March  2006.   Thereafter
    the Appellant overstayed, and on 7th  November  2014  she  applied  for
    asylum.  That application was refused for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    Respondent's letter of 30th April 2015.  The  Appellant  appealed,  and
    her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Chapman  (the
    Judge) sitting at Birmingham on  6th  April  2016.   He  dismissed  the
    appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds for
    the reasons set out  in  his  Decision  dated  13th  April  2016.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  11th  May  2016
    such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained  a  material
    error of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. As was established at the hearing before me, the  sole  issue  in  this
    appeal is whether the Judge applied the principle established  in  Ruiz
    Zambrano v Office  National  de  L'Emploi  [2011]  AER  (EC)  491  when
    considering the Appellant's ECHR human rights.  In  this  respect,  the
    Judge made findings of fact that the Appellant had two daughters living
    in Namibia with her father, and also brothers, sisters,  and  an  aunt.
    In late 2013 the Appellant had a relationship with IO which resulted in
    the birth of a daughter, UO, born on 23rd  June  2014.   IO  had  three
    other children aged 14, 11 and 7 years.  UO was a British  citizen  who
    had lived with the Appellant since her birth.  The  Appellant  did  not
    have a genuine and subsisting relationship with IO who did not  have  a
    significant role in the life of UO.  On the basis  of  these  findings,
    the Judge decided that although the Appellant was the primary carer  of
    UO, IO had not abandoned UO and played some  role  in  her  upbringing.
    Therefore for the purposes of paragraph EX.1. of Appendix FM of HC 395,
    the Appellant did not have sole responsibility for UO, and therefore UO
    would not be forced to leave the UK, and it would not  be  unreasonable
    to expect UO to go to Namibia with  her  mother.   Therefore  paragraph
    EX.1. was not satisfied.  Further, the Judge found that there were  not
    significant obstacles to the Appellant's  reintegration  into  Namibia,
    and therefore she could not rely  upon  paragraph  276ADE  of  HC  395.
    Finally, the Judge decided that there were no compelling  circumstances
    not already considered under the  Immigration  Rules  allowing  him  to
    consider the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights outside the  Immigration
    Rules.  However, in the alternative, the Judge further decided that the
    Respondent's decision was not disproportionate.

 4. At the hearing, Mrs Sood submitted that the Judge had erred in  law  in
    reaching these decisions by failing to consider what she  described  as
    the Zambrano principle.  That principle, which was that a child  of  an
    EU citizen should not be compelled to leave the UK, was  not  described
    in the Decision.  The Zambrano principle was about the  deprivation  of
    rights of an EU citizen.  The principle should have been considered  by
    the Judge in the context of the best interests  of  the  child.   Those
    should have been established by an investigation by the Family Court.

 5. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to her Rule 24 response and argued that
    there were no such errors of law.  The Judge had made reasoned findings
    open to him on the evidence.  The Zambrano principle had been raised at
    the hearing before the Judge, and properly  considered  by  him  as  he
    stated at various places in the Decision.  The  Judge  had  made  clear
    findings as regards  the  future  of  UO  and  her  best  interests  at
    paragraphs 65 and 68 of the Decision.  UO was not  being  compelled  by
    any decision of the Respondent to leave the UK.  It was  a  matter  for
    her parents to decide what would happen to her.  The Zambrano principle
    only applied when a child was required to leave the EU.  In  this  case
    the child could remain in the UK with her father.

 6. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.  Mrs Sood criticised the Judge for  failing
    to apply the decision in Zambrano, but I find this not to be the  case.
    The Judge referred to the decision in Zambrano in a number of places in
    the Decision.  He did so at paragraphs 54, 56, and 74 of the  Decision.
    Between paragraphs 57  and  60,  the  Judge  carefully  and  thoroughly
    analysed the decision in  Zambrano  and  the  subsequent  jurisprudence
    dealing with its application.  The Judge stated that in respect of  all
    of his  decisions  in  the  appeal,  he  had  taken  into  account  the
    principles in Zambrano, and this is apparent to  me  from  the  Judge's
    reasons for those decisions.  I do not think it possible to argue  that
    the Judge failed to take account of the decision in Zambrano as regards
    the consequences for UO of the Respondent's decision.  Clearly  he  did
    so.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the same reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton               6th December 2016
