
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08020/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2016                  |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     KK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms M Benitez, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 20 March 1997 who arrived
    in the UK on 30 June 2014 and applied for asylum on 2 July 2014.

 2. The appellant's claim,  in  summary,  is  that  his  family  have  been
    involved in a blood feud since 1993. He described an incident  in  2008
    where shots were fired at his father and uncle  whilst  returning  from
    grocery shopping. He says that upon turning 16 he became  a  target  of
    the  feud,  the  consequence  of  which  was  that  he  lived  in  self
    confinement until his uncle arranged  for  him  to  leave  Albania.  He
    claims that if he were to return to Albania he  would  be  at  risk  of
    being killed.

 3. The respondent refused the application. It did not accept there was  an
    active blood and considered that the appellant could return  safely  to
    either his home area or elsewhere in Albania.

 4. The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") Judge Froom who, in a decision promulgated on 9  October  2015,
    dismissed the appeal.

 5. The FtT accepted there was an incident in 1993 that triggered  a  blood
    feud but did not accept the feud was  ongoing  or  that  the  appellant
    would be targeted. The FtT's findings in  support  of  this  conclusion
    included, inter alia, the following:
      a. There have been no further murders since 1993 and that even  taking
         the appellant's claim at its highest the last incident was in 2008.


      b. The appellant has nine male cousins, all of  whom  are  older  than
         him, but did not relate a  single  incident  involving  them  since
         1993. The FtT stated that the absence of further attempts to  exact
         revenge over 22 years makes it highly unlikely there is  an  active
         blood feud.
      c. The FtT did not find credible the appellant's explanation as to why
         the incident in 2008 was not reported to the  police  given,  inter
         alia, that the police took action following the 1993 incident.
      d. If the appellant's father and uncle were at risk and living in semi-
         confinement, the FtT did not accept it is consistent  for  them  to
         have been grocery shopping by car, which is the activity  in  which
         they were said to be engaged when shots were fired at them in 2008.
      e. The FtT had difficulty with the appellant's  account  of  attending
         school for  eight  months  after  turning  16  notwithstanding  the
         renewal of the feud in 2008.
      f. The FtT found the  appellant's  oral  evidence  about  whether  his
         cousins were living in self confinement to be inconsistent.
      g. It also found his account of contacting his family  after  arriving
         in the UK unreliable and in respect of documents submitted  by  the
         appellant the FtT stated that  "there  was  much  artifice  in  the
         appellant's account regarding the provenance of the  documents  and
         this undermines their credibility."
      h. In respect of two letters produced, one from the Golaj commune  and
         the other from the Golaj village, attesting to the blood feud,  the
         FtT held  it  was  not  able  to  give  them  weight  as  providing
         corroboration of the appellant's account.



Grounds of appeal and submissions

 6. The grounds of appeal contend that the FtT failed to take into  account
    the evidence before it that the appellant's family were living in  self
    confinement as an  explanation  for  the  absence  of  further  revenge
    attacks during the course of the feud.

 7. The grounds also submit that FtT erred by  rejecting  the  two  letters
    from the Golaj commune on the basis they  had  a  similar  content  and
    layout given they are official documents.

 8. Miss Benitez argued that the FtT failed to consider and  make  findings
    in respect of attempts at reconciliation in 2010 and 2013 which have  a
    bearing on the issue of there being an active feud.

 9. In respect of the rejected documents, she argued that the FtT failed to
    appreciate that they were similar because they originated from the same
    authority  -  the  similarity  should  be  a  factor  supporting  their
    credibility, not detracting from it. She stated that it was speculation
    on the part of the judge to assume the  Albanian  local  offices  would
    have a distinct email address and not use a hotmail address.

10. Mr Whitwell argued that the FtT had considered and  was  aware  of  the
    claimed self confinement of relatives. At paragraph [34] the judge  set
    out  the  appellant's  evidence  about  his  cousins  living  in   self
    confinement and at paragraph [31] discussed  the  appellant's  father's
    self confinement. Mr Whitwell referred to the FtT's findings about  the
    appellant continuing his schooling beyond the age of 16 and his  father
    going to the supermarket and argued that it was open to the FtT, on the
    evidence before it, to find there was not an active feud.

11. With regard to the two documents that were not  accepted,  Mr  Whitwell
    noted that the FtT had given them careful  consideration  and  had  not
    confused them with  being  NGO  documents.  The  FtT's  reasons,  taken
    together, were adequate to justify its conclusion.

Consideration

12. The first ground of appeal takes issue  with  the  FtT's  finding  that
    there  was  no  longer  an  active  blood  feud  given  that  the  self
    confinement of the appellant's family  would  explain  the  absence  of
    attacks.

13. I do not consider this ground to have any merit. The FtT  gave  several
    reasons to explain why it found the blood feud to not be ongoing.  This
    included, inter alia, that appellant continued to attend  school  after
    16, that there have been no attacks on his nine elder cousins and  that
    the appellant's father and uncle  felt  able  in  2008  to  go  grocery
    shopping by car notwithstanding their self confinement.

14. In reaching its finding about the blood feud, it is clear the  FtT  had
    regard to the appellant's family's alleged self confinement.  This  was
    considered,  in  respect  of  the  appellant's  uncle  and  father,  at
    paragraphs [31] and [32] where their grocery shopping by  car  in  2008
    was discussed. In respect of the appellant's nine  older  cousins,  the
    FtT considered their self confinement at paragraph [34], where  it  was
    stated the appellant's evidence about them being  in  self  confinement
    was inconsistent and embellished.

15. It is my view, therefore, that the  FtT  has  considered  the  evidence
    before it about the feud and in explaining its reasons for finding that
    the feud is  not  ongoing  has  take  into  account  the  alleged  self
    confinement of the appellant's family.

16. The second ground of appeal relates to two  letters  dated  10  October
    2014 from the Golaj Commune, one of which  specifies  it  is  from  the
    Golaj village elders. The  letters  state  that  there  is  blood  feud
    ongoing since 1993 which has not reconciled.

17. At paragraph [40]  the  FtT  noted  that  the  letters  were  virtually
    identical, had a hotmail rather than governmental email address and are
    dated the same day. It also said that they are almost  entirely  silent
    on important matters such  as  who  requested  the  confirmation,  what
    records were consulted, what events caused  the  feud  and  under  what
    authority they were issued.

18. At paragraph [41] the FtT stated: "drawing these points together, I  am
    not able to give the documents weight as providing corroboration of the
    appellant's account".

19. It is apparent from  the  decision  that  the  FtT  has  given  careful
    consideration to the letters. Whilst I accept there is  merit  to  Miss
    Benitez's argument that the use of a hotmail account and the similarity
    of format between the letters should not weigh against  them,  the  FtT
    has looked at the letters in the round and,  taking  into  account,  in
    particular, that the letters fail to address key information about  the
    feud (as set out at paragraph [17] above) I am satisfied  that  it  was
    open  to  the  FtT  to  not  give  the  letters  weight  as   providing
    corroboration of the appellant's account.

20. Accordingly, I find that the  appellant  is  unable  to  succeed  under
    either of the grounds of appeal and therefore that the decision of  FtT
    Judge Froom should stand.

    Decision
      a. The appeal is dismissed.
      b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of a material error of law and shall stand.
      c. An anonymity direction is made.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 23 February 2016              |

