
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08550/2013
     AA/08551/2013
     AA/08552/2013
     AA/08553/2013
     AA/08555/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27th November 2014                           |On 5th January 2015        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

        SF                                            First Appellant

          RF                                       Second Appellant

        AF                                           Third Appellant

         LF                                         Fourth Appellant

        AMF                                          Fifth Appellant

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms E Rutherford of Counsel instructed by Braitch RB
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Following a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge  Peter  Lane  gave  permission  on  26th  February  2014  to  the
    appellants to appeal against the determination of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal V A Cox in which she dismissed the appeals on all grounds
    against the decisions of the respondent to refuse asylum,  humanitarian
    and human rights protection to the appellants who are all  citizens  of
    Pakistan.

 2. In granting permission Judge Lane thought it arguable that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had made factual errors regarding the background of
    the main appellant which  may  have  had  a  material  bearing  on  her
    credibility findings.

 3. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal before me I heard submissions from
    both representatives about the claimed error on a point of law.

 4. Ms Rutherford confirmed that she relied upon the grounds of application
    to the Upper Tribunal.  These submit that the fundamental criticism  of
    the determination is that the judge erroneously reached her conclusions
    on the basis that the appellant was a highly  educated  woman  who  had
    obtained a degree in the United Kingdom.  Several  references  to  this
    conclusion were  made  by  the  judge  when  reaching  her  credibility
    findings, most notably in paragraph 68(a) where erroneous reference was
    made  to  the  appellant's  educated   status   in   conjunction   with
    consideration of Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of
    Claimants Act) 2004. The erroneous conclusion was also referred  to  in
    paragraphs 68(c) and 74.

 5. The grounds further contend that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    conclusions of the country expert who gave a plausible explanation  for
    the first named appellant's husband concealing his  Ahmadi  faith  from
    her (paragraph 30  of  the  report).   The  grounds  also  allege  that
    paragraph 73 of  the  determination  is  fundamentally  flawed  in  its
    conclusion that the appellant would not  be  an  unsupported  woman  in
    Pakistan because she would have the  support  offered  by  her  current
    partner.  No evidence was presented during the proceedings to show that
    the present partner would be in a position  to  support  the  appellant
    financially or, for that matter, that he had  done  so  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 6. The grounds also criticise the determination for a restrictive approach
    to Article 8 issues and a flawed analysis of the risk on return for the
    first named appellant and the children without  an  assessment  of  the
    best interests of those children and consideration of  whether  or  not
    the first named appellant's  relationship  with  a  married  man  would
    impose an additional risk for her and her children in  the  country  of
    origin.

 7. At the hearing Ms Rutherford expressed the view that the expert  report
    had been largely ignored by the judge.  For example, conclusions  about
    domestic violence  suffered  in  Pakistan  (paragraph  68(e))  made  no
    reference to the comments of the expert.  Further,  the  appellant  had
    never worked in Pakistan so it was wrong to  conclude  that  she  could
    support herself.

 8. Mr McVeety referred to paragraph 39 of the expert report in  which  the
    appellant was referred  to  as  educated.   He  also  argued  that  the
    function of the expert was not to comment on  credibility.   The  judge
    had given cogent reasons for  her  conclusions  about  the  appellant's
    husband.  Whilst he conceded that the Section 8  conclusions  contained
    the error about the appellant's education he suggested  that  this  was
    not relevant.

 9. In conclusion Ms Rutherford drew my attention to paragraph  31  of  the
    expert report.  She argued that the expert had dealt  objectively  with
    the husband's Ahmadi faith and this was a matter which the judge should
    have shown she had  considered  before  reaching  her  own  credibility
    findings.

Conclusions

10. Paragraph 68(a) of the determination shows that the judge  reached  her
    conclusion that the appellant is a highly educated  woman  because  she
    had obtained a degree in the United Kingdom.  That was, however,  wrong
    because the appellant had not been educated to degree  standard  either
    here or in Pakistan.  Such a conclusion might not have been material if
    the judge had made no further reference to the appellant's intelligence
    when reaching conclusions about her credibility.  However, that is  not
    the case.  The judge reached the conclusion that the  appellant  was  a
    highly educated and able  woman  who  would  be  able  to  re-establish
    herself and her children in Pakistan (paragraph 74).  In  paragraph  75
    the judge goes on to conclude that the appellant's UK degree gave  her,
    I infer, an employment advantage in Pakistan which would also ease  her
    difficulties. It is clear  that  the  judge's  erroneous  view  of  the
    appellant's educational status figured so  highly  in  her  conclusions
    that she also made it a basis for her Section 8 finding.   I  can  only
    conclude that the error is material because of its  close  relationship
    to the credibility findings and assessment  of  risk  on  return.   The
    error means that the determination cannot stand.

11. I also accept that the  judge's  reference  to  the  expert  report  is
    inadequate, particularly in relation to her husband's  claimed  secrecy
    about his Ahmadi faith.  Even if the judge was not bound to follow  any
    statements  by  the  expert  about  the  appellant's  credibility,  the
    evidence put forward should have been referred to  and,  if  necessary,
    dismissed  with  reasons  before  adverse  credibility  findings   were
    reached.  The judge's findings  about  the  likelihood  of  support  in
    Pakistan by the appellant's partner in the United Kingdom  are  reached
    without any reference to evidence which might  show  that  the  partner
    could support her in that way.  These matters also amount to errors  on
    points of law which compound the effect of  the  fundamental  error  to
    which I have referred.

12. The determination shows the errors  on  points  of  law  which  I  have
    identified.  These errors are  such  that  the  appeal  must  be  heard
    afresh.  In reaching that conclusion I bear in mind the  provisions  of
    paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement  by  the  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals of 25th September 2012 particularly  as  the  judicial  fact-
    finding exercise by the First-tier tribunal will involve all issues.





DIRECTIONS

 1. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Stoke  for
    hearing afresh on all issues.

 2. An Urdu interpreter will be required.

 3. The time estimate for the hearing is three hours.

 4. The appeal must not be heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  V  A
    Cox.

 5. As this appeal involves the interests of  minor  children  I  make  the
    following direction:

    Unless and until  the  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellants  are
    granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This  direction
    applies to the appellants and to the respondent. Failure to comply with
    this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

