
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08856/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 May 2015                       |On 10 June 2015                      |
|Prepared on 1 June 2015              |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    Z. M.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Soltani, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant says that he is a citizen of Syria, born on 19 February
       1996. He claimed to have entered  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  in
       August 2011, and applied for a grant of leave to remain on the  basis
       of his Article 8 rights on 15 February  2012.  That  application  was
       refused without an in country right of appeal on 3 July 2013.

    2. On 1 July 2014 the Appellant claimed asylum. The  Respondent  refused
       the asylum claim on 13 October 2014 and in  consequence  she  made  a
       decision of the same date to remove him from the UK as  one  who  had
       entered illegally. Since the Respondent believed the Appellant to  be
       in truth a citizen of Iraq she proposed to remove him either to Syria
       or Iraq.

    3. An appeal against that removal decision was heard  and  dismissed  by
       First Tier Tribunal Judge  Duff  in  a  Decision  promulgated  on  11
       February 2015. The Judge was not satisfied that the Appellant was  in
       truth a citizen of Syria as he claimed to be. Since the Appellant did
       not assert that he faced a real risk of harm in the KAZ of  Iraq  his
       appeal was dismissed.

    4. The Appellant applied to the First Tier Tribunal  for  permission  to
       appeal. Permission was granted by Judge Simpson on 6  March  2015  on
       all of the grounds advanced.

    5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice on 19 March  2015.  She  argued
       that the grounds were misconceived, and that the Judge  was  entitled
       to find on the evidence before him that the Appellant was not  Syrian
       as he  claimed  to  be,  and  that  those  findings  were  adequately
       reasoned.

    6. Thus the matter comes before me.

   The Appellant's father

    7. By the date of the hearing, in the light of  the  DNA  test  evidence
       that the Appellant had by then obtained, it was  no  longer  disputed
       that the Appellant was the son of M.I.

    8. M.I. had applied for asylum in the UK on 26 November  2004,  claiming
       to have entered the UK illegally  the  previous  day,  and  to  be  a
       citizen of Syria.

    9. In his witness statement made in support of  his  asylum  claim  M.I.
       named his wife and five children, and gave the years of  their  birth
       [J1-]. Those details were repeated in his SEF, which he completed  on
       8 December 2004 [K1-]. Thus M.I. declared that the Appellant was born
       in 1992.

   10. On 14 January 2005 M.I.'s asylum claim was refused, when his  account
       of events in his country of origin was  rejected  as  untrue  by  the
       Respondent, and thus a decision was made to remove him to Syria.  The
       Respondent did not however specifically challenge M.I.'s claim to  be
       a Syrian citizen.

   11.  M.I.'s  appeal  was  heard  and  dismissed  by  the  Tribunal  in  a
       Determination promulgated on 7 April  2005.  In  the  course  of  his
       appeal he adopted, and confirmed as true his  witness  statement  and
       SEF. Again his account  of  events  in  his  country  of  origin  was
       rejected as untrue [I4-]. There  was  no  specific  challenge  raised
       before the Tribunal as to either M.I.'s identity,  or,  whether  M.I.
       was a Syrian national, and the Determination is  clearly  written  on
       that basis.

   12. Despite the exhaustion of his appeal rights, the  Respondent  appears
       to have taken no step  to  remove  M.I.  from  the  UK.  Instead  the
       Respondent granted M.I. indefinite leave to remain in  the  UK  under
       the "legacy programme" on 19 April 2010 [H3].

   13. M.I. subsequently applied to the Respondent  for  a  travel  document
       which was issued to him in February 2013 on an exceptional  basis  in
       order that he might travel to a country  with  a  functioning  Syrian
       Embassy, and thus obtain a Syrian passport  [H1].  The  document  was
       valid for 12 months. It is clear that M.I. used that travel  document
       to travel from the  UK,  to  Iraq  on  at  least  one  occasion  with
       immigration stamps recording that use. He does not admit to using  it
       for the purpose for which it had been issued,  because  he  does  not
       admit to having sought, or obtained a Syrian passport.

   14. M.I. applied to the Respondent again in  early  2014  for  a  further
       travel document. In support of that he produced documentation showing
       that he had received an implantable cardiverter/defibrillator at  the
       Freeman Hospital [L4/5]. The basis of his  application  was  that  he
       urgently needed to travel to Iraq to care for and visit his wife  who
       was ill in hospital. He also claimed to have two  children  who  were
       said to be staying with their mother at the Domiz refugee  camp  near
       Dohuk in the KAZ [L4]. Thus whatever cardiac  difficulties  M.I.  had
       previously suffered he considered himself fit to travel to the KAZ in
       early 2014.

   15. The Respondent initially refused to issue a further  travel  document
       on 19 March  2014  [L1].  The  application  must  however  have  been
       renewed, and one was issued to him on 23 May 2014 on  an  exceptional
       basis in order that he might travel to a country with  a  functioning
       Syrian Embassy, and thus obtain a Syrian passport [H1]. The  document
       was valid for 12 months. Again he used that travel document to travel
       from the UK, to Iraq, but once again he does not claim to  have  used
       it to obtain a Syrian passport.

   The Directions issued by the Tribunal

   16. The Tribunal identified the need for clarity  over  the  issues  that
       needed to be determined in the course of the appeal, and thus  issued
       Directions on 15 January 2015 requiring the Respondent to set out  in
       writing  her  position  on  the  Appellant's   paternity,   and   the
       nationality of M.I.

   17. The Respondent responded on 16 January 2015 formally  accepting  that
       M.I. was the father of the Appellant. Whilst she accepted  that  M.I.
       had claimed to be a Syrian national, and that this had not previously
       been specifically challenged, she noted the  evidence  that  was  now
       available that showed that both he and the Appellant  were  in  truth
       Iraqi, and not Syrian. That evidence included the linguistic analysis
       that showed he spoke a dialect from the KAZ rather than  from  Syria,
       and the answers he had given at interview that showed  he  knew  very
       little about life in Syria. She formally disputed the date  of  birth
       that the Appellant had provided, and did not accept that the document
       he relied upon as his Syrian birth certificate was reliable. Thus she
       formally disputed his claim to be a Syrian.

   18. In the light of this statement of position on 16 January 2015,  I  am
       satisfied that neither the Appellant nor  his  representatives  could
       have been under any remaining  illusion  as  to  the  nature  of  the
       dispute that was central to the appeal.

   19. Notwithstanding this it is clear that no evidence was produced to the
       Tribunal by M.I. to address either the inconsistency between the date
       of birth that he had given for the  Appellant,  and  that  which  the
       Appellant had claimed, or, the evidence that pointed to the Appellant
       having grown up in the KAZ. Although the position at the CMR  hearing
       was that the Appellant's father and friends would  give  evidence  at
       the appeal to address these issues they did not do so. There  was  no
       further written evidence from M.I., and he did not attend the hearing
       of the appeal. Nor was evidence produced to explain how if  M.I.  was
       fit enough to travel from the UK to the KAZ, he was unable  to  offer
       evidence in support of the Appellant's appeal.

   20. The Appellant sought to explain M.I.'s absence, and lack of  evidence
       on these issues, on the basis that M.I. was too ill to assist him. No
       medical evidence to that effect was produced  to  the  Tribunal,  and
       none has been produced to me. The Judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to
       deal with the lack of evidence from M.I. as he did [29]. He  did  not
       treat that absence of evidence as evidence - he simply  noted  as  he
       was entitled to do that M.I. could have offered  an  explanation  and
       had not done so.

   The "concession" argument

   21. Ms Soltani (who did not appear below, and did not draft the  grounds)
       argued that since the Respondent had conceded that M.I. was a  Syrian
       national, and had conceded that the Appellant was the son of M.I.  it
       followed that on the applicable standard of proof the  Appellant  was
       also a Syrian national. That argument is a  superficially  attractive
       one, because the ordinary assumption  would  be  that  the  Appellant
       would take his nationality from his father M.I., but  it  must  fails
       because its central premise is flawed. In the light of the letter  of
       16 January 2015 the Respondent had not only clearly placed in dispute
       the Appellant's nationality, but had withdrawn any past concession as
       to M.I.'s nationality.

   22. There was therefore no error of law  in  the  Judge  approaching  the
       appeal as he did at paragraph 23. The Respondent accepted that if the
       Appellant established that he  were  a  Syrian  national  his  appeal
       should be allowed, and equally the  Appellant  accepted  that  if  he
       could not do so that his appeal should be dismissed.

   Conclusions

   23. The Judge was obliged to consider the weight that he  could  give  to
       the document that the Appellant relied upon as being his own  genuine
       and legitimately issued Syrian birth certificate. Although he did not
       refer to the authority, the decision shows in my judgement  that  the
       Judge sought to apply the principles set out by Ouseley J  in  CJ,  R
       (on the application of) v  Cardiff  County  Council  [2011]  EWHC  23
       (Admin), when he restated the importance of the approach  in  Tanveer
       Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318. Documentary evidence along  with  its
       provenance needs to be weighed in the light of all  the  evidence  in
       the case. Documentary evidence does not carry with it  a  presumption
       of authenticity, which specific evidence must disprove, failing which
       its content must be accepted. What is required is  its  appraisal  in
       the light of the evidence about its nature,  provenance,  timing  and
       background evidence and in the light of all the other evidence in the
       case, especially that given by the claimant. The same can properly be
       said for a claimant's oral evidence.

   24. There is in my judgement no error in the  Judge's  approach  to  this
       document that requires the decision to be set aside and remade [18  &
       27]. The content of this document is clearly  inconsistent  with  the
       evidence given by M.I. in two documents made by him in the course  of
       his own asylum claim, and then confirmed as true in the course of his
       appeal  hearing  before  the  Tribunal,  and  M.I.  had  offered   no
       explanation for that. That alone would give rise to  serious  concern
       as to the reliability of the document produced by the Appellant.  The
       reference to the Appellant's maturity does not undermine that.

   25. If the Appellant was born when his father had said then he  was  four
       years older than he admitted to when he left his country of origin. A
       different level  of  general  knowledge  of  his  surroundings  would
       ordinarily be expected of a young man of 15, to that  expected  of  a
       young man of 19. It is plain in my judgement  when  the  decision  is
       read as a whole, that this was the Judge's approach [28].

   26. The Judge  was  taken  to  the  interview  record  which  showed  the
       Appellant's responses to a variety of questions about Syria. Contrary
       to the complaint raised  in  the  second  ground  he  did  not  focus
       exclusively on only one question and answer. The point that the Judge
       was making, and which was well open to him, was  that  the  Appellant
       had not displayed at interview the sort of general knowledge that  he
       expected.

   27. The Appellant had not produced in evidence an expert report analysing
       his dialect, and knowledge of Syria. He had however  submitted  to  a
       linguistic analysis undertaken by those retained for that purpose  by
       the  Respondent.  The  conclusion  of  that  analysis  was  that  the
       Appellant's speech showed that he had grown up amongst those speaking
       with the Kurdish Iraqi dialect. The Judge noted  the  limitations  of
       the report, and  considered  its  methodology  [30].  He  was  in  my
       judgement perfectly entitled to place weight upon it.

   28. The Appellant's explanation for the  conclusions  of  the  linguistic
       analysis  was  to  claim  that  since  arrival  in  the  UK  he   had
       predominantly socialised with Iraqi  Kurds.  To  put  that  into  its
       proper context, he was saying that he had acquired the  dialect  that
       was the subject of analysis on 25 September 2014 since his arrival in
       the UK in August 2011. Thus he was claiming to have done  so  between
       the ages of 15 and 18 if  the  date  of  birth  he  relied  upon  was
       accurate, or, was claiming to have done so between the ages of 19 and
       22 if the date of birth given by his father was accurate. Put  simply
       the Judge was perfectly entitled to consider the weight that he could
       place upon that explanation. He was not obliged  to  accept  it,  and
       plainly did not do so.

   29. In my judgement it is plain, when the decision is read  as  a  whole,
       that the Judge considered all of  the  evidence,  and  gave  adequate
       reasons for his decision. He took as his starting point  the  history
       concerning M.I. and the Respondent's initial tacit acceptance of  his
       Syrian nationality. He was satisfied ultimately that the totality  of
       the evidence before the Tribunal showed that  the  Appellant  was  in
       truth an Iraqi citizen. In  my  judgement,  and  notwithstanding  the
       terms in which permission to appeal was granted, there is no merit in
       the grounds advanced before me. The grounds are in  my  judgement  no
       more than a disagreement with that conclusion. Accordingly  there  is
       no error disclosed in the Judge's approach to the evidence,  and  his
       decision reveals no material error of law that requires it to be  set
       aside and remade.

DECISION

   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 11
   February 2015 contained  no  error  of  law  in  the  dismissal  of  the
   Appellant's appeal which requires that decision  to  be  set  aside  and
   remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 1 June 2015



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

   Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise the Appellant is granted
   anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these  proceedings
   shall directly or indirectly identify him. This direction  applies  both
   to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
   direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 1 June 2015

