
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08425/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 30 April 2015                     |On 14 May 2015                       |
|Prepared on 1 May 2015               |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                     S R
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Chawdhery, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran who said that  she  had  entered
         the United Kingdom illegally the same day that she  claimed  asylum
         on 28 May 2014. That application was refused on 7 October 2014, and
         in consequence a removal decision was made in relation to her.

      2. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal  against  those  immigration
         decisions and her  appeal  was  heard  on  28  November  2014,  and
         dismissed by decision of Judge Batiste, promulgated on  8  December
         2014.

      3.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal, as drafted, raised two complaints;  (i)  that
         the Judge had failed to take evidence into account that would  have
         had a material  impact  upon  his  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
         credibility,  and,  (ii)  that  the  Judge  had  given   inadequate
         consideration  to  the  issue  of  whether  the   Appellant   could
         reasonably be expected to relocate within Iran to avoid any risk of
         harm she faced in her home area.

      4. That application was granted by Judge  Scott-Baker  on  12  January
         2015 on the second ground only, and permission was refused  on  the
         first ground.

      5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice of 10 February 2015 in  which
         she asserted that the issue of internal relocation  was  fully  and
         properly considered by the Judge.

      6. The Appellant formally applied for permission to rely upon  further
         evidence pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
         Rules 2008 relating to the report of a psychologist upon her mental
         health,  and  evidence  concerning   her   recent   conversion   to
         Christianity and baptism on 7 December 2014.

      7. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Ground 1

      8. Ms Chawdhery did not seek to  advance  the  complaint  set  out  in
         ground 1, which she had  not  drafted.  She  was  in  my  judgement
         entirely correct not to do so, because at best  it  amounts  to  no
         more than a disagreement with the Judge's conclusions. I  need  say
         no more about it.

    Ground 2

      9. As drafted, ground 2 is a complaint that the Judge failed  to  take
         adequate account  of  the  content  of  a  report  dated  17/9/2014
         submitted to the UN, entitled "Women living under Muslim laws."  In
         particular paragraphs 2.2 and 2.3 concerning provisions  in  Iran's
         Civil Code which relate (a) to the ability of a husband to  prevent
         his wife from working in a trade or profession deemed by him to  be
         incompatible with the interests of  the  family  or  with  his  own
         dignity, or that of his wife, and, (b) to the ability of a  husband
         to determine the place of a wife's residence, so that she would  be
         unworthy of maintenance rights in the event of disobedience.

     10. These complaints amount in my judgement to  a  misreading  of  this
         report. The report does not  suggest  that  under  Iranian  law  an
         employer, or a landlord is required to demand written proof of  the
         consent of a husband  before  taking  on  a  married  woman  as  an
         employee, or leasing a domestic property to them to live in.  Thus,
         even if the Appellant would be perceived to be a married  woman  in
         the event of return to Iran by a prospective employer or  landlord,
         she would not be required to contact her husband and obtain such  a
         consent before she could  work  to  support  herself,  or  lease  a
         property in which to live. In those circumstances,  since  she  did
         not propose to contact her husband and demand maintenance from him,
         or a divorce, the evidence before the Judge  did  not  support  any
         contention that her husband (a plumber) would  know  that  she  had
         returned to Iran, let alone where she would  be  living.  He  would
         have no opportunity to prevent her taking employment or  leasing  a
         home,  and  the  bald  assertion  to   the   contrary   is   simply
         misconceived.

     11. The Judge accepted that the Appellant was at risk of harm from  her
         ex-husband in her home area, and quite properly went on to consider
         the Appellant's ability to relocate within Iran as a result. He did
         so  at  some  length  within  paragraphs  39-42  of  his  decision,
         considering the medical evidence as  it  then  was  concerning  the
         Appellant's low mood following her separation from her children (Dr
         Lord's report and Dr Jones' report). He was not provided  with  the
         report of Dr Narimani of 10 April 2015 because it had not then been
         written, but even if  he  had  been  able  to  consider  it,  I  am
         satisfied that it would have made no difference to his decision. Dr
         Narimani speaks of the Appellant's recovery being affected  by  the
         appeal process, but there is nothing  in  that  report  that  would
         permit a finding that it was unreasonable to expect  the  Appellant
         to relocate within Iran.

     12. The Judge had accepted the Appellant's own  account  that  she  was
         assisted in her desire to  leave  Iran  by  her  brothers.  He  was
         entitled to the inference that they were not ill  disposed  towards
         her, and that practical help from them would be forthcoming in  the
         event of her  return  to  Iran.  Ms  Chawdhery's  argument  to  the
         contrary was no more than a disagreement with a  finding  that  was
         well open to him on the evidence.

     13. The Judge made  no  reference  to  the  Appellant's  conversion  to
         Christianity in the course of his decision. Ms  Chawdhery  accepted
         that he made no error of law in so doing, because he was never told
         of it.

     14. I note however the evidence that is now offered  under  a  Rule  15
         Notice which purports to suggest that the  Appellant  was  baptised
         three days after the decision of  Judge  Batiste  was  promulgated,
         and, that she had been attending the  Stockton  Baptist  Tabernacle
         since being housed in Stockton on Tees by NASS. It is difficult  to
         see how she could have failed  to  be  aware  of  that  forthcoming
         ceremony at the hearing of her appeal, and she had of course  moved
         to Stockon on Tees no later than 12 September  2014  when  she  was
         interviewed in  connection  with  her  asylum  claim  [B3].  As  Ms
         Chawdhery  accepted,  the  Appellant  has,  as  yet,   offered   no
         explanation as to why she failed to disclose to Judge  Batiste  her
         claim to have become a convert to Christianity. It is not for me in
         the course of these proceedings, and without hearing  evidence,  to
         determine whether that claim is genuine or not,  but  it  is  plain
         that in the context of this  chronology  the  Appellant  will  have
         something of a struggle to convince anyone that this is the case.

    Conclusions

     15. Not only is there nothing wrong with the Judge's reasoning  on  the
         issue of internal relocation, but it is perfectly clearly  set  out
         in the decision; MK (Duty to give  reasons)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT
         641.

  DECISION

       The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on
       8 December 2014 contains no error of law in the decision  to  dismiss
       the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be  set  aside
       and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.






  Signed



  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

  Dated 1 May 2015





  Direction  regarding  anonymity  -  Rule  14  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
  Tribunal) Rules 2008

       Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
       granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No  report  of  these
       proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her. This direction
       applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to
       comply with this direction could lead to  proceedings  being  brought
       for contempt of court.






  Signed



  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

  Dated 1 May 2015
