
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08376/2015
                                                               AA/08378/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     IT
                                     SAY
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr. A. Alam of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shergill promulgated on  8  October  2015  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decisions to
    refuse to grant asylum.

 2. I have made an anonymity direction, following that which  was  made  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The grounds argue that the judge adopted a flawed approach in  his
         assessment of credibility.  (1) In  finding  that  the  couple  had
         fabricated their account to facilitate remaining  in  the  UK,  the
         judge had adopted a higher standard of proof; (2)  given  that  the
         respondent had accepted that  the  appellant  had  entered  into  a
         relationship with the 2nd  appellant  and  had  a  child  with  her
         outside  marriage,  the  judge  was  wrong  to   reject   how   the
         relationship came about; (3) the judge's finding  that  the  second
         appellant marriage to her  British  husband  was  not  genuine  and
         granted her entry clearance to the join him; (4) the  judge  failed
         to factor in the accepted and crucial  fact  that  the  couple  had
         engaged in an adulterous relationship and that  the  2nd  appellant
         had given birth  to  a  child  outside  of  wedlock.   These  raise
         arguable errors of law."

 4. At the hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives.   I
    reserved my decision which I set out below with my reasons.

Submissions

 5. Mr. Alam relied on the grounds of appeal.  Further, in relation to  the
    burden of proof, he submitted that looking at the decision as a  whole,
    the judge had found on the lower burden against the Appellants,  rather
    than assessing whether, to the lower standard of proof,  their  account
    was true.  He had reversed the burden when  considering  whether  their
    account was reasonably likely to be true.  I was referred to  paragraph
    [32], and his use of the words "highly unlikely".  I was also  referred
    to paragraph [43], where he considered their claim to be naive  against
    the evidence that they were technical people.

 6. He submitted that due weight had not been  placed  on  the  ECO  having
    granted entry clearance to the second Appellant.  Contrary to the  Rule
    24 response, there was more to it than an  online  application.   Entry
    clearance applications  required  strong  evidence  of  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.   Without  strong  evidence,  the  application
    would have been refused.

 7. Mr. Mills submitted that there was no merit in the grounds relating  to
    the standard and burden of proof.  In paragraph [18]  the  judge  self-
    directed using the correct standard of proof.   He  then  repeated  the
    standard of proof throughout the decision.  I was referred to paragraph
    [46].  In relation to [32], the fact that the judge referred to "highly
    unlikely" did not mean that he was applying the incorrect  standard  of
    proof.

 8. In relation to the ground relating to the verification checks,  a  full
    reading of paragraph [45] showed that there were  other  factors  which
    had led the judge to put no weight on the document, including the  fact
    that some of the document was in Urdu, and that there was an issue with
    the dates.

 9. In relation to the third ground, the judge  states  in  paragraph  [34]
    that he is bound by the Respondent's concession  that  they  are  in  a
    relationship, but what he disputes is how that relationship came about.
     It is connected to the rejection  of  the  second  Appellant's  claim.
    This was a sustainable finding.  Given the credibility findings, he was
    entitled to find that they were in a relationship, but nothing else.

10. In relation to the second  Appellant's  previous  marriage,  the  judge
    found that this was never genuine and subsisting, which was  a  finding
    that was open to him.  No concession had been made  by  the  Respondent
    that the marriage was genuine.  The fact that entry clearance had  been
    granted could not bind a judge  and  he  was  entitled  to  come  to  a
    different view.   The  second  Appellant  had  never  lived  with  that
    individual, nor had they co-habited.  It was hard to see how the  judge
    could have come to any other conclusion.

11. In relation to ground 5, and the failure to consider in detail the risk
    on return, the Appellants were  two  nationals  of  Pakistan  who  were
    unmarried and had a child.  According  to  Pakistan  law,  such  people
    could be  stoned  to  death.   However,  there  was  no  evidence  that
    adulterers would be pursued, absent a complaint.  The judge found  that
    there was no such issue in paragraph [56].  He found there was no  risk
    from the second Appellant's family.  On the  judge's  findings,  nobody
    would make a complaint against the Appellants.  Nobody was looking  for
    them.  They could return to Pakistan as a family unit, and  could  make
    their relationship formal by marrying.

12. In response Mr. Alam submitted that just because the judge  had  stated
    the correct standard of proof did not mean that he had applied it.  The
    essence of the case, that the  Appellants  had  formed  a  relationship
    outside of marriage, outside the cultural and religious norms, had been
    conceded.  The judge had focussed on the inconsistent aspects.   I  was
    referred to HK [2006]  EWCA  Civ  paragraph  [28].   Having  found  the
    essence  of  the  claim,  their  relationship,  the  judge  then  finds
    inconsistency in how the relationship came  about,  but  he  questioned
    what weight should have been applied to this.

13. In relation to relocation, paragraph [56], this  was  by  reference  to
    there being no threat to the Appellants.  The  issue  related  to  them
    being in a genuine relationship.  The conclusion was drawn on the basis
    of the judge's finding that there had not been a  genuine  relationship
    between the second Appellant and the man she came to the United Kingdom
    to marry.  It was not open to the  judge  to  find,  given  that  entry
    clearance had been granted, that this was not a genuine relationship.

14. I was referred to the petition document.  It was submitted that it  was
    clearly in English, contrary to the assertion in the decision that part
    of it was in Urdu.  There was no reason for the Appellants to get  this
    verified.  It was not clear on what basis the judge had found that this
    had been created after 11  September  2015.   It  was  attested  on  11
    September 2015.  It was difficult to see how the judge had  found  that
    this document had been produced after the date on which it stated  that
    the Appellant was to go to court.  It  was  difficult  to  see  why  no
    weight had been placed on this document whatsoever.



Error of law

Ground 1 - standard of proof

15. In relation to the standard of proof, the  judge  states  in  paragraph
    [18] that the lower standard of proof is the correct standard.   It  is
    of course not enough for a judge to state the standard of proof, but he
    must also  have  applied  that  standard  of  proof.   Considering  the
    decision as a whole, I find that the judge uses this standard of proof.
     He refers to it throughout, for example paragraphs [32],  [39],  [41],
    [43], [49] and [59].  I find that there is  no  evidence  that  he  has
    applied a higher standard of proof  when  considering  the  Appellants'
    account.  In paragraph [54] he refers to the findings  of  falsity  and
    dishonesty being made on the balance  of  probabilities,  but  this  is
    following his finding in paragraph [51] that "when assessing all of the
    evidence at  the  lower  standard  and  taking  account  of  the  legal
    principles that both witnesses accounts were highly  implausible".   In
    paragraph [53] he states "looking at all of the evidence in  the  round
    to the lower standard, I am not satisfied that there  is  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that threats had been made".  Arguably he does not
    need to find in paragraph [54] that the account has been fabricated, as
    he has already found when  assessing  all  of  the  evidence  that  the
    accounts were highly implausible.  There was no need for  him  to  find
    any further.

16. I find that reading the decision as a whole it is clear that the  judge
    has used the correct standard of proof.

Ground 2 - reversal of burden of proof

17. Paragraph [45] states:

         "Turning to the petition document, I note that the original has not
         been  provided  and  on  a  faxed  copy  was  sent  from  Pakistan.
         Verification checks have not been undertaken and in any event parts
         of the document remain in Urdu with no translation (the parts which
         were raised in submission as being somewhat odd  given  an  earlier
         date to appear has been  given  than  the  date  of  issue).   That
         undermines the weight to be attached from the outset."

18. I have considered this document.  It is a photocopy.  The judge  states
    that "parts of the document remain in Urdu".  Although  there  is  some
    handwriting in Urdu, the body of  the  document  is  typed  and  is  in
    English.  The judge states that it is dated earlier than  the  date  of
    appearance.  The document states that it was  verified  on  oath  on  9
    September 2015.  It also states "appear on 11 September  2015".   There
    is a date of 19 September 2015 written at the top, and while  it  might
    not be clear how the judge has ascertained from this that the  document
    was dated after the date on which it indicated for appearance,  equally
    it is not clear from the document to what the date of 19 September 2015
    refers.

19. It is of course correct for a judge to pay less weight to  a  photocopy
    document, and not to attach weight  to  a  document  which  is  not  in
    English.  There is however no obligation on  an  appellant  to  have  a
    document verified.

20. However the judge does not reverse the burden of proof  and  attach  no
    weight to the document simply because it was not verified,  as  implied
    in the grounds of  appeal.   He  gives  further  consideration  to  the
    document in paragraph [46] and gives several reasons for  attaching  no
    weight to it.  He refers  to  the  timing  of  the  production  of  the
    document.  He also refers to the fact that no explanation was given  as
    for why the proceedings were based in Lahore.  He finds  there  was  no
    obvious reason as to why the first Appellant would have received a copy
    of this  document.   He  notes  that  the  petition  anticipates  other
    processes of the court which would follow  but  finds  that  the  first
    Appellant confirmed that no further documentation had been received  at
    the family home.   He  also  refers  to  the  Country  Information  and
    Guidance relating to the court system in Pakistan, and  the  prevalence
    of fraudulent documents.

21. I find that taking paragraphs [45] and [46] together,  the  judge  gave
    adequate reasons for not attaching weight to  this  document.   It  was
    not, as submitted in the grounds, simply because no verification checks
    had been undertaken, and he has not reversed the burden  of  proof.   I
    find that there is no error of law in the judge's consideration of this
    document when taken as a whole.

Ground 3 - contradictory findings

22. The judge states in paragraph [34] that he is bound by  the  concession
    that both Appellants have entered into a relationship and had  a  child
    outside of marriage.  What he does not accept is how  the  relationship
    developed.  He has therefore not made a finding beyond the fact already
    agreed by the parties.  What he has disputed is the way  in  which  the
    relationship came about, which is relevant to his credibility findings.
     It is clear that he has accepted that the Appellants have entered into
    a relationship and have had a child.  He has not reviewed this  matter,
    but  in  making  his  credibility  findings,  he  has  considered   the
    Appellants' account of how their  relationship  developed,  as  he  was
    entitled to do.

Ground 4 - perverse finding

23. The judge did not accept that the second Appellant  was  in  a  genuine
    marriage with  YY  (paragraphs  [27]  and  [53]).   Given  the  judge's
    findings as to the credibility of the second Appellant and the lack  of
    credibility in her account, I find that it was open  to  the  judge  to
    find that her marriage to YY was not genuine.  It is of course right to
    say that the second Appellant was granted entry clearance to the United
    Kingdom on the basis of her marriage  to  YY,  and  that  part  of  the
    requirements are that a marriage be genuine and subsisting.  However it
    is clear that the second Appellant never lived with YY and it cannot be
    said  that  her  marriage  was  ever  subsisting.   Given  the  judge's
    rejection of her account, it was open to him to find that the  marriage
    was not genuine either.  Just because admission was granted as a spouse
    does not mean that the judge is bound by this to find that  the  second
    Appellant was in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship,  especially
    given the account of what happened  when  she  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Taking the evidence and findings as a whole, this finding  is
    not perverse.



Ground 5 - overlooking material facts

24. It was submitted that in considering the risk on return and  relocation
    the judge had failed to factor in the accepted fact that the couple had
    engaged in an adulterous relationship and that the second Appellant had
    given birth to a child outside wedlock. It had  been  accepted  by  the
    Respondent that the Appellants were in a relationship and had a  child.
    It was accepted by the Respondent that the Appellants were not married.
     It was accepted by Mr. Mills that adulterers could be stoned to  death
    but that there was no evidence that adulterers would be pursued, absent
    a complaint.

25. In relation to the second Appellant's relationship with YY, the man she
    came to the United Kingdom to marry, in paragraph [25] the judge states
    "I have to accept that there was a marriage  conducted  or  purportedly
    conducted between YY and [the second Appellant] in  Pakistan  otherwise
    the spouse visa would not have been granted by the respondent".

26. The judge turns to consider the divorce between  the  second  Appellant
    and YY in paragraphs [42] and [43].  He states "She may well be married
    to YY" [42].  However, the judge states that he  does  not  accept  the
    account as put forward by the Appellants in relation to the steps taken
    into to obtain a divorce from YY [43].  He states: "In the alternative,
    I  am  satisfied  at  the  lower  standard  that  the  appellants  have
    maintained themselves in this predicament without  pursuing  any  steps
    relating to the divorce in order to facilitate the asylum application."



27. There was no evidence that the family of YY had  any  interest  in  the
    Appellants.  The judge took into account all of  the  evidence  of  the
    second Appellant's behaviour and that of her family in relation to  the
    marriage to YY, but did not find it credible.   The  judge  found  that
    there would be no risk to the Appellants from the family of the claimed
    bride of the first Appellant as he found that this woman did not exist,
    [56]. The judge made findings and gave reasons as to why he could place
    no weight on the petition document provided.

28. The judge found that there was no threat to the  Appellants  [56].   He
    found that there was no reason why they would come to the attention  of
    the authorities or the general public.  He found in paragraph [58] that
    they would pass off as a "normal" married couple and family  unit.   He
    found that this was "regardless of whether [the second  appellant]  and
    YY are still not divorced or [the Appellants]  remain  unmarried".   He
    states in paragraph [58]:

         "There is nothing that I have seen or heard (and  in  light  of  my
         findings) that would lead me to conclude the  lower  standard  that
         there was any risk on return."

    He also considered that they could  relocate  in  accordance  with  the
    Respondent's assessment.

29. I find that the judge did not overlook material facts.  He did not find
    the Appellants to  be  credible  and  gave  detailed  reasons  for  his
    findings.   He  considered  that  there  would  be  no  threat  to  the
    Appellants on return to Pakistan from their position  as  an  unmarried
    couple.  There is no error of law  in  his  consideration  of  risk  on
    return and relocation.

Notice of Decision

The decision does not involve the making of an error of law and  I  not  set
    it aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of their  families.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 12 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
