
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08029/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2016                           |On 25 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     JR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Ghaffar, Counsel, instructed by UK Law
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of JR in respect of whom an anonymity direction  has
    been made. That will be maintained.  He is a citizen of Eritrea born on
    15 September 1993.

2.   On 8 May 2015 a decision was made to refuse to  grant  him  asylum,  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain  and  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom by way of directions.  He gave notice of appeal  against  those
    decisions on 19 May 2015 and his appeal was  heard  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 5 October 2015.  In a decision promulgated on  11  November
    2015 his appeal was refused.  He now appeals to the Upper Tribunal.

3.     Before us it was conceded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made  an
    error of law in that she did not follow the country guidance case of MO
    (Illegal exit) (Eritrea) CG (2011)  relying instead on the report of  a
    fact finding mission from Denmark.

4.    The recent case of MST &  Others  (national  service-risk  categories)
    (Eritrea) CG [2016] UKUT 443 has reaffirmed the authority of MO and  it
    follows that in not following MO the judge made an error of law.   That
    is accepted on all hands.

5.     It was accepted by the Secretary of State  that  the  appellant  left
    Eritrea illegally.  It is accepted that he is the age he says he is and
    it is accepted therefore that he falls within the parameters of  MO  in
    that he is liable on return to be drafted and therefore to face a  real
    risk of persecution, serious harm or ill-treatment contrary to Articles
    2 or 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

6.     That being so we have little difficulty in holding his  appeal  ought
    to be allowed and we accordingly remake  the  decision  and  allow  his
    appeal.  We are grateful  to  Counsel  for  the  manner  in  which  she
    conducted this appeal and indeed to the Home Office Presenting  Officer
    for her fairness.

Notice of Decision

The appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  allowed.   We
remake the decision, allowing the appellant's appeal  on  asylum  and  human
rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                       Date: 24 January 2017



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                       Date: 24 January 2017
