
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08366/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke on Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th June 2016                              |On 21st July 2016             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            MISS SATANG SANKAREH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Somal, promulgated on 1st March  2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Nottingham on 18th February 2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Miss Satang Sankareh, whereupon  the  Appellant
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, whereupon the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Gambia, who  was  born  on  6th
    January 1972.  She appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, dated 13th May 2015, refusing her  application  for
    asylum and for humanitarian leave to remain.  The Appellant had entered
    the UK on a visit visa on 9th February 2007, valid until 9th July 2007,
    and she failed to  leave  the  UK  when  her  visa  expired.   She  had
    initially claimed that she could not return to Gambia because  she  did
    not have sufficient funds to buy a return ticket.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The  Appellant's  claim  is  that  in  the  UK,  she  began  to  attend
    demonstrations  outside  the  Gambian  embassy,  and   attended   three
    demonstrations.  Students had  been  killed  in  Gambia  although,  she
    asserted that she did not know  why  students  were  killed  in  Gambia
    despite a feeling that she had "to act upon  news  of  the  deaths  and
    demonstrate in the UK" (see paragraph 13 of  the  determination).   She
    also protested because Gambia had been removed  from  the  Commonwealth
    and, "she did not know why Gambia was removed  from  the  Commonwealth"
    (paragraph 13).  Her claim now was that, she believed that as  she  had
    demonstrated in the UK the authorities in Gambia "would have  her  name
    and a photograph  of  her"  (paragraph  14).   She  had  also  attended
    meetings for the PPP or CDC - G (paragraph 14).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  claim  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant had become politically active in the UK five years after  she
    arrived.  And this was after she had overstayed her  visit  visa.   She
    had conceded that she had not been politically active in  Gambia.   Her
    distinct lack of knowledge and awareness of  Gambian  political  issues
    and a sudden interest in becoming politically  active  pointed  towards
    her "having acquired an ulterior motive to suddenly become  politically
    active with a view to staying in the UK" (paragraph 35).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge erred  in  law  because
    the Appellant's sur place activities came  under  the  rule  in  Danian
    [2000] Imm AR 96 so that even if the Appellant's activities politically
    in the UK were self-serving, it was arguable that the judge should have
    considered her claim in the context of the case  law  relating  to  sur
    place activities.

 6. On 30th March 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

 7. On 15th April 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Secretary  of
    State to the effect that the evidence relied upon by the Appellant that
    the Gambian authorities would  put  her  at  risk  of  persecution  was
    unpersuasive because all that it showed was that the  authorities  have
    an unfavourable view of persons portraying the country  in  a  negative
    light.  The Appellant was a person who had limited knowledge of current
    politics  in  Gambia  (see  paragraph  13),  and  a  lack  of  previous
    involvement in politics  whilst  in  the  Gambia  (see  paragraph  15),
    together with the poor knowledge of her purported political party  (see
    paragraph 25), all of which fortified the finding by the judge that, "I
    find the Appellant has conjured up her alleged  political  activity  in
    the UK in a disingenuous ploy to remain in  the  United  Kingdom"  (see
    paragraph 51).  There was no arguable error of law.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 8th  July  2016,  Mr  Jafar,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that at page 71 of  the  Appellant's
    bundle there was clear objective evidence that  the  government  had  a
    zero  tolerance  policy  towards  people  who  portrayed  the   Gambian
    government in a negative light.  People who did so would  "pay  a  high
    price" and be convicted of treason.  At page 98 there is the OGN report
    that those who are perceived to  be  insurgents  would  be  persecuted.
    Even those who took refuge abroad  by  taking  part  in  demonstrations
    would be at risk.  Mr Jafar accepted that each case must be  considered
    individually, but upon consideration of this particular  case,  it  was
    clear that the government authorities had a zero tolerance policy which
    was very severe against its detractors.   At  paragraph  32  the  judge
    refers to an article from Jollof News dated 7th  August  2014,  "Canada
    based Gambian flees Gambia" and this contains the report of a young man
    who took part in anti-government demonstrations and who was targeted by
    the authorities and mistreated.  Such is the prospect that awaits  this
    present Appellant.

 9. If one looks at the nature of the  demonstrations  that  the  Appellant
    attended (at page 46) it was clear that she would be at risk (see  page
    47) because these are small demonstrations whereby the Appellant  would
    be easily identifiable.  The photographs are such  that  the  Appellant
    would be identified.  Finally, in YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA Civ 360, the
    Court of Appeal stated that, as has been seen, the Tribunal,

         "while accepting that the Appellant's political  activity  in  this
         country was genuine, were not prepared to accept in the absence  of
         positive evidence that the Eritrean authorities had 'the means  and
         the inclination' to monitor  such  activities  as  a  demonstration
         outside their embassy, or that they would be able to  identify  the
         Appellant from photographs of the demonstration.  In  my  judgment,
         and without disrespect to what is a specialist Tribunal, this is  a
         finding which risks losing contact with reality".

10. Mr Jafar submitted that what YB pointed to was a scenario  whereby  the
    suppression of political opponents by a named government would require,



         "little or no  evidence  or  speculation  to  arrive  at  a  strong
         possibility that its foreign legations not only film or  photograph
         their nationals who demonstrate in public against  the  regime  but
         have informers among ex-patriot oppositionist organisations who can
         name the people who are filmed or photographed."

    In these circumstances, and given what the Court of  Appeal  had  said,
    the judge was wrong not to  have  considered  the  possibility  of  the
    Appellant being persecuted upon return, simply  because  she  would  be
    perceived as a threat by a government that was known to be  suppressing
    political opponents.

11. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that in looking  at  the  particular
    individual circumstances of this case, it was clear that there would be
    no risk of persecution on the lower standard.  The starting point  here
    was someone who had no political involvement with  anything  whatsoever
    prior to her coming to the UK.  She exhibited  no  political  knowledge
    and no particular interest in political parties.  She was  regarded  as
    disingenuous by the judge.  Those  findings  are  unchallenged  by  the
    Appellant in this appeal.  It was all very well to place reliance  upon
    the case of YB (Eritrea) but the fact was that that case did  not  show
    that there are facial recognition techniques that would be  applied  in
    situations where photographs are taken, because if  one  looks  at  the
    photographs in this case, (particularly at pages 75 to 76), it is clear
    that the Appellant is a person, who not only has her head covered,  but
    whose face is very hard to distinguish and identify.

12. At this juncture, however, Mr Jafar interrupted to say that some of the
    photographs do demonstrate the Appellant as being a person who  can  be
    identified.

13. Mr McVeety continued that it was pure speculation to suggest  that  the
    Appellant would be  identified,  as  a  person  who  had  no  political
    involvement prior to coming to the UK, and even in the UK did so  after
    five years' residence here, because she  would  simply  not  to  be  of
    interest  to  the  authorities  there.   Unless  the  Appellant   could
    demonstrate why there was a  strong  possibility  that  her  photograph
    would be used by informers to identify her and place her at  risk,  she
    could not succeed.  Even if one accepted, as one must, that one did not
    have  to  be  a  genuine  political  activist  to  incur  the  risk  of
    persecution upon  return,  the  fact  here  was  that  one  had  to  be
    identified as such a person before that  risk  could  attach.   Nothing
    that the Appellant had said would demonstrate that on the facts of this
    case.  The Appellant was not on the radar  of  the  authorities.   They
    would not even know that she had previous political activities when she
    returned.

14. In reply, Mr Jafar submitted that if one looks  at  the  demonstrations
    that  the  Appellant  had  been   involved   in,   these   were   small
    demonstrations, and were not numbering in their thousands.  There is no
    need for facial recognition software in  circumstances  where  one  was
    looking at a country which  strongly  suppressed  political  opposition
    because that in itself would lead to  a  strong  possibility  that  the
    Appellant  would  be  at  risk.   The  OGN  itself  states   that   the
    authorities' attitude to demonstrators left much to  be  desired.   The
    fact was that  the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities  had  not  been
    properly considered in terms of the risk that would attach to her  upon
    her return to the Gambia.  This was the main question.



No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

16. Whereas reliance is not infrequently placed upon  the  case  of  Danian
    [2000] Imm AR 96 for the proposition that sur  place  activities,  even
    when conducted in bad faith, can  give  rise  to  a  viable  claim  for
    refugee asylum status, it must not be  forgotten  that  Sedley  LJ  did
    emphasise in that case that the commission of sur place  activities  in
    bad faith must be understood in the context that, "nothing in it should
    be read as giving any kind of green light  to  bogus  asylum  seekers".
    That is a proper way in which the strictures of  that  case  should  be
    interpreted.  This is  a  case  where  the  judge  has  comprehensively
    considered all the evidence that has been put before  her.   The  judge
    observes that the Appellant's production of an article from Jollof News
    dated 7th August 2014, referring to the young man who had been involved
    in a demonstration and who had then been detained led to the assumption
    that authorities can infiltrate demonstrations (see paragraph 32).  The
    evidence produced by the Appellant (at page 46) addresses this point.

17. However, the judge considers this entire claim in the  context  of  the
    fact that the Appellant only became politically active in the  UK  five
    years after she arrived, having overstayed  her  visa,  and  could  not
    explain her sudden interest in becoming politically active,  especially
    when she had displayed a distinct lack of knowledge  and  awareness  of
    Gambian political issues.  The Appellant gave details of the  CDC-G  in
    her asylum interview and presented her membership card.  The  site  was
    not active and in her oral evidence she claimed that the site was  down
    at the time.

18. The judge observed how she had produced no evidence of  that  from  the
    CDC-G and given no evidence to show that it became  an  active  website
    after the Home Office checks.  Her membership  card  produced  bore  no
    photograph of her, no signature, and no email address and  no  landline
    number (see paragraph 35).  These are very significant matters that the
    judge took into account and go directly  to  the  observation  by  Lord
    Justice Sedley that nothing in Danian should be considered to give  the
    green light to bogus asylum seekers.

19. But it does not end there.  The judge considered in detail the evidence
    that the Appellant relied upon.  She observed how, most of her evidence
    is that she attended political meetings  which  I  reject  as  she  has
    failed to produce any evidence of that, other than minutes showing  she
    was not present.  She  has  produced  evidence  of  photographs  and  a
    YouTube video of an anti-government demonstration  shortly  before  she
    made her claim for asylum.  She has failed to explain why  these  posts
    would bring her to the attention of  the  Gambian  authorities  or  her
    former husband who she claims to be an  Immigration  Officer,  which  I
    have rejected such that they would have any  interest  in  her  on  the
    basis of a few posts (paragraph 41).

20. This was a conclusion that the judge was entitled to come to.  This  is
    particularly the case given that the judge observed that,

         "I have had regard to the objective evidence including the  country
         guidance and there is nothing to show the Gambian authorities would
         have any interest in her or would be able to identify  her  on  the
         basis of the posts which she is seeking to rely on.   I  find  this
         mere speculation on her part" (paragraph 41).

    That is a conclusion that the judge was entitled to come to.   She  did
    so on the evidence that was before her.

21. In the circumstances, the judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  "the
    Appellant has conjured up her alleged political activity in the UK in a
    disingenuous ploy to remain in the UK" (paragraph 41), and  her  return
    to Gambia would not lead to her  persecution,  on  the  lower  standard
    because, having "had regard to the  objective  evidence  including  the
    country  guidance"  there  was  nothing  to  show  that   the   Gambian
    authorities would have any interest in her.  That was a conclusion that
    the judge would come to.  The judge was clear that the Appellant  would
    not be identified in the manner that she alleged.  There is no error of
    law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th July 2016


