
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08398/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 October 2016                 |On 3 November 2016                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     M K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjain (counsel) instructed by Leonard &
                    Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant, preserving the  anonymity  order  made  by
the Fist-tier Tribunal.

2.   This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon promulgated on 22 June  2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.   The Appellant was born on 24 April 1985 and is  a  national  of  Sierra
Leone.

4.   On 11 March  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

5.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
Judge O'Hanlon ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6.   Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 23 September 2016  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Chalkley gave permission to appeal stating

      "I do not wish to raise the appellant's hopes too much but  it  is,  I
      think,  properly  arguable  that  paragraphs  42   and   43   of   the
      determination the judge may have erred. I grant permission in  respect
      of ALL challenges."

The Hearing

7.(a)    Mr Chakmakjian, counsel for the appellant,  moved  the  grounds  of
appeal. He told me that at [39] the Judge had  jumped  to  a  conclusion  in
relation to a passport which the appellant says is a  forgery.  He  told  me
that the Judge failed to consider to a  reasonable  alternative  explanation
about the authenticity of the passport and in doing so had  failed  to  take
account of matters material to the outcome of the appeal. He  told  me  that
the Judge's findings at [39] of the decision are inadequately reasoned.

(b)  Mr Chakmakjain moved to [42] of the decision,  where  the  Judge  found
that the appellant is not a victim of trafficking. He argued  that  all  the
Judge does there is adopt the conclusion of the National Referral  Mechanism
("NRM"), which employs a different standard of proof,  and  that  the  Judge
did not analyse the evidence for himself. He argued that  a  material  error
of law can be found there because the Judge does not make his own  evidence-
based findings of fact. He told me that the NRM decision was  taken  without
reference  to  medical  evidence  and  without  reference  to  evidence   of
counselling, and that evidence was before the Judge. He  told  me  that  the
decision is devoid of reference to the medical evidence and the  answers  to
150 questions that the appellant provided at interview. He  argued  if  that
the Judge had analysed those sources of evidence, the blanket acceptance  of
the NRM's conclusions would not feature in 42 of the decision.

8.   It was at that point that Mr Nath, for the respondent, asked  for  time
to discuss this case with counsel for  the  appellant.  After  a  15  minute
adjournment, parties' agents returned and Mr Nath told me that  he  accepted
that the decision is tainted by a material error of law because the  Judge's
findings are inadequately reasoned at [42] and  [43]  of  the  decision.  He
told me that an entirely new fact-finding exercise  is  required  to  justly
determine this case. Counsel for  the  appellant  joined  with  Mr  Nath  in
asking that the case be remitted to the First-tier tribunal.

Analysis

9.   In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

10.  The Judge's  findings  are  set  out  between  [38]  and  [45]  of  the
decision. At  [42]  the  Judge  adopts  the  findings  of  NRM  rather  than
analysing the evidence and reaching his  own  findings  of  fact.  There  is
merit in Mr Chakmakjain's argument that inadequate  consideration  has  been
given to the medical evidence and the answers provided by the  appellant  at
asylum interview. What is lacking is a meaningful analysis  of  each  strand
of evidence.  The  Judge  has  apparently  raced  to  a  conclusion  placing
reliance  on  only  one  source  of  evidence  without  explaining  why  the
remaining sources of evidence are given little or no weight.

11.  I therefore find that the decision is tainted by a  material  error  of
law. A holistic consideration of each strand of evidence may  have  resulted
in a different conclusion. The appellant  is  a  vulnerable  female  and  is
receiving counselling. There is a real risk that her ability to give a  full
account of her experiences is affected by the gender of  her  audience.  Any
further hearings should take place before an all-female tribunal if  at  all
possible.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

12.  Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)  the nature or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

13.  In this case I  have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

14.  I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Bradford  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge O'Hanlon.



CONCLUSION

Decision

15.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by  material  errors
of law.

16.  I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on  22  June  2016.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                                                              Date 2
November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

