
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08347/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 February 2016                  |On 25 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                                     M R
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp of counsel instructed by Joules Law,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is a national of Pakistan. She was born to
    Ahmadi parents in Pakistan on 3 August 1963. Following her marriage  in
    1984 she joined her husband in the UEA in 1987 as he was working in the
    UEA. Their son was born in July 1998. They also have a daughter who  is
    married and settled in UEA. The appellant and her family lived  in  the
    UEA until the appellant's husband was notified on 5 December 2014  that
    his employment had been terminated. As the right of residence  for  the
    appellant and her son was  dependant  on  that  of  her  husband,  they
    considered their options. They did not go to Pakistan to live  as  they
    thought that they would face persecution as Ahmadis there.  The  family
    had not lived in Pakistan for twenty-seven years.

 2. The family - the appellant, her husband and their son  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 17 December 2014 and claimed asylum on  arrival.  The
    application was refused by the respondent for reasons given  in  letter
    dated 11 May 2015. Their appeal against the decision was heard by Judge
    Sharkett at Manchester on 2 November 2015. At the hearing  before  him,
    oral evidence was given by the appellant, her husband their son and the
    appellant's brother. For reasons given in his determination promulgated
    on 1 December 2015, Judge Sharkett of the First Tier Tribunal dismissed
    the appeals.

 3. The appellant sought and obtained permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. In granting permission First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Zucker  in
    his decision dated 6 January 2016 said, "However it is arguable on  the
    basis of the grounds before  me  that  the  Judge  has  misapplied  the
    guidance in MN [2012] UKUT 00389 and gave insufficient  weight  to  the
    appellant's activities in support of her Ahmadi faith when in the UAE."
    I note that the grounds for seeking permission to appeal were  detailed
    and  extensive  and  included  a  strong  challenge  to   the   adverse
    credibility findings made by Judge Sharkett and the Judge's failure  to
    engage with the claim under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. I heard submissions from Mr  Fripp  and  Ms  Isherwood.  Mr  Fripp,  as
    expected of a Counsel of his standing and experience, most ably took me
    through the parts  of  the  determination  of  Judge  Sharkeet  as  are
    relevant to the grounds of appeal and concluded by asking me  to  allow
    the appeal as the decision was in material error of law. In  her  turn,
    Ms Isherwood argued that  the  reasons  given  by  the  Judge  for  the
    decision were perfectly adequate and his  assessment  of  evidence  had
    been full and fair. She, in fairness, conceded that the Judge  had  not
    given his reasons for finding that the appellant's activities in the UK
    had been in bad faith.

 5. I asked the parties how would they wish me to dispose off  the  appeals
    if I were to find that  the  determination  of  Judge  Sharkett  is  in
    material error of law. Both parties agreed that it  would  be  best  to
    remit the matter to the First  Tier  Tribunal  for  a  full  and  fresh
    hearing. I reserved my decision which I now give with reasons as below.

 6. Judge Sherkett found the appellant to be an Ahmadi but used the  wholly
    inappropriate test for determining whether she  would  be  at  risk  of
    facing persecution in Pakistan on grounds of her faith. I agree with Mr
    Fripp and Judge Zucker that the Judge misapplied  the  guidance  in  MN
    [2012] UKUT 00389. MN decision states, "Such  behaviour  includes  open
    discourse with others not merely preaching or proselytising" The  first
    ground of appeal is made out. The second issue is the  reference  point
    that the Judge  used  for  determining  credibility.  I  note  that  in
    paragraph 30 of his determination the Judge states, "The main issue  in
    this appeal is the credibility of the Appellant's claim that she is  in
    need of international protection." However, in determining  credibility
    the Judge has taken little account of the fact that  the  appellant  is
    being returned to Pakistan and not to the UAE and the  impression  that
    the Judge articulated that since the appellant had lived in peace as an
    Ahmadi in the UAE, her claim that she would be at risk  of  persecution
    in Pakistan was not credible. The Judge, with great respect, failed  to
    engage fully and fairly with the evidence of  the  three  witnesses  he
    heard. In paragraph 56 the Judge has said that "despite having been  in
    the UK for approximately 6 weeks by the time she  attended  her  asylum
    interview she had attended a mosque on only four occasions and  by  her
    own evidence had not started to preach to anyone." The Judge says  this
    in the context of the  appellant's  assertion  that  she  regards  open
    practice of her faith and preaching of  that  faith  to  others  as  an
    important part of her religion.  What  the  Judge  fails  to  give  any
    consideration to is that the appellant was  at  the  time  being  moved
    around by the State as an  asylum  seeker  and  despite  that  she  had
    attended the mosque four times in the six weeks' period. Attendance  at
    mosques for congregational prayers is only once in a week (Friday)  and
    in the circumstances  therefore  the  appellant  has  demonstrated  her
    serious commitment to her faith by attending four times out of six. The
    Judge does not appear to have realised that not all Muslim mosques  are
    open to Ahmadis in the UK. The Ahmadis have their own mosques and  most
    towns do not have Ahmadi mosques.

 7. The Judge's conclusions  in  paragraphs  58  and  63  are  without  any
    evidentiary foundation and reasoning. The Judge's engagement  with  and
    analysis of the contents of letter from Ahmadiyah Muslim Association is
    also seriously flawed (Paragraph 59). The expectation that  the  letter
    should have given information about the appellant's  activities  as  an
    Ahmadi in Pakistan was wholly unrealistic in that the appellant has not
    lived in Pakistan for 27 years! The AMA is  regarded  as  a  bona  fide
    organisation of Ahmadiyas in Britain and it does  not  appear  to  have
    been given the weight that its letter in  support  of  the  appellants'
    claim was given. The Judge does not appear to have taken account of the
    current situation of Ahmadis in Pakistan. It is certainly not the  same
    as it was in 1987.

 8. I allow this appeal and remit it for fresh  hearing  before  the  First
    Tier Tribunal by a Judge other than Judge Sherkett.


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
22 February 2016
