
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08610/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th April 2016                            |On 24th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                    [g s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss P Solanki, Counsel instructed by Morden
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male  citizen  of  Iran  born  on  [  ]  1990.   The
    Appellant apparently first arrived in the UK on 13th  August  2008  and
    claimed asylum the following day.  That application was  refused.   The
    Appellant appealed unsuccessfully, and the  Appellant's  appeal  rights
    were exhausted  by  6th  June  2011.   He  made  a  number  of  further
    submissions, and eventually he was refused asylum for the  reasons  set
    out in the  Respondent's  letter  of  26th  May  2015.   The  Appellant
    appealed, and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Burns
    (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 6th October 2015.  She decided  to
    dismiss the appeal for the reasons given in  her  Decision  dated  17th
    October 2015.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that  decision  and
    on 12th November 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant's original case was that he was at risk on return to Iran
    as someone who had been discovered smuggling alcohol.  However,  whilst
    in the UK the Appellant, an ethnic Kurd, had become an active member of
    the KDPI.  This was evidenced in part by the fact that the  Appellant's
    attendance at a Martyrs Day celebration  had  been  captured  on  video
    which  without  his  knowledge  had  been  uploaded  to  YouTube.   The
    Appellant had been visible on the video, and as a consequence an  Order
    had been issued against him to attend the Computer Crimes Court.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal because although she accepted  that  the
    Appellant had had some limited involvement with the KDPI in the  UK  as
    evidenced in the video, she  was  not  satisfied  that  his  sur  place
    activities had come to the attention of the  Iranian  Authorities.   It
    was not clear to the Judge that the Appellant  appeared  in  the  video
    which in any event had not been widely viewed.

 5. There were a total of six grounds of application on which the Appellant
    relied.  I only need deal with one of them in this  Decision.   At  the
    hearing, Miss Solanki referred to her Skeleton Argument  and  submitted
    that the Judge had erred in law in dealing with the  YouTube  evidence.
    The Judge had made inconsistent findings in paragraphs 36 to 39 and  59
    to 60 of the Decision.  On the one hand the Judge had decided that  the
    Appellant was involved with the KDPI from the evidence  of  the  video,
    but later she decided that it was unclear if it was the  Appellant  who
    appeared in the video.  Further, it was apparent from a  screenshot  of
    the video that more than a quarter of the Appellant's  face  was  shown
    and that the Appellant was recognisable from the video.  Also the Judge
    had concluded that the video would not have been seen  by  the  Iranian
    Authorities as there had been only 250 viewings of it.   This  was  the
    wrong approach.  The issue was whether there was a reasonable degree of
    likelihood that the video had been seen  by  the  Iranian  Authorities.
    The Judge had  not  dealt  with  that  issue  in  the  context  of  the
    background country information and the decisions in VA  (demonstrations
    in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC)  and  AB  and
    Others (internet activity - state of evidence) [2015] UKUT  257  (IAC).
    This information was that the  Iranian  Authorities  closely  monitored
    internet activity both inside and outside of Iran  showing  that  there
    was a reasonable degree of likelihood that the video  in  question  had
    been seen by them.

 6. In response, Mr Diwnycz was content only to say that he agreed with the
    comments of Miss Solanki as regards the YouTube video.

 7. I do find an error of law in the decision  of  the  Judge  so  that  it
    should be set aside.  In my judgment the Judge's findings in respect of
    the YouTube video were not supported by  sufficient  reasons  from  the
    evidence as explained by Miss Solanki.  This error is material  because
    the evidence provided by the YouTube video goes to  the  heart  of  the
    Appellant's claim that he is at risk on return to Iran.

 8. I did not proceed to remake the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Instead I decided that that decision should be remade in the First-tier
    Tribunal  in  accordance  with  paragraph  7.2(b)   of   the   Practice
    Statements.  At the remake hearing none of the Judge's findings  as  to
    credibility and fact will be preserved.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  was  not
asked to do so.  Whether an order for anonymity is eventually made  will  be
a matter for the First-tier Tribunal  when  remaking  the  decision  on  the
appeal.






Signed                              Date 24 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
