
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08168/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 30th July 2016                   |On: 2nd August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MS
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Faryl, Counsel instructed by IAS (Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mr G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a female national of Pakistan born in 1981.







    Anonymity Order

 2. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders I consider it appropriate to make  an  order  in  the  following
    terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

    The Appeal

 3. In a determination dated the 13th January 2016 the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge McDade) allowed the Appellant's appeal  against  a  decision  to
    reject her  protection claim.  The Secretary of State brought an appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal and by way of decision promulgated  on  the  20th
    April 2016 I found the decision to contain an error of law and  set  it
    aside, albeit  preserving  many  findings  of  fact[1].  This  decision
    concerns the remaking of that decision.

    Background and Matters in Issue

 4. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that she had a well-founded fear
    of "honour" based violence in Pakistan. She had  grown  up  in  Karachi
    with her parents and siblings. She remained in education until she  was
    17 and thereafter operated a beauty parlour from the family  home.   In
    approximately 2011 she formed a relationship online with a man  in  the
    UK. This man proposed marriage to her.  She  eventually  persuaded  her
    father to allow her to come to the  UK  to  meet  with  this  man.  Her
    sister, who was supposed to chaperone her, was refused a visa  and  she
    ended up coming alone. The real life relationship was very different to
    the online version. The Appellant's  Intended  treated  her  badly  and
    withdrew his offer of marriage. The Appellant confided  in  her  sister
    who informed other members of the family that she was living  alone  in
    the UK, having been rejected. The Appellant's brothers were very angry.
    They had always opposed her coming her and now they perceived that  the
    family had been "shamed" and that  it  was  her  fault.   In  2015  the
    Appellant's father died and her brother [I] became head of the  family.
    He, and the next in line, have made numerous threats to  the  Appellant
    that if she returns to Karachi they will kill her. These  threats  were
    accepted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  genuine  indictors  of
    objective risk and it was on this basis that the appeal was allowed.

 5. The Secretary of State successfully appealed on  the  ground  that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  properly  considered  the  question  of
    internal flight. It was common ground  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed in her appeal if there was another area of  Pakistan  in  which
    she could safely, and  reasonably,  live.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    'reasons for refusal letter' had suggested that it  was  open  to  this
    young woman to establish herself in another part of  the  country.  She
    was educated and resourceful; she had run her own  business  whilst  in
    Karachi and she could replicate its success elsewhere. If she  had  any
    difficulty in re-establishing herself she could receive support from  a
    state-funded shelter. The First-tier Tribunal had found, with reference
    to the United States' State Department Report 2014, that these shelters
    "could hardly be described as a place of safety" and  had  allowed  the
    appeal.   I found there to be an error in approach.

 6. The first error was that the Tribunal had not directed  itself  to  the
    extensive consideration of internal flight in the then  extant  country
    guidance case of KA & Others  (domestic  violence  -  risk  on  return)
    Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) and the central conclusion reached:

         "... the network of  women's  shelters  (comprising  government-run
         shelters (Darul Amans)  and  private  and  Islamic  women's  crisis
         centres) in general affords effective protection for women  victims
         of domestic violence"

    Whilst it was of course open to the First-tier Tribunal to consider and
    make findings on evidence that post-dated that decision,  the  findings
    in KA should have been  the  starting  point,  particularly  since  the
    Respondent had placed direct reliance on them.

 7. The second error was that the decision did not adequately  address  the
    central point made by the Respondent, which was that this was  a  young
    woman who had run her own business in Pakistan.  The determination  had
    described her as neither "professional nor highly educated";  this  did
    not appear to take into account  the  evidence  that  she  had  herself
    given. For instance, in her visa application  form  the  Appellant  had
    written:

         "I am a sole proprietor, currently running my own hair  and  beauty
         salon business under the  name  of  'Glamorous  Look'  in  Karachi,
         Pakistan. My monthly income from my business is PKR 60,000"

 8. The findings on internal flight were set aside. On the 15th  June  2016
    the matter came back before me for those findings to be re-made.

    The Re-Made Decision

    The Legal Framework

 9. Article 8 of the Qualification Directive[2] reads:

         1. As part of the assessment of the application  for  international
             protection, Member States may determine that an  applicant  is
             not in need of international protection if in a  part  of  the
             country of origin there  is  no  well-founded  fear  of  being
             persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious harm  and  the
             applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part  of
             the country.

         2. In examining whether a part of  the  country  of  origin  is  in
             accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall at  the  time
             of taking the decision on the application have regard  to  the
             general circumstances prevailing in that part of  the  country
             and to the personal circumstances of the applicant.

         3. Paragraph 1 may apply  notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
             return to the country of origin.

10. In SSHD v AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 the House of Lords make clear  that
    the question of whether internal flight is "reasonable" is  not  to  be
    equated with the test under Article 3 ECHR. Lord Bingham refers [at  5]
    to his own guidance in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5:

         "In paragraph 21 of my opinion in Januzi I summarised  the  correct
         approach to the problem of internal relocation in terms with  which
         all my noble and learned friends agreed:

             'The  decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all   relevant
             circumstances pertaining to the claimant and  his  country  of
             origin, must decide whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
             claimant to relocate or whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to
             expect him to do so....There  is,  as  Simon  Brown  LJ  aptly
             observed  in  Svazas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
             Department, [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum  of  cases.
             The decision-maker  must  do  his  best  to  decide,  on  such
             material as is available, where on the spectrum the particular
             case falls... All must depend on  a  fair  assessment  of  the
             relevant facts'.

         Although specifically directed to a secondary issue  in  the  case,
         these observations are plainly of general application.  It  is  not
         easy to see how the rule could be more simply or clearly expressed.
          It is, or should be, evidence that the enquiry must be directed to
         the situation of  the  particular  applicant,  whose  age,  gender,
         experience,  health,  skills  and  family  ties  may  all  be  very
         relevant.  There is no warrant for excluding,  or  giving  priority
         to, consideration of the applicant's way of life in  the  place  of
         persecution.  There is no warrant for excluding, or giving priority
         to consideration of conditions generally  prevailing  in  the  home
         country.  I do not underestimate the difficulty of making decisions
         in some cases.  But the difficulty lies in applying the  test,  not
         in  expressing  it.   The  humanitarian  object  of   the   Refugee
         Convention is to secure a  reasonable  measure  of  protection  for
         those with a well-founded fear of persecution in their home country
         or some part of it; it is not to procure a general levelling-up  of
         living standards around the world, desirable though of course  that
         is."

11. At [20] Baroness Hale cites with approval the UNHCR view that the  test
    is whether the individual will be able to  live  a  "relatively  normal
    life without undue hardship", itself a formulation  approved  by  their
    Lordships in Januzi[3]:

         "As the UNHCR put it in their very  helpful  intervention  in  this
         case:

             '...the correct approach when considering  the  reasonableness
             of IRA [internal relocation alternative] is to assess all  the
             circumstances of the individual's case holistically  and  with
             specific reference to the individual's personal  circumstances
             (including past persecution or fear thereof, psychological and
             health condition, family and social  situation,  and  survival
             capacities).  This assessment is to be made in the context  of
             the conditions in the place  of  relocation  (including  basic
             human rights, security conditions, socio-economic  conditions,
             accommodation, access to health care facilities), in order  to
             determine the impact on that individual  of  settling  in  the
             proposed place of relocation and whether the individual  could
             live a relatively normal life without undue hardship'.

         I do not  understand  there  to  be  any  difference  between  this
         approach and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph 5  of  his
         opinion.  Very little, apart from the conditions in the country  to
         which the claimant has fled, is ruled out."

12. The assessment on the individual characteristics of the  claimant  must
    include her personal history, and its relevance in the society in which
    she is relocating. See for instance VNM v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 47  [per
    Wilson LJ at 25]:

         "... it is obvious that the reasonableness of her relocation  in  a
         different   part   of   Kenya   requires   consideration   of   the
         practicability of her  settling  elsewhere;  consideration  of  her
         ability convincingly to present to those in her new milieu a  false
         history relating to herself and  to  her  daughter,  including  the
         latter's paternity, and  a  false  explanation  for  their  arrival
         there;  and,  in  the  light  of  her   substantial   psychological
         vulnerability, consideration of her ability to sustain  beyond  the
         short term a reasonable life for them both on that false basis".

13. At the time of the First-tier Tribunal decision the applicable  country
    guidance was KA (supra). By the time that the decision came to  be  re-
    made before me the decision in SM (Lone  Women  -  ostracism)  Pakistan
    [2016] UKUT 67  (IAC)  was  available.   The  headnote  summarises  its
    helpful guidance:

         (1)      Save as herein set out, the existing country  guidance  in
             SN and HM (Divorced women - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2004]
             UKIAT 00283 and in KA and Others (domestic violence - risk  on
             return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) remains valid.

         (2)      Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in  her
             home area for a single woman or a female  head  of  household,
             there  may  be  an  internal  relocation  option  to  one   of
             Pakistan's larger cities, depending on the family, social  and
             educational situation of the woman in question.

         (3)      It will not be normally be unduly harsh to expect a single
             woman or female  head  of  household  to  relocate  internally
             within Pakistan if she can access support from family  members
             or a male guardian in the place of relocation.

         (4)      It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated,  better
             off, or older women to seek internal relocation to a city.  It
             helps if a woman has qualifications enabling her to get  well-
             paid employment and pay for  accommodation  and  childcare  if
             required.

         (5)      Where  a  single  woman,  with  or  without  children,  is
             ostracised by family members and  other  sources  of  possible
             social support because  she  is  in  an  irregular  situation,
             internal relocation will be more difficult and whether  it  is
             unduly harsh will be a question of fact in each case.

         (6)      A single woman or female head of household who has no male
             protector or social network may  be  able  to  use  the  state
             domestic violence shelters for a short time, but the focus  of
             such shelters is  on  reconciling  people  with  their  family
             networks, and places are in short  supply  and  time  limited.
             Privately run shelters may be more flexible, providing  longer
             term support while the woman regularises her social situation,
             but again, places are limited.

         (7)      Domestic violence shelters are available for women at risk
             but where they are used by women with children, such  shelters
             do not always allow older children  to  enter  and  stay  with
             their mothers. The  risk  of  temporary  separation,  and  the
             proportionality  of  such  separation,  is  likely  to  differ
             depending on the age and  sex  of  a  woman's  children:  male
             children may be removed from their mothers at the age of 5 and
             placed in an orphanage or a madrasa until the family situation
             has been regularised (see KA  and  Others  (domestic  violence
             risk on return) Pakistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT  216  (IAC)).  Such
             temporary separation will not always  be  disproportionate  or
             unduly harsh: that is a question of fact in each case.

         (8)      Women in Pakistan are legally permitted to  divorce  their
             husbands  and  may  institute  divorce  proceedings  from  the
             country of refuge, via a third party  and  with  the  help  of
             lawyers in Pakistan, reducing the risk of family reprisals.  A
             woman who does so and returns with a new  partner  or  husband
             will have access to male protection and is  unlikely,  outside
             her home area, to be at  risk  of  ostracism,  still  less  of
             persecution or serious harm.

    The Factual Matrix

14.  It  is  accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Karachi for reasons of her membership  of  a  particular
    social group, namely women in Pakistan.

15. At the resumed hearing on the 15th June 2016 I heard  further  evidence
    from the Appellant.   She adopted her statements dated  25th  September
    2015 and 2nd June 2016.  I have also  had  regard  to  the  Appellant's
    interview record, her SEF statement, and to the evidence  given  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

16. In respect of her education the Appellant agreed that she had  attended
    school until she was approximately 17. She started when she was about 5
    or 6 at a free of charge state school.  She  states  that  she  enjoyed
    school, but was "not a bright student". She  passed  her  matriculation
    with the bare minimum of marks.  It was open to her to  attend  college
    after she left,  but her father did not allow her to  because  she  had
    not done well enough at school.  After she left she stayed at home  and
    helped her mother with housework and cooking. After her mother died her
    elder brother's wife took charge of such  matters,  and  the  Appellant
    continued to assist her.

17. As I note above the Appellant had already disclosed her involvement  in
    the beauty parlour before she ever claimed asylum: she had relied  upon
    it in the course of her marriage visa application.  She was asked about
    it at interview. She stated that it wasn't a big business, there were 5-
    6 girls working under her including her sister.   In  her  most  recent
    statement she had given more detail:

         "I used to enjoy with my friends making ourselves up. We all taught
         ourselves how to put make up on and also basic hair cutting and
         attempts at styling.




         Because I enjoyed doing this, I suggested to my father about
         setting up a parlour at home for me to do this. I said that it may
         at least give us as a family a bit more money. It took my father
         some time to agree to this. My younger sister Naila was also keen
         to be involved in this and was also involved from the start.




         It was my Dad who bought the things we needed, make up and mirrors
         and lights. And we used a ground floor room in our house.




         We started this in around 2012, calling it 'Glamourous Look'. I
         also asked some of my friends to be involved, who I knew were good
         at this. This all depended on how busy things became.  And it did
         become popular in our local area, being at its most busy around
         both Eids and for local weddings and parties".

18. In her oral evidence the Appellant confirmed that the business start-up
    costs had been provided by her father and  that  he  had  continued  to
    support her where necessary, for instance buying equipment.   The other
    girls who worked there were all  friends.  They  would  work  different
    hours depending on how busy it was.

19. The Appellant  does  not  accept  that  her  success  could  be  easily
    replicated elsewhere in Pakistan:

         "The Home Office have said that because of this parlour, I can
         easily do something similar in another part of Pakistan and support
         myself independently. This is incorrect. As I have said before, in
         Pakistan it is just not acceptable for a single woman to rent a
         room. No one would be prepared to rent a room to me. I would need
         to have a male member of the family, a husband or father or
         brother, with me to be able to do this. As a single woman, I would
         not be able to do this alone. So how could I be able to start up
         anything like any business, no matter how small, it I am not able
         to find somewhere to live first?"

20. As to where she might go in Pakistan the Appellant avers that  she  has
    never lived outside  of  Karachi.  She  could  not  go  to  Rawalpindi,
    Islamabad, Lahore or Haripur because she has family living  in  all  of
    these cities and she would be afraid that her brothers would  find  her
    there.  At her asylum interview she said that her brother was  involved
    in "transport" and that he knew a lot of people. Her brother [I] is  in
    the MQM and he has a lot of connections.

    Findings

21. I find the Appellant to be a credible witness.  In this I  concur  with
    the assessment made by the First-tier Tribunal.  Her evidence was clear
    and  consistent.  There  was  nothing  therein  that  I  found  to   be
    implausible either generally, or in light  of  the  country  background
    material. I assess the facts presented  against  the  country  guidance
    given in SM and the appropriate legal framework.

22. The Appellant does have a basic level of  education,  having  graduated
    from school following matriculation. She states that she  did  not  get
    good grades, and I find this claim to be consistent with the fact  that
    instead of progressing to university (like  other  middle  class  girls
    might be expected to do), she instead remained at  home  and  opened  a
    beauty parlour.   I accept that she does not  have  any  qualifications
    bar her 'matric'.

23. I accept that after she left school the  Appellant  operated  a  beauty
    parlour from her family home. From what she said I  do  not  understand
    this to have been an informal arrangement (ie just friends popping in);
    rather it was a properly equipped  salon.  She  said  that  her  father
    bought special lights, mirrors and other equipment. She and her  sister
    worked their pretty much full time, with other  girls  working  as  and
    when required.  She has therefore gained some experience  not  just  of
    beauty work, but of running a business.  I accept that she has  had  no
    other form of employment.

24. I accept that the Appellant is estranged from her family  in  Pakistan.
    She has no partner and as such would be returning alone.

25. I have not been provided with any particular evidence relating  to  the
    Appellant's  mental  state  or  medical  history.  She  avers  in   her
    statements that she has been suffering from depression and in  view  of
    her recent history I do not doubt that she  is  feeling  low.  She  was
    tricked by a man whom she thought she loved, was treated badly by  him,
    has been disowned and threatened by her own family  and  has  lost  her
    greatest ally, her father. In those circumstances I see  no  reason  to
    reject her evidence that  she  is  very  sad  and  "terrified"  at  the
    prospect of returning to Pakistan to establish  herself  in  a  strange
    city.  I accept, in light of the background material, that she is  very
    apprehensive about how she  will  be  viewed  by  others  in  Pakistani
    society.

26. Against these findings on the Appellant's  personal  characteristics  I
    assess the likely circumstances that she would be living in should  she
    return to Pakistan.

27. The Secretary of State submits that the Appellant can avail herself  of
    internal flight a) because she is educated, b)  she  has  a  skill  and
    experience of running her own business, c) she is from a city and d) in
    the last resort she can avail herself of the protection of a shelter.

28. I deal with the questions of the shelters first. The  findings  of  the
    Tribunal in SM are clear.  Whilst there are places available for  women
    at risk, these shelters are massively  oversubscribed.  Places  are  in
    short supply and stays are time limited. The focus of such institutions
    is reconciling the woman in question  with  her  family.  The  accepted
    evidence before the Tribunal was that entry to these places is  "taboo"
    in Pakistani society and women who enter them are likely to be  harshly
    judged [see for instance the Aurat Foundation  evidence  cited  in  the
    2015 Country Information and Guidance'  at  paragraph  50  SM].   I  am
    satisfied that there is a possibility that the Appellant would be  able
    to access such a shelter, but  her  stay  would  very  likely  be  time
    limited. Internal  flight  is  only  an  alternative  to  international
    protection if it is a durable solution. Entry to  a  shelter  would  be
    unlikely to be of anything other than short  term  assistance  to  this
    Appellant.

29. The more likely scenario is that  she  will  be  compelled,  sooner  or
    later, to live alone in a large city. The Appellant  has  averred  that
    she has close family members (her sister, brother-in-law, uncles) in  a
    number of major cities but obviously there are other cities  and  large
    towns in which she could try and live.  I accept that from the  outset,
    her journey to independence would be  overshadowed  by  her  subjective
    fear of discovery. All of the evidence considered by the Tribunal in SM
    indicated that it might be possible for a young woman to  live  on  her
    own, for instance by renting an apartment, but even the  most  positive
    of the respondents, the Warwick University Law Professor cited  in  the
    CIG,  agreed  that  it  would  be  "difficult"  [at  57]  and  that   a
    lower/middle class woman attempting to break away from her family would
    face "danger" [at 56].   The nature of these dangers is  elucidated  at
    by Professor Ballard who believes that a woman who cannot afford to pay
    for  high-class  accommodation  "would  be  at  risk  of  accepting  an
    accommodation offer which  she  realises  too  late  came  with  sexual
    strings attached".  This evidence is given against  the  background  of
    the material inter alia in the CIG  to  the  effect  that  young  women
    living on their own without a male guardian are viewed with  suspicion.
    Those seen to be estranged from their families run a  significant  risk
    of being viewed as "dishonourable" ie sexually 'immoral'.  I  therefore
    further accept that in addition to her subjective fear of discovery  by
    her family the Appellant would be living with the  stigma  of  being  a
    woman without a male relative.

30. All the sources identify class, education, wealth and  greater  age  as
    protective factors. The Appellant has none of these on  her  side.  She
    may be from a relatively middle class family - as she  describes  it  -
    but this is going to be of little assistance to her in negotiating life
    in a strange city with no qualifications,  capital  or  connections  to
    call upon.   I accept that it  will  be  near  to  impossible  for  the
    Appellant to set up her own business against this background.   On  the
    basis of the accepted evidence in SM I  am  satisfied  that  her  fears
    about finding safe and affordable  premises  are  well-founded.  It  is
    questionable how she would build a client base  in  a  community  which
    viewed her with suspicion.

31. I have considered the  alternative,  that  she  seek  employment  as  a
    beautician in another company. This would appear to be her least  worse
    option. I have given careful consideration to  the  likelihood  of  the
    Appellant managing to do that.  Although I do  not  have  any  specific
    evidence on the availability of such work I bear in mind the  following
    factors. The Appellant has no qualifications, and would  have  to  give
    herself a reference, since her father has passed away. Any  prospective
    employer is likely to be interested to know why a  young  Pathan  woman
    from Karachi is now seeking employment whilst apparently living  alone.
      A prospective employer may be concerned about how  such  an  employee
    would be viewed by the clients.  Even if she  managed  to  secure  such
    employment it is likely to be relatively low paid and insecure work.  I
    cannot be satisfied that it would be sufficient for  the  Appellant  to
    live on her own in a  city.    Nor  would  such  employment  offer  the
    Appellant protection from gossip, innuendo, unwanted sexual advances or
    worse.   Having considered all of these factors I am satisfied that the
    Appellant would find it very difficult to lead anything like  a  normal
    life upon return to Pakistan. To put it another  way,  internal  flight
    would be unduly harsh in all the circumstances.

32. It follows that the appeal must be allowed.

    Decisions

33. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to the extent
    identified above.

34. The decision in the appeal is re-made as follows:

    The appeal  is  allowed  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.   The
    Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because she  is  a
    refugee.

35. There is an anonymity order in force.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              29th July 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] The hearing took place on the 13th April 2016. The 'Error of Law'
decision is appended.
[2] Council Directive 2004/83/EC
[3] See for instance Lord Hope of Craighead at 47.

