
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08042/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 July 2017                           |On 17 July 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                     Mohammed Saleh Allawi Al-Qarghalli
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Walker, instructed by 1A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mohammed Saleh Allawi Al-Qarghalli, was born on 18  June
    1986 and is a male citizen of Iraq.  The appellant appealed against the
    decision of the respondent dated 4 November 2014  refusing  his  asylum
    and Articles 2/3 ECHR claims.  The First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  E  M  M
    Smith) in a decision promulgated on 15  December  2016,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant had claimed, inter alia, that he feared return to Iraq on
    account of his father's involvement in the regime  of  Saddam  Hussein.
    That was the claim which was rejected by the judge [34].  In support of
    his claim, the appellant had produced in  evidence  an  Iraqi  identity
    document which he claimed had belonged to his father.  In addition, the
    appellant  had  produced  photographs  which  appear  to  show  a   man
    identified by the appellant as his father with Saddam Hussein.  Several
    of these photographs have been annotated by the caseworker of the  Home
    Office; at the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr McVeety,  for  the
    respondent, agreed that the annotations had been added by  one  of  his
    colleagues.  One annotation reads "a series of 8 photographs  -  person
    in these photos DOES  match  the  photograph  on  ID  card  (attached).
    Original seen."  The refusal letter [12] recorded the appellant's claim
    that his father had been linked to Saddam Hussein and  also  refers  to
    the photographs and the ID card.  However, the refusal letter  observes
    that the appellant had provided no evidence of his father's role within
    the Saddam Hussein government and also that the ID card  had  not  been
    translated.  For that reason, little weight had been  attached  to  it.
    However, by the time the appeal had reached  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the appellant had obtained an English translation of  his  father's  ID
    card.  Given the particular reason for attaching little weight the card
    provided in the refusal letter and in the light also of the annotations
    added by the caseworker to the photographs, it is surprising  that  the
    judge makes no reference to the ID card in his decision.   I  am  aware
    that the judge is not required to make findings in respect of each  and
    every item of evidence which is adduced by either party but I  do  find
    that the significance of the document which the appellant claims is the
    ID card of his father was such that the judge should have considered it
    in his analysis.  I find that his failure to do so amounts to an  error
    of law.

 3. Further, I find that the judge has dealt inadequately in  the  decision
    with evidence concerning the appellant's brother.  It is apparent  from
    the  record  of  proceedings  that  the  appellant's  brother  and  the
    difficulties he had faced in Iraq had been discussed at length in cross-
    examination and also in submissions.  However, the brother is  referred
    to only fleetingly in the decision, in particular at  [34],  where  the
    judge wrote;

         "I take note that having escaped in the most unusual  circumstances
         from his then captors, the appellant returned to Baghdad  where  he
         remained until he left Iraq, supposedly after his brother had  been
         abducted for which  a  ransom  was  paid.   No  evidence  has  been
         provided from the appellant's  brother  to  confirm  this  and  the
         appellant's father statement makes no mention of it."

 4. The parties agree that  the  judge  misunderstood  the  evidence.   The
    appellant had returned to Baghdad (where he had remained until he  left
    Iraq) some time before his brother had been abducted;  the  appellant's
    evidence was that the  abduction  had  occurred  in  2016.   Given  the
    significance of the brother in the appellant's claim, I find  that  the
    judge has failed to address adequately this element of the account.

 5. Mr McVeety acknowledged that he was in some difficulty in defending the
    judge's decision.  He made what I considered to be a good point when he
    told me that the judge appears to have attached excessive weight to the
    fact that the appellant's answers in the screening interview  had  made
    no mention of the appellant having left Iraq  on  account  of  problems
    concerning his father's association  with  Saddam  Hussein.   Whilst  I
    agree with Mr McVeety that the judge was entitled to  take  account  of
    apparent omissions in the screening interview  answers,  I  acknowledge
    also that the appellant had referred  to  his  father  in  the  written
    statement which he produced after the screening  interview  and  before
    the asylum interview in  which  he  discussed  his  father  at  length.
    Moreover, there is force in Ms Walker's submission that  the  screening
    interview is not intended to be a full and  thorough  statement  of  an
    individual's asylum  claim.   A  reading  of  the  whole  determination
    indicates that the judge  appears  to  have  considered  the  screening
    interview  omissions  as  the  primary  reason  for  disbelieving   the
    appellant's account; in consequence, he failed to analyse in sufficient
    detail other elements of claim.

 6. Considered as a whole, I find that the errors which I  have  identified
    should lead me to set aside the First-tier  Tribunal  decision.   Since
    these errors have infected the fact-finding analysis of the judge, none
    of the findings of fact shall stand. A  new  fact-finding  exercise  is
    better conducted in the First-tier Tribunal to which this appeal is now
    returned.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  was  promulgated  on  15
December 2016, is set aside.  None of the  findings  of  fact  shall  stand.
The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not judge E M Smith or  E
M M Smith) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 15 JULY 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 15 JULY 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

