
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08025/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 30th April 2015                   |On 29th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               Md Nasim Uddin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Tetty of Counsel instructed by Morgan Dias
                    Immigration Consultants Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Chambers
    made following a hearing at Manchester on 9th January 2015.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1st February 1988.  He
    arrived in the UK as a student on  21st  January  2010  with  leave  to
    remain until 24th October 2013.  He returned to Bangladesh in September
    2011 and stayed for two months.  He returned  to  the  UK  and  entered
    Bangladesh for a second time on 20th April 2012.  His right  to  remain
    in the UK as  a  student  was  curtailed  due  to  non-attendance.   He
    returned to the UK on 2nd  October  2013,  was  detained,  and  claimed
    asylum three days later.

 3. The appellant's claim is  based  on  his  involvement  with  a  student
    political group in 2000 and, as a consequence of his  involvement  with
    the organisation, the Awami League supporters tried to kill him several
    times.  He was appointed chairman of the village  branch  of  Jamaat-e-
    Islami.  Awami League  supporters  took  away  some  of  his  land  and
    property and although the local Pancheat President ruled in his  favour
    Awami League supporters did not comply with  the  ruling  and  did  not
    return his property.  Criminal charges were fabricated against him.  He
    was not attacked when he was a student in Dakar between 2008  and  2010
    but he was in his home area by members of the Awami  League  in  August
    and September 2013.

 4. The judge said that the difficulties over the land arose as long ago as
    1990 when the appellant was probably around 2 years old.   He  was  not
    satisfied that the family were being targeted by a political  party  in
    relation to the land seizure and although he was indirectly a victim of
    the land dispute it was the adult male members of the family  who  were
    dispossessed.  He concluded that, to put  the  claim  at  its  highest,
    wrong had been perpetuated against the family  and  the  appellant  had
    been denied the chance of inheriting ancestral land.   The  failure  to
    recover the land from local owners was not, however, a problem  brought
    about by members of the Awami League.

 5. The appellant claimed to  be  a  local  chair  of  the  Jamaat-e-Islami
    continuing in the party at Dakar University.  The judge found the  lack
    of interest by the Awami League in him when he  was  a  student  to  be
    somewhat surprising.  His account of  living  uneventfully  during  his
    university years did not sit easily with his claimed political profile.

 6. The judge recorded  that  the  appellant  did  not  seek  international
    protection when he came to the UK as a student in 2010 and returned  to
    Bangladesh on two occasions during the currency of his student visa.

 7. The judge took into  account  a  number  of  documents  which  he  said
    included translations of  documents  from  political  organisations,  a
    lawyer in Bangladesh, various complaints and  letters  to  the  police,
    summonses and translations and First Information Reports.  He said that
    he had considered the documents in  the  round  in  the  light  of  the
    totality of the evidence but did not find that the documents  supported
    the claim to have been persecuted.

 8. The judge also considered the medical evidence which he said  supported
    the strong possibility that the appellant had been  beaten  up  in  his
    home area but he discounted the appellant's account that the attack was
    politically motivated.  In his view the  appellant  had  dressed  up  a
    stale local land dispute and set it against a background of politics in
    Bangladesh

 9. Even if the appellant would face persecution in his  home  area,  which
    was not accepted, he could reasonably expect to relocate  to  somewhere
    else, specifically Dakar where he  lived  for  two  and  a  half  years
    without difficulty.

10. The judge also took  into  account  the  appellant's  medical  history,
    including a psychiatric report and the letter from the appellant's  GP.
    He had a background  history  of  possible  schizophrenia  or  paranoid
    depression but it was clear that if further treatment was necessary  he
    could continue to receive it in Bangladesh.  He  concluded  that  there
    was no real risk of any breach of Article 3.

The Grounds of Application

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had  been  inconsistent  in  his  reasoning.   At  one  point  of   the
    determination he had  found  that  the  appellant  was  prevented  from
    inheriting his ancestral land and yet at  another  that  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest  that  he  would  have  succeeded  his  father  and
    inherited the land.  He had not made a clear finding in relation to the
    documentary evidence and had not taken  into  account  the  appellant's
    explanation for his return to Bangladesh in 2012 which was that he  was
    mentally unwell at the time and believed  he  was  going  to  die.   He
    returned to Bangladesh in order that his burial rites take place there.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Lewis on 24th  February  2015
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

13. On 16th  March  2015  the  respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

14. Mr Tetty relied on his grounds and in particular submitted that it  was
    not clear why the judge had not accepted the documentary evidence.  His
    rejection of the documents was generalised and unreasoned.

Findings and Conclusions

15. There is no error of law in this determination.  It is absolutely clear
    that the judge was entitled to find that this was a local dispute which
    the appellant had pursued through the local courts  and  there  was  no
    evidence of a political motive behind it.

16. There was no requirement on the judge to  go  through  each  and  every
    document.  It is clear that the judge took them  into  account  in  the
    context of his findings as a whole.

17. The starting point for the judge's considerations is the fact that  the
    appellant failed to claim asylum on arrival  in  the  UK,  returned  to
    Bangladesh during the currency of his visa when he had no reason to  do
    so and only claimed that he was at risk of  persecution  after  he  had
    been detained.  It is not a material error for the judge  not  to  have
    recorded the oral evidence that he returned to  Bangladesh  because  he
    thought that he was going to die, particularly as  this  is  not  quite
    what he said in  his  witness  statement  when  he  said  that  he  was
    suffering from depression from 2011. There is no mention of the present
    claim that he returned because he wanted to be buried in Bangladesh.

18.  In  any  event  the  judge's  conclusions  on  the  reasonableness  of
    relocation are unassailable.  On the appellant's own evidence he  lived
    in Dakar for two and a half years as a student without experiencing any
    difficulties whatsoever. This is plainly a wholly unmeritorious  claim.
    The  judge's  determination  is  detailed  and  fully  reasoned.    His
    conclusions were plainly open to him.  There is  no  proper  basis  for
    challenging it.

Notice of Decision

The original judge's  decision  shall  stand.   The  appellant's  appeal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

