
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08858/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Date Sent                    |
|On 20th June, 2013                            |On 3rd July, 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                        KUMARAGURUSAMY ARUNTHAVARAJA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid of Counsel instructed by LG Law Chambers,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is male, a citizen of Sri Lanka  and  was  born  on  11th
    October, 1976.  On 13th September,  2012,  the  respondent  decided  to
    remove the appellant as an illegal  entrant.   The  appellant  appealed
    that decision and his appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cope at North Shields at a hearing on 28th January, 2013.

2.   In his  determination,  which  was  subsequently  promulgated  on  11th
    February,  2013,  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Cope   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal  and  dismissed  both  his  humanitarian  protection
    appeal and his human rights appeal.

Immigration history

3.   The appellant made  an  application  for  asylum  in  1998,  which  was
    refused in March 2000.  He then claims to have left the United  Kingdom
    and went to France.  The appellant maintains that he was deported  from
    France and returned to Sri Lanka in  September,  2002.   The  appellant
    then left Sri Lanka again on 30th March, 2008, using a false  passport,
    and travelled by air to Germany.  He remained in Germany for two  weeks
    before travelling to France by car.  From there, the appellant  entered
    the United Kingdom, clandestinely, in a lorry, arriving in  the  United
    Kingdom on 14th May, 2008.

Basis of the asylum claim

4.   The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was that he  feared  for  his
    life because of his political opinion.  He is of  Tamil  ethnicity  and
    lived in  the  Jaffna  area  of  northern  Sri  Lanka.   The  appellant
    maintained that he and his family members have had involvement with the
    LTTE, an armed opposition group which had been fighting for Tamil self-
    determination in the north and east of Sri Lanka.  He claimed  that  he
    was forced to assist the LTTE and  that  his  father  was  a  committee
    member of a political wing.  The appellant  was  detained  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities for a three month period after his deportation  from
    France.  He was released into the care of his parents but  subsequently
    had difficulties with the Sri Lankan  authorities  in  2002  and  2004.
    When he moved to a different area in 2006, he was forced to assist  the
    LTTE.  He went to Colombo in 2008, before leaving the country in March,
    2008, with an agent.  In November, 2008, the appellant met  a  lady  to
    whom he is currently married.  They have a daughter born in 2010, and a
    son born in 2012.

Grounds of application

5.   The grounds of application to the Upper Tribunal  are  very  brief  and
    are as follows:-

         "1.  The appellant has scars and this caused by torture  [sic]  and
             that some of the risk factors  identified  [sic]  in  TK  (Sri
             Lanka) CG (Tamils - LP updated) [2009] UKAIT 00049  relate  to
             the appellant.  However there are many credibility issues were
             in his interview and his witness statement [sic] in connection
             to his involvement with the LTTE.  But the  Immigration  Judge
             has failed to address most of them.  It is respectfully argued
             that  in  failing  to  address  and  make  findings   on   the
             credibility challenges, the Judge has erred in  law,  and  the
             credibility findings are not safe, the whole determination  is
             not safe.


         2.   The IJ has failed to consider the appellant's scarring.  It is
             respectfully submitted in the medical report.  However the  IJ
             failed  to  consider  the  same  and  it  is  seems   in   the
             determination  [sic]  that  the  appellant's  scars  were  not
             considered and this renders the determination unsafe.


         3.   Finally the IJ  failed  to  consider  the  appellant's  wife's
             psychiatric report and this report reveals her depression  and
             trauma.


         4.   The failed to consider the article  8  of  the  ECHR  for  his
             family and private live [sic].


         5.   For the above reasons, it is respectfully submitted  that  the
             IJ erred in law and that this is a proper case for  the  Upper
             Tribunal's consideration.


         6.   Permission is therefore sought."


6.   Permission to appeal was granted.

The hearing before me

7.   At the hearing before me Counsel told me that she was 'stuck' with  the
    grounds of application submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   She
    accepted that the judge had not addressed the  appellant's  scars  but,
    contrary to the claim made in the application, the  appellant  did  not
    have any scarring  and  no  medical  report  had  ever  been  submitted
    suggesting that he did have any scars.

8.   Ms Reid also, entirely  properly,  conceded  that  the  judge  had  not
    failed  to  consider  the  wife's  psychiatric   report,   because   no
    psychiatric report had ever been prepared in respect of the wife.   She
    accepted that the judge  had  dealt  with  the  appellant's  Article  8
    rights, despite the claim to the contrary in the determination.

9.   Counsel suggested, however, that the judge had  erred  in  relation  to
    what he said about TK.  The judge failed, she submitted, to address the
    risk to this appellant because, contrary to the guidance given  by  the
    Tribunal at paragraph 125 of TK  (Tamils,  LP  updated)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2009] 00049, at paragraph 83 of the determination the judge refers  to
    and categorises risk factors as "background".  He identifies  that  the
    appellant is Tamil, that he will be returning to Sri Lanka from one  of
    the overseas centres of LTTE activity or fundraising and  that  he  has
    made an asylum claim abroad.  The judge has however erred by  referring
    to these risk factors as being background factors.

10.  Mrs Pettersen suggested that, when read as a whole,  the  determination
    makes clear findings at paragraph 33 to 77.  The Immigration Judge very
    carefully looked at the case  in  the  light  of  both  the  background
    evidence placed before him and the case law.  He was not satisfied that
    the appellant or any family members have ever had any involvement  with
    the LTTE in relation  to  the  appellant's  Article  8  claim  and  the
    determination should be upheld.

11.  Ms Reid told me she had no response to make.  I reserved my decision.

12.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge properly considered the decision  of  the
    Tribunal in Devaseelan v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2002] UKIAT 00702* [2003] Imm AR1.  He applied Devaseelan  in  respect
    of an earlier determination made  following  the  appellant's  original
    claim for asylum, in  August,  2000.   He  noted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found that the appellant's family had not  been  members
    of the LTTE.  The judge noted that there was  no  credible  explanation
    given for the direct contradiction  in  what  the  appellant  had  been
    saying in his current asylum claim  about  his  father  being  actively
    involved in the LTTE in the 1990s, and an  explicit  statement  in  his
    claim for asylum which he made in 1998, to the effect that  no  members
    of his family were involved with the LTTE.

13.  The judge believed that such a fundamental  contradiction  damaged  the
    credibility of the appellant to a very significant extent.   The  judge
    did not believe the appellant.  He believed that the fact the appellant
    made claims  which  he  regarded  as  highly  implausible  damaged  his
    credibility further.  He did not accept that  the  appellant  had  ever
    been a sympathiser with, or supporter of, the LTTE, that  he  was  ever
    forced to work for them or  that  he  had  ever  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the Sri Lankan authorities.  He did not  accept  that  the
    appellant had been detained or tortured by the Sri Lankan  authorities,
    that his father was ever a  member  or  supporter  of  the  LTTE  or  a
    committee member of any political wing or that the authorities had  any
    continuing interest in the appellant.  He also found that the appellant
    had not shown that it was reasonably likely that he had left Sri  Lanka
    on any form of illegal basis.

14.  The Immigration Judge had considered the case  law  and  accepted  that
    there were a number of factors which needed to  be  considered,  namely
    the appellant's Tamil ethnicity, the fact that he  would  be  returning
    from one of the overseas areas of LTTE activity or fundraising and that
    he  had  made  an  asylum  claim  abroad.   At  paragraph  83  of   the
    determination the judge said this:-

         "Most of these specific factors have been categorised by the Asylum
         and Immigration Tribunal in AN and SS [AN and SS (Sri Lanka) [2008]
         UKIAT 00063] as background factors; by this is meant that they  are
         not likely in themselves to give rise to a reasonable likelihood of
         persecution but would have the effect of intensifying the degree of
         risk when taken with any  more  of  the  direct  factors  which  do
         actually apply in a particular case."


    He went on to find that in the circumstances, and given his credibility
    findings, he did not believe that there were any direct  factors  which
    had been identified in LP [LP (Sri Lanka)CG [2007] UKAIT 00076].


15.  Criticism is made of the judge for  having  described  the  factors  he
    identified which might cause the appellant to be at risk as "background
    factors".  I am satisfied that in doing so he did not materially err in
    law.

16.  In TK at paragraphs 123, 124 and 125 the Tribunal said this.

         "In LP at para 238 the Tribunal stated:
             "During the course of the determination we have considered a
             list of factors which may make a person's return to Sri Lanka
             a matter which would cause the United Kingdom to be in breach
             of the Conventions. As in previous country guidance cases,
             this list is not a checklist nor is it intended to be
             exhaustive. The factors should be considered both individually
             and cumulatively. Reference should be made to the earlier
             parts of this determination where the factors are considered
             in more detail but for ease of reference they are set out
             here. There are twelve and they are not in any order of
             priority:-
                 "(i) Tamil ethnicity.
                 (ii) Previous record as a suspected or actual LTTE member
                 or supporter.
                 (iii) Previous criminal record and/or outstanding arrest
                 warrant.
                 (iv) Bail jumping and/or escaping from custody.
                 (v) Having signed a confession or similar document.
                 (vi) Having been asked by the security forces to become an
                 informer.
                 (vii) The presence of scarring.
                 (viii) Returned from London or other centre of LTTE
                 activity or fund-raising.
                 (ix) Illegal departure from Sri Lanka.
                 (x) Lack of ID card or other documentation.
                 (xi) Having made an asylum claim abroad.
                 (xii) Having relatives in the LTTE."
       124. To some extent the assessment we have just given of  particular
            items of evidence has already adumbrated our  understanding  of
            risk factors presently, but it makes sense to  deal  discretely
            with the central issue raised in this case of whether the  risk
            factors, as set out in LP and further analysed by the ECtHR  in
            NA require modification in the light of recent developments  in
            Sri Lanka. We have already stated that we do not seek  in  this
            case to decide whether recent events merit the  adding  of  two
            entirely new risk factors (journalists and NGOs).  As  heralded
            earlier, we  are  only  concerned,  as  was  LP,  with  factors
            affecting Tamils and to what  extent  they  need  modifying  or
            modified application.

         125  In AN & SS, the Tribunal adopted the refinement  suggested  by
            Collins J in Thangeswarajah & Others [2007] EWHC  3288  (Admin)
            who considered that several of the LP risk factors were  better
            characterised as "background factors"  -  namely:  (i),  (vii),
            (viii), (ix), (x), (xi) - in that "they do  not  in  themselves
            indicate a real risk, but they are matters which if there is  a
            factor which does give rise to a real risk that  the individual
            will be suspected of  involvement  in  the  LTTE,  add  to  the
            significance of that". So too did Toulson LJ in VS (Sri  Lanka)
            [2008] EWCA Civ 271.  However, we  note  that  in  NA,  despite
            referring to this observation of Collins J, the Court  did  not
            expressly adopt it and on  balance  we  consider  the  LP  risk
            factors continue to hold good as they stand.   The  desire  for
            refinement is a valid one, especially when the risk factors run
            into double figures, but it seems to us that it can be achieved
            without  any  subdivision.   We  see  an  intrinsic  danger  in
            differentiating between "risk factors" and "background factors"
            if the former are then elevated to de  facto  risk  categories,
            which they are not. The  wisdom  we  derive  from  the  ECtHR's
            analysis of the LP approach is that it treats  each  factor  as
            furnishing a point of focus for considering related  indicators
            and also allows for adjustment in respect of each in the  light
            of new evidence (in LP and in NA some factors  were  considered
            to  be  merely  contributory,  others  as  more   significant).
            Further it seems to us that the process adopted in LP itself at
            paragraphs 207-222 is not in practice  substantially  different
            from that suggested by Collins J. [My emphasis]"


17.  However, they went on to consider what the Tribunal had said in  LP  in
    relation to Tamil ethnicity and said:-

         "129. In the light of the most recent evidence it is clear that  it
         remains the case that young male Tamils are  at  relatively  higher
         level of risk than other Tamils; it is they who are more likely  to
         be subject to incidents of arrest and detention.  Because  most  of
         the TamilNet reports refer simply to "persons", we cannot  be  sure
         females are not involved, but the virtual absence of any  reference
         to them is striking. The Sri Lanka  Guardian  article  referred  to
         earlier made mention  of  a  recent  incident  involving  a  female
         returnee, but we have found this  report  unreliable.  However,  in
         view of the fact that in the  August  2009  FCO  report  the  Swiss
         Embassy representative stated that "females with a  Vanni  National
         Identity card (NIC) may also be targets", we consider it  right  to
         be cautious. Whilst therefore we conclude  that  on  balance  young
         female Tamils will not face the same level of risk  as  young  male
         Tamils, we concur with Dr Smith  and  Professor  Good's  assessment
         that relative youth remains a more important indicator of risk than
         gender. "




18.  In relation to return from London or other centre of LTTE  activity  or
    fundraising they said this:-

         "Return from London or other  centre  of  LTTE  activity  or  fund-
    raising (viii)


       145. In LP this factor was  seen  as  highly  case-specific  and  so
            dependent on the presence of other significant  factors  giving
            rise to suspicion of a  returning  failed  asylum  seeker.   Mr
            Chelvan pointed out that that Dr Smith regarded one of the  new
            priorities of the Sri Lankan government  as being to  dismantle
            the overseas procurement network, a priority it  can  put  more
            resources into now it is no longer tied up  with  fighting  the
            LTTE in Sri Lanka. Professor Good also identified  this  factor
            as one that had increased  in  significance  for  this  reason.
            However, in our assessment, whilst such  increased  concern  is
            likely to  enhance  the  level  of  risk  to  persons  who  are
            principal or high  profile  figures  in  overseas  fund-raising
            activities, it will not raise  the  level  of  risk  to  failed
            asylum seekers returned from the UK who simply happen to arrive
            back  in  Sri  Lanka  following  removal   from   London.   The
            appellant's submissions  on  this  point  were  based  on  mere
            supposition.  Evidence  to  indicate  that   the   Sri   Lankan
            authorities  take  a  greater  interest  in  returnees  from  a
            specific location is somewhat inconclusive: in any event,  none
            of the recent TamilNet evidence recorded any incident affecting
            a returnee from the UK. "




     and in relation to having made an asylum claim abroad they said:-

         "Having made an asylum claim abroad (xi)

       149.  Like the Tribunal in LP we have  no  hesitation  in  accepting
            that the process for putative  returnees  applying  for  travel
            documentation (or replacement passports) from  the  Sri  Lankan
            High Commission in London is likely to  result  in  information
            regarding such persons being passed on to  the  authorities  in
            Colombo. Indeed, at least in the context of returns by way of a
            charter flight, there  would  appear  to  be  specific  liaison
            between the UKBA, the BHC, ILM and the Sri Lankan  authorities.
            Whether, however, such information is treated by the Sri Lankan
            authorities as a cause for any particular interest appears even
            more  doubtful  now  than  before,  in  view  of  the  evidence
            concerning the January 2009 charter flight return  of  thirteen
            failed asylum seekers.  Given the likely fact they  were  known
            in advance by the Sri Lankan authorities at the airport  to  be
            failed asylum seekers, we regard it of some  significance  that
            there is no evidence whatsoever that any one of them  met  with
            difficulties.   Professor  Good  posits  that  for   individual
            returnees, the process would be quite  different,  but  on  our
            analysis of the recent evidence in recent media reports and the
            August 2009 FCO report, the evidence does not indicate that  it
            would.   We accept that the January 2009 return  pre-dates  the
            end of the conflict, but if anything it seems  to  us  that  at
            that (conflict-intensive) point in time scrutiny  of  returnees
            would have been higher  than  now.  Given  the  importance  the
            Tribunal in LP attached to BHC evidence that in  the  past,  at
            least, lists of failed asylum seekers have been in the hands of
            Sri Lankan police conducting cordon and  search  operations  in
            Colombo, we think it justified to retain this as a risk factor,
            but would regard it as likely now  to  be  a  relatively  minor
            contributing factor at best."


19.  Given the judge's findings concerning the appellant's  credibility  and
    the wholescale rejection of the account he had given of events  in  Sri
    Lanka, the judge was entitled in the circumstances to conclude that  it
    had not been shown to be reasonably likely that the appellant would  be
    at any risk of persecution or  serious  ill-treatment  were  he  to  be
    returned to Sri Lanka. The judge did not  elevate  "to  de  facto  risk
    categories" the background factors, and did not err in law,

20.  Counsel did not address me in respect  of  the  appellant's  Article  8
    claim.  It was asserted  in  the  grounds  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the appellant's Article 8 claims.  He did not.  At  paragraphs
    96 to 127 he very carefully considered the appellant's Article 8 claim.
     His conclusion that the decision of the respondent  was  proportionate
    cannot be said to be perverse

21.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.  There being no error  of  law  in
    the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Cope,  his  decision  shall
    stand.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
