
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/08756/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 14 March 2013                              |On 19 March 2013             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                                     A H
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission  to  the
    appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge Renton on 9 January 2013.

2.    The appellant is an  Iranian  national  born  on  21  July  1984.  She
    entered the UK as a student on 16 October 2007 and  claimed  asylum  in
    December 2010 whilst she still had leave to remain. Her application was
    refused on 14 September 2012 and a decision  to  remove  her  was  made
    under s.47. The refusal letter and immigration decision were not on the
    Tribunal file but Mr Tarlow helpfully  provided  me  with  copies.  The
    appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro by way  of  a
    determination promulgated on 18 December 2012.  The  matter  then  came
    before me on 14 March 2013.

3.    The  appellant's  case  is  that  she  was  a  broadcaster  at  Manoto
    television in Iran.  That  part  of  the  claim  was  accepted  by  the
    respondent. The judge  found,  however,  that  the  appellant  had  not
    published  or  broadcasted  any  programmes  critical  of  the  Iranian
    government. She found the appellant had no political profile. She  also
    found, relying on what she presumed to be  objective  evidence  in  the
    refusal letter, that Manoto television had  not  had  its  transmission
    jammed and that this meant that the authorities did not view Manoto  as
    anti-Islamic or as a threat.

4.    The grounds  argue  that,  in  reaching  her  conclusions,  the  judge
    disregarded the background material submitted  by  the  appellant  with
    regard to the view taken by the authorities  of  Manoto  and  that,  in
    ignoring the material which was specifically drawn to her attention  in
    submissions, her findings are unsustainable.

5.    At the hearing the parties indicated that they were in agreement  that
    the judge had erred in law as set out in the grounds. Having  read  the
    determination and seen the extracts from  the  evidence  cited  in  the
    grounds I am satisfied that at least some of those citations show  that
    the authorities may not have taken the view ascribed  to  them  by  the
    judge. I concur with the parties that her failure to have regard to all
    the evidence when arriving at her conclusions was an error of law which
    renders her determination unsustainable.  I  therefore  set  aside  the
    decision in its entirety except as a record of the  evidence  given  at
    the hearing. No findings are preserved.

6.    Although it has not been raised as an issue, I flag up the section  47
    decision that was made in this case, the asylum application having been
    made during the validity of the appellant's student leave.

7.    The bundle served for this  hearing  which  encompasses  the  evidence
    previously submitted remains on file and need not be  submitted  again.
    Any further documentary evidence must be served no later than five days
    prior to the hearing.

Decision

8.    The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law and  the  determination  is
    set aside. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh decision to be made on all issues.

Signed:


Dr R Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge
14 March 2013
