
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08848/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 18th January 2016                 |On 1st February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     RH
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs O Dury of Jemek Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Stott of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 13th January 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Iranian citizen born in 1987 who arrived in the
    United Kingdom illegally on 24th  May  2014  and  claimed  asylum.   In
    brief, the Appellant's claim was based upon his fear of  the  Basij  in
    Iran due to his previous activities  in  fitting  satellite  dishes  to
    homes which is an illegal occupation in Iran.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 24th June 2014,  not  finding
    the Appellant  credible,  and  rejecting  his  claim  in  its  entirety
    although it was accepted that he is a national of Iran.  The  Appellant
    appealed and his appeal was heard by the FtT on 5th January 2015.   The
    FtT accepted that the Appellant is an  Iranian  national  but  did  not
    accept his account as credible and did not find that  he  would  be  at
    risk if returned to Iran.  His appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary, it was contended that  the  negative  credibility  findings
    made by the FtT are unsustainable as the FtT had failed to give reasons
    for the findings.

 5. It was also contended that the FtT had failed to take  into  account  a
    Country of Origin Information Report  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant,
    which indicated that a person with the Appellant's profile would be  at
    risk in Iran.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge P J M Hollingworth of the FtT
    in the following terms;

         "An arguable error of law has arisen.  At paragraph  11  the  judge
         has accepted that the Appellant  may  well  have  been  stopped  by
         police authorities in Iran and that he has  paid  bribes  and  also
         accepted that the Appellant may have been detained  by  the  Basij.
         However, the judge went on to state that he was  unable  to  accept
         the  Appellant  had  been  imprisoned  for  a  twenty  day  period.
         Subsequently, the judge has made adverse credibility findings.   It
         is unclear as to which portions of the  Appellant's  evidence  have
         survived the adverse credibility findings.  In these  circumstances
         the relationship between  the  findings  and  the  degree  of  risk
         becomes the subject of an arguable error of law."

    Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary it was contended that the FtT had made clear findings
    and rejected the Appellant's claim to have been detained for a six  day
    period, and a twenty day period.  The FtT had also made clear  findings
    and given  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's  claimed
    relationship with the niece of a Basij commander.

 7. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such  that
    the decision must be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

 8. Mrs Dury contended that the FtT had  not  given  adequate  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeal.  The Appellant had provided a  detailed  witness
    statement to the FtT, commenting upon the issues raised in the  reasons
    for refusal letter.

 9. The FtT had accepted that  the  Appellant  had  been  arrested  by  the
    authorities in Iran but it was not clear what aspects of his claim  had
    been accepted and what had been rejected,  and  there  was  a  lack  of
    reasoning.

10. It was  submitted  that  in  relation  to  the  twenty  day  period  of
    imprisonment, the Appellant's evidence was clear in that he had  stated
    in his asylum interview, that he had been imprisoned  for  twenty  days
    approximately three years ago.

11. Mrs Dury submitted that the FtT decision should be set  aside  and  the
    appeal remitted to the FtT to be heard afresh.

The Respondent's Submissions

12. Mr McVeety submitted that it is well-established law, that parts of  an
    account can be accepted, and parts rejected.  When read as a  whole  it
    was contended that the FtT had considered the evidence  in  the  round,
    considered the background evidence, and made findings open to it on the
    evidence, and provided adequate reasoning.

The Appellant's Response

13.  Mrs  Dury  contended  that  the  FtT  had  placed  reliance  upon  the
    Appellant's screening interview, which was unsafe, as the Appellant was
    told at that interview that he need not provide  comprehensive  details
    of his asylum claim, which would be dealt with at a  later  substantive
    interview.  When that substantive interview took place,  the  Appellant
    had explained his claim in detail.

14. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. The challenge to the decision of the FtT was based upon  inadequacy  of
    reasons, and the judge granting permission raised the issue of  unclear
    findings.

16. The FtT has a duty to make clear findings on the evidence  and  provide
    clear reasons.  I set out below the head  note  to  MK  (duty  to  give
    reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC);

         "(1) It is axiomatic that a  determination  discloses  clearly  the
             reasons for a Tribunal's decision.

         (2)   If  a  Tribunal  finds  oral  evidence  to  be   implausible,
             incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth  no  weight
             whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the determination and
             for  such  findings  to  be  supported  by  reasons.   A  bare
             statement that a witness was not believed or that  a  document
             was afforded no weight is unlikely to satisfy the  requirement
             to give reasons."

17.  I also set  out  below  the  head  note  to  Budhathoki  (reasons  for
    decision) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

18. Credibility is a central issue in this appeal.  The Respondent rejected
    the Appellant's account on credibility grounds.  The Respondent in  the
    reasons  for  refusal  letter  placed  very  considerable   weight   on
    inconsistencies  between  the  Appellant's  screening   interview   and
    substantive asylum interview.  Adverse credibility findings  were  made
    because the Appellant mentioned aspects of his claim in his substantive
    interview, that he had not mentioned in his asylum interview.

19. The FtT has followed a similar approach stating in paragraph 10;

         "There are disparities  in  the  versions  that  he  has  given  as
         outlined in the refusal letter and furthermore  the  Appellant  has
         failed to mention in the screening interview  events  that  he  now
         relies upon which, if true, are of significance."

20. The credibility findings made by the FtT that relate to the events that
    the Appellant claimed took place in Iran are contained in paragraphs 11-
    14 of the decision.  In paragraph 11 the FtT accepts that the Appellant
    may well have been stopped by police authorities in Iran, that he  paid
    bribes, and that he may also have been detained by the Basij.  The  FtT
    does not accept that the Appellant was  imprisoned  for  a  twenty  day
    period on the basis that there is  no  clear  evidence  clarifying  the
    situation.  I do not find that adequate reasons  have  been  given  for
    rejecting the Appellant's claim to have been imprisoned  for  a  twenty
    day period.  The Appellant said in his screening interview  (4.1)  that
    he had been imprisoned for twenty days and  later  said  in  answer  to
    question 5.1 that he had been arrested in 2013.  He did not however say
    that he had been imprisoned for twenty days  in  2013.   The  Appellant
    clearly stated in his asylum interview in answer to questions 51 and 52
    he had been imprisoned for twenty days which  was  approximately  three
    years ago.  This was confirmed in paragraph 5 of his witness  statement
    dated 30th December 2014.

21. In paragraph 12 the FtT rejects the Appellant's claim that he had  been
    detained for six days at a Basij base because this was not mentioned in
    the screening interview.  No other reason for rejecting this claim  was
    given.  I do not  find  that  adequate  reasons  have  been  given  for
    rejecting this  claim.   In  my  view  care  is  needed  when  weighing
    discrepancies between a screening interview, and a  substantive  asylum
    interview.  I accept that failure to mention a  central  feature  of  a
    claim in a screening interview may  affect  credibility.   However  the
    following is read out to  an  interviewee  at  the  commencement  of  a
    screening interview;

         "The questions I am about to  ask  you  relate  to  your  identity,
         background and travel route to the United Kingdom.  The information
         you will be asked to provide will be used mainly for administrative
         purposes.  You will not be asked at this stage to  go  into  detail
         about  the  substantive  details  of  your  asylum  claim  as,   if
         appropriate, this will be done at a later interview.  However, some
         details you will be asked  to  provide  may  be  relevant  to  your
         claim."

22. The Appellant in his screening  interview  was  asked  whether  he  was
    having problems in Iran and he explained that he was in connection with
    satellite installation which is banned in Iran and he was caught "a few
    times" doing installations.  He was put in prison for twenty  days  and
    had to pay a penalty to get out.  He was asked when he  started  having
    these problems and he said in the past five years, and he was asked who
    he was having problems with,  and  he  explained  the  Basij  (security
    police).  He went on to say that he had his nose broken by the Basij.

23.  It  is  therefore  clear  that  the  Appellant  was  not   asked   any
    comprehensive details about his claim, and he was specifically told  he
    was being asked primarily about his  identity,  background  and  travel
    route to the United Kingdom.   I  therefore  conclude  that  inadequate
    reasons have been given by the FtT for rejecting his claim to have been
    detained for six days and ill-treated.

24. I make a similar finding  in  relation  to  paragraph  13  of  the  FtT
    decision, in which the Appellant's relationship with  the  niece  of  a
    Basij commander is rejected, the  only  reason  being  given  for  this
    rejection,  being  that  this  was  not  mentioned  in  the   screening
    interview.

25. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the FtT has  not  complied
    with the principles set out in MK and Budhathoki, and has not  resolved
    key conflicts in the evidence, and has not  given  clear  and  adequate
    reasons for findings.

26. Therefore the decision of the FtT is unsafe and is set aside and  needs
    to be re-made.

27. In considering whether the appeal should be re-made by the FtT  or  the
    Upper Tribunal I have taken into account  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statements which for ease of reference I  set  out
    below;

         '7.1 Where under section 12(1) of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in
             accordance with the relevant Practice Direction to re-make the
             decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii).

         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision and the  appeal  to
                  be re-made is such that, having regard to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

         7.3  Re-making rather than remitting will  nevertheless  constitute
             the normal approach to determine appeals where an error of law
             is found, even if some further fact-finding is necessary.'

28. In my view, no findings made by the FtT can be preserved.   There  will
    therefore need to be extensive fact-finding, and I  therefore  conclude
    that it would be more appropriate for this appeal to be remitted to the
    FtT.

29. The appeal before  the  FtT  will  take  place  at  the  Sheldon  Court
    Birmingham Hearing Centre.  The appeal is to be heard by an  FtT  Judge
    other than Judge Stott.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The FtT made no anonymity direction, but I decided, as  this  is  an  appeal
against refusal of asylum, and the Appellant claims that he is at  risk,  to
make an anonymity order pursuant  to  rule  14  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 22nd January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to be considered by the FtT.


Signed   Date 22nd January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
