
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08213/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 13 May 2015                       |On 20 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     JT
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms Walker (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who entered  the  UK  with  a
       valid visa on 14 September 2011.  This was  extended  and  her  leave
       remained valid until 4 September 2014.  The appellant claimed  asylum
       on 16 April 2014 and this was refused by the  SSHD  after  her  leave
       expired on 3 October 2014 in a Notice of Decision  headed  'Rejection
       of Asylum Claim'.

    2. The appellant appealed against the decision to refuse asylum  to  the
       First-tier   Tribunal.    The   difficulty   with   this,   as   both
       representatives before me agreed  is  well  known,  is  that  a  mere
       refusal of asylum without more, is not an  immigration  decision  and
       does not carry with it a right of appeal.

    3. In the Rule 24 submissions lodged on behalf of the SSHD  it  is  said
       that the  Notice  of  Decision  relied  upon  section  83(2)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  i.e.  the  Notice  of
       Decision states 'you are  entitled  to  appeal  this  decision  under
       section 83(2)...' Mr McVeety accepted this  is  plainly  wrong.   The
       appellant had not been granted leave for over a year at the  time  of
       the decision and section 83(2) simply does  not  apply.   Mr  McVeety
       also accepted, as conceded within the Rule 24 response, that the SSHD
       had not made an immigration decision in order to trigger a  right  of
       appeal pursuant to section 82 of the 2002 Act.

    4. It appears that neither of the representatives  raised  this  obvious
       jurisdictional issue with the Judge who heard the appeal.  This is to
       be regretted.  The appellant was represented by a  different  Counsel
       at  that  stage  and  the  respondent  by  a  different  Home  Office
       Presenting Officer.  The Judge mistakenly considered that the  appeal
       was being  brought  against  a  removal  decision  [3].   Mr  McVeety
       confirmed that there has been no removal decision.

    5. Mr McVeety therefore conceded  that  without  a  statutory  right  of
       appeal, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction and it must follow that  the
       SSHD must make a new decision  generating  a  right  of  appeal.   Mr
       McVeety was correct to adopt this approach.  An appeal under  section
       82 of the 2002 Act requires there to be an immigration  decision,  as
       there defined.  Where no immigration  decision  has  been  made,  the
       First-tier Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear the  appeal  -  Singh
       (No immigration decision-jurisdiction) [2013] UKUT 00440  (IAC).   Mr
       McVeety made it clear that it was most regrettable  that  this  issue
       was only being raised for the first time before the  Upper  Tribunal.
       He however properly acknowledged that representatives cannot  concede
       jurisdiction where there is none - see Virk and others v SSHD  [2013]
       EWCA Civ 652.  It is also regrettable that the Judge considering  the
       appeal did not check the immigration decision as set out  within  the
       guidance provided in Singh (supra) at [12].

    6. The First-tier Tribunal did not have  jurisdiction  to  consider  the
       appeal and neither do I.

Decision

    7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the decision
       re-made dismissing the appeal for want of jurisdiction.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 15 May 2015
