
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA080862015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 April 2016                              |On 17 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Navendra Frank DAVID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Soltani, Hanson Young Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The  appellant,  Navendra  Frank  David,  was  born  on  12
    February 1971 and is a  male  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.   The  appellant
    appealed against a decision of the respondent dated 23  April  2015  to
    refuse his application for asylum  and  to  issue  directions  for  his
    removal to Sri Lanka.  The First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Saffer)  in  a
    decision   promulgated   on   21    September    2015    allowed    the
    asylum/Article/2/3 ECHR appeals.  The Secretary of State  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appeal turns on the question posed by Judge Robertson (who  refused
    permission in the First-tier Tribunal) namely, would the  appellant  be
    perceived to be a threat to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a  single
    state and  to  have  a  significant  role  in  relation  to  post-Tamil
    separatism and a renewal of hostilities with Sri  Lanka?   In  granting
    permission, Judge McWilliam considered that it was

         "... arguable  that  the  judge  inadequately  explained  why  [the
         appellant] would on return be perceived as a Tamil activist working
         to destabilise a unitary Sri Lankan state or  revive  international
         armed conflict.  This is in the light  of  the  limited  sur  place
         activities and historic arrest and detention."

    In the grounds of appeal, the Secretary of State refers to the  country
    guidance case of GJ and Others (Post-Civil War: Returnees) Sri Lanka CG
    [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).  The head note reads:

         (1)  This determination replaces all existing country  guidance  on
         Sri Lanka.

         (2)  The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed
         since the civil war ended in May 2009. The LTTE in Sri Lanka itself
         is a spent force and there have been no terrorist  incidents  since
         the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
         activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism  and
         to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in  Amendment
         6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in 1983,  which  prohibits  the
         'violation of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka. Its focus is  on
         preventing both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE or any similar Tamil
         separatist organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within
         Sri Lanka.

         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
         there remains a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring
         international protection.

         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
         person at real risk from the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  since  the
         government now controls the whole  of  Sri  Lanka  and  Tamils  are
         required to return to a named address  after  passing  through  the
         airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
         whose names appear on a "stop"  list  will  be  detained  from  the
         airport. Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities  are
         or become interested exists not at the airport, but  after  arrival
         in their home area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID
         or police within a few days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
         or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
         otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,
             or are perceived to have a significant  role  in  relation  to
             post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  and/or  a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

             (b)  Journalists (whether in print or other  media)  or  human
             rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised the Sri
             Lankan government, in particular its human rights  record,  or
             who are associated  with  publications  critical  of  the  Sri
             Lankan government.

             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
             Learned and  Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the  Sri
             Lankan  security  forces,  armed  forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities in alleged war crimes. Among those  who  may  have
             witnessed war crimes during the conflict, particularly in  the
             No-Fire Zones  in  May  2009,  only  those  who  have  already
             identified themselves by giving such evidence would  be  known
             to the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only they  are  at
             real risk of adverse attention or  persecution  on  return  as
             potential or actual war crimes witnesses.

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name  appears  on  a  "stop"  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
         intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
         diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities  know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
         Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone
         in the Northern Province had some level  of  involvement  with  the
         LTTE  during  the  civil  war.  In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,   an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
         "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not
         reasonably likely to  be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
         monitored by the security services after his or her return. If that
         monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist
         working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or  revive  the
         internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question  is  not,  in
         general, reasonably likely to be detained by the  security  forces.
         That will be a question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any
         diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.

         (10) Consideration must always be given to whether, in the light of
         an individual's activities and responsibilities  during  the  civil
         war, the exclusion clauses are engaged (Article 1F of  the  Refugee
         Convention and  Article  12(2)  of  the  Qualification  Directive).
         Regard should be had to the categories for exclusion set out in the
         "Eligibility Guidelines For Assessing the International  Protection
         Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Sri Lanka", published by UNHCR  on  21
         December 2012.

 3. The appellant did not claim to be involved with the LTTE in  Sri  Lanka
    or with LTTE-related groups in the United Kingdom [decision, 19].   The
    judge did not accept the respondent's argument that the  appellant  had
    produced forged documents in connection with an application  to  extend
    his stay  in  2011.   The  judge  did  consider  that  the  appellant's
    credibility was damaged by a failure to claim asylum in  2008  when  he
    arrived from Sri Lanka.  In  general,  however,  the  judge  found  the
    appellant to be a credible witness.  At [50] the judge accepted that

         "Having seen the pictures and considered the oral  and  documentary
         evidence it is reasonably likely that [the appellant] has  attended
         meetings and two demonstrations which would be perceived by the Sri
         Lankan authorities as being anti-government."

    The judge made that finding against the background of  the  appellant's
    account of having been detained and ill-treated for a  period  of  more
    than two months in Sri Lanka in 2008.  The judge recorded [35] the fact
    that the Sri  Lankan  authorities  have  a  sophisticated  approach  to
    intelligence gathering and are able  to  distinguish  between  economic
    migrants who have travelled abroad and those who offer a threat to  the
    Sri Lankan state.  The respondent's case before the Upper  Tribunal  is
    that the  appellant  would  not  be  of  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities after his 2008 detention given that the conflict  with  the
    Tamil separatists has subsequently ceased.   There  was  no  reason  to
    suppose that, simply because they had detained the appellant  in  2008,
    he would be perceived as a threat to the Sri Lankan state.

 4. The grounds do not directly challenge the credibility findings  of  the
    judge although it is submitted that the judge  has  made  the  findings
    which I have quoted at [50] whilst failing to consider the  appellant's
    own evidence against [having attended anti-government meetings] that he
    has never been involved in the  LTTE  and  sympathises  with  them  for
    humanitarian reasons."  I reject that submission.  As the judge  notes,
    the important issue here is the perception of  the  appellant  and  his
    activities by the Sri Lankan  authorities.   The  appellant  has  never
    actively supported the LTTE and,  indeed,  his  motives  for  attending
    demonstrations and meetings may not be entirely genuine but rather  are
    self-serving.  If the Sri Lankan authorities perceive the appellant  to
    be a threat then there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  they  will
    persecute  him  upon  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   Having   accepted   the
    appellant's  account  in  particular  having  found  that  he  attended
    meetings and demonstrations which "would be perceived by the Sri Lankan
    authorities as being anti-government" it was clearly open for the judge
    to make the findings which I have quoted above [51].  That  was  not  a
    conclusion which was perverse or irrational in the face of the evidence
    and I am satisfied also that the judge  has  given  [38-49]  clear  and
    cogent reasons for rejecting the attacks on the appellant's credibility
    made by the respondent and accepting the appellant's  account  of  past
    events as true and accurate and, having found those  facts,  concluding
    on the basis of the country guidance that the  appellant  would  be  at
    real risk on return.  In the circumstances, I find that the  judge  has
    not erred in law as asserted in the grounds or at all.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 1 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
