
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08419/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2016                  |On 8 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     FAN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent







Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms T Jaber, counsel instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ R Cooper,  promulgated  on
    29 September 2015.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on 23 November 2015 by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coker.




Background


 3. The appellant, aged 20, previously applied for asylum, that claim being
    refused on 22 October 2009 and  again  on  20  February  2012.  He  was
    granted Discretionary Leave to Remain (DLR) until 30 September 2012. On
    21 September 2012, he sought further leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds, specifically Articles 2, 3  and  8  of
    the ECHR.

 4. The basis of the appellant's asylum  claim  is  that  he  is  from  [a]
    village, Bagrami District, in Kabul Province and that his  father,  who
    worked for a French-run organisation failed to  return  from  work  one
    day, it being believed  that  he  was  abducted  by  the  Taliban.  The
    appellant states that the Taliban also had an adverse interest in  him,
    as the eldest son. His mother sold the family home in order to pay  for
    the appellant's travel to the United Kingdom.

 5. The Secretary of State's Reasons for Refusal  letter  of  26  September
    2014 explains that the appellant's application was refused for the same
    reasons contained in the earlier  refusal  letters.  In  addition,  the
    respondent provided reasons as to why she had  been  unable  to  comply
    with  her  duty  to  endeavour  to  trace  the  appellant's  family  in
    Afghanistan. Regard  was  also  had  to  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, however the conclusion  was  that
    the appellant's best interests were served by him  leaving  the  United
    Kingdom  and  being  reunited   with   his   family   in   Afghanistan.
    Consideration was also given to Article 8 within the Rules, however the
    appellant was said to be unable to meet any of the requirements.  There
    were said to be no exceptional circumstances and it was considered that
    the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom was appropriate.

 6. During the course of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    reasons for refusal letter of 20 February 2012 was  not  available  and
    the Secretary of State's representative conceded that paragraph  34  of
    the reasons for refusal letter of 26 September 2014 did  not  apply  to
    the appellant. The FTTJ concluded that the appellant was not at risk of
    persecution owing to a number of  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    account. Nor was it accepted that the appellant was at risk of  serious
    harm and therefore entitled to humanitarian protection. The appeal  was
    allowed under "the Immigration Rules and Article 8" on the  basis  that
    there were significant obstacles to the appellant's  re-integration  in
    Afghanistan.

Error of law


 7. Permission to appeal was sought on  the  basis  that  firstly,  it  was
    arguable that the FTTJ failed to apply relevant factual findings to  an
    assessment of the appellant's membership of a particular social  group,
    that being "practical orphans." Secondly, it was argued that  the  FTTJ
    failed to assess  whether  the  appellant  qualified  for  humanitarian
    protection on the basis of his personal circumstances  and  thirdly  it
    was said that the FTTJ's credibility assessment was flawed in a  number
    of respects.

 8. Permission to appeal was  initially  refused  by  FTTJ  Garratt  on  23
    October 2015. The UTJ granting permission, on similar, albeit  expanded
    grounds, considered that; "It is arguable that the judge erred  in  law
    for the reasons given namely failing  to  apply  her  findings  to  the
    specific age of the appellant  who  even  though  an  adult  was  still
    accepted to be vulnerable; failed to apply her own findings as  to  the
    appellant's circumstances to the issue of humanitarian  protection  and
    failed  to  have  adequate  regard  to  credibility   findings   made."
    Permission was granted on all grounds.

 9. The Secretary of State's response indicated that the respondent opposed
    the appeal as it was considered that the  FTTJ  appropriately  directed
    herself.

The hearing


10. Mr Avery advised me that there was no cross-appeal in relation  to  the
    decision to allow the appellant's appeal. Furthermore,  the  respondent
    had now granted the appellant DLR.

11. Ms Jaber relied on the grounds of appeal, which were set out at  length
    in her 17-page skeleton argument, which I have taken into consideration
    in deciding this matter. The additional points she  made  in  terms  of
    expanding the first ground  included  emphasising  that  the  fact  the
    appellant was aged 20 at the time of the FTTJ's decision, did not  mean
    that he could not qualify for asylum as a practical orphan.  There  had
    been limited consideration by the FTTJ as to whether his age  qualified
    him.  In relation to ground 2, Ms Jaber asked me to consider the issues
    accepted by the FTTJ between [108] and [123] of  the  decision  and  to
    conclude that she had used an erroneous test in finding that he did not
    qualify for humanitarian protection in those circumstances. With regard
    to ground 3, Ms Jaber identified a number of findings made by the FTTJ,
    which she argued were problematic.

12. Mr Avery argued that the FTTJ had made findings open to her and that Ms
    Jaber's arguments did not identify  any  material  error  of  law.  The
    appellant's age at the time of the hearing was a relevant factor. There
    was nothing in the evidence, which ought to have led the FTTJ to  treat
    him as a child. While the FTTJ had made findings  in  relation  to  the
    decision amounting to a breach of the appellant's rights under  Article
    8, this did not  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  he  was  entitled  to
    international protection. On the second ground, Mr Avery  asked  me  to
    find that the FTTJ's conclusions as  to  humanitarian  protection  were
    perfectly sustainable. The FTTJ found that the appellant had family  in
    Afghanistan and  that  he  had  no  significant  health  problems.  The
    criticisms set out in ground 3 were, he submitted, no  more  than  mere
    disagreement with the FTTJ's findings. Mr Avery went on to address  the
    credibility  issues,  which  were  highlighted  by  Ms  Jaber  in   her
    arguments.

13. In reply, Ms Jaber argued that the appellant's age  was  not  the  only
    relevant factor with regard to whether the  appellant  qualified  as  a
    refugee on account of being a practical orphan.  This  was  a  material
    error in that it was not a foregone conclusion that the FTTJ would have
    reached the same decision had she approached the issue differently. The
    findings the FTTJ made on Article 8 were factors, which  supported  the
    appellant being a refugee. On ground 2, she argued that  the  FTTJ  had
    excluded the relevant factors and in relation to ground 3 the FTTJ  had
    relied on unsubstantiated reasons.

14. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether  there
    was a material error of law.

Decision on Error of Law

15. I will address the grounds in the same order as  they  were  made.  The
    first ground took issue with the FTTJ's conclusion that  the  appellant
    was not a member of a particular social group on account of his age; LQ
    (Age : immutable characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005 and  DS
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 305 applied. The FTTJ gave careful
    and detailed consideration to this matter between [97] and [107] of the
    decision and reasons. She correctly directed herself as to the case law
    at the beginning of her consideration and  when  reaching  her  overall
    conclusions. Other than the fact that the appellant is a  young  adult,
    Ms Jaber did not draw my attention to any other part of  the  evidence,
    which might have led the FTTJ to conclude that the appellant should  be
    treated as a child.

16. There is a reference in Ms Jaber's skeleton argument to the appellant's
    apparent or assumed age, however I heard no argument to the effect that
    this was below 20 at the time of the hearing before the FTTJ. While the
    FTTJ's comment about the appellant not challenging the first refusal of
    his asylum claim when he was a minor was of doubtful  relevance,  I  do
    not accept that this amounts to a material error in light of  the  fact
    that on the evidence before the FTTJ, the appellant  was  a  physically
    and  mentally  healthy  20  year  old  man  with  many   relatives   in
    Afghanistan, specifically in Kabul Province. Other than his age  and  a
    "Fit certificate" from a GP dating from January 2014  (some  18  months
    before the hearing) referring to anxiety related symptoms; there was no
    evidence before the FTTJ,  which  could  have  led  her  to  reasonably
    conclude that the appellant would face the same risk of persecution, as
    would a child.

17. The second ground concerns the argument that the FTTJ failed to  assess
    whether the appellant was at risk of serious harm  from  indiscriminate
    violence based on all of his personal circumstances and  not  just  his
    age. The FTTJ addressed this issue  between  [108]  and  [122]  of  the
    decision. I reject the assertion that the appellant's age was the  only
    issue taken  into  consideration.  At  [114-115]  the  FTTJ  took  into
    consideration  the  worsening  security   situation;   at   [116]   she
    particularly noted the rise in IDP's in the Kabul  area  to  which  the
    appellant would be returned; at [117], she took into consideration that
    the appellant had not lived in Afghanistan since the age of 13 and that
    the appellant would need to locate his relatives in  his  village  with
    whom contact had lapsed and reintegrate upon return  there;  at  [118],
    the FTTJ took into consideration the appellant's circumstances  in  the
    United  Kingdom  throughout  his  residence  here  and  the  degree  of
    independence he had attained and accepted that he still  received  some
    support from the local authority.

18. Ms Jaber submitted that the reasons given by the FTTJ for allowing  the
    appeal under paragraph 276ADE(vi) of  the  Rules  ought  to  have  been
    applied to her findings on serious harm. I note that the FTTJ took into
    account the appellant's age, lack of experience of  independent  living
    and that he was last  in  Afghanistan  as  a  13  year  old  child  and
    concluded  that  there  would  be  significant  obstacles  to  his  re-
    integration.

19. I do not accept that these matters were not considered in terms of  the
    appellant's humanitarian protection claim for reasons given above.

20. The FTTJ paid  careful  attention  to  the  somewhat  limited  evidence
    relating to the appellant's physical and mental health at [119} and she
    accepted that he suffered from some anxiety  symptoms  (notwithstanding
    the vintage of the GP's certificate) but concluded  that  she  was  not
    satisfied that he had "significant" health problems.

21. Finally at [120] the FTTJ considers the evidence of the difficulties of
    failed asylum seekers reintegrating in Afghanistan. While the FTTJ,  at
    [122] refers, to the appellant's age and the security situation, it  is
    abundantly clear from reading the preceding 14 paragraphs that the FTTJ
    considered every aspect of the appellant's personal circumstances prior
    to deciding  that  he  was  not  at  risk  of  serious  harm  owing  to
    indiscriminate violence. The grounds amount to  disagreement  with  the
    FTTJ's findings.

22. In ground 3, issue is taken with a number of the reasons given  by  the
    FTTJ for concluding the appellant's father  was  not  abducted  by  the
    Taliban. Five specific matters are relied upon in Ms  Jaber's  skeleton
    argument and they initially appear persuasive, when taken in isolation.



23. The first matter concerns the FTTJ's finding that  the  appellant  only
    belatedly made efforts to verify his father's employment, which  it  is
    (rightly) argued fails to take into consideration the  appellant's  age
    and the fact that (partial) verification was ultimately obtained.

24. Secondly, I am told that the appellant was never  asked  about  how  he
    obtained the Tiskara, which he relied upon in the Administrative  Court
    proceedings and which resulted in the local authority's assessment that
    he was two years older than his stated age,  being  quashed.  I  accept
    that, ideally, this matter ought to have been put to the appellant  for
    his comments during the hearing.

25. Thirdly, it is doubtful that the appellant's failure to  challenge  the
    2009 refusal of his claim ought to adversely affect the credibility  of
    that claim given that he was a minor at the time.

26. Fourthly, there is also the FTTJ's reliance on the screening  interview
    record when the appellant was interviewed without an appropriate  adult
    as well as the interviews taken in connection with the age assessments,
    which were subsequently quashed.  On this point, I find that  the  FTTJ
    was entitled to place some weight on the appellant's responses provided
    that she considered the appellant's circumstances,  in  particular  his
    age, as well as those in which these interviews took  place;  this  she
    did at [53-56] and elsewhere in her findings.

27. Fifthly, the FTTJ was criticised for placing weight on the  failure  of
    the appellant to mention to social workers that he  did  not  know  his
    father's whereabouts. Indeed, the FTTJ  goes  further  than  this,  she
    notes that there were "numerous references" in  the  Pathway  Plans  to
    both his birth parents.

28. I reject the argument that the social services evidence is deserving of
    no weight solely because the age assessments were quashed.

29. The FTTJ's credibility findings, both positive and negative, occupy  40
    paragraphs of the decision and reasons. I conclude  that  of  the  five
    matters isolated in the ground 3, only the first three have any  merit.
    However, in relation to the issue of the Tiskara, the FTTJ did not  err
    in placing some weight upon the fact that the appellant  denied  having
    such a document on arriving in the  United  Kingdom  and  that  he  had
    offered to contact his mother in order to obtain it.

30. In addition to the  negative  credibility  findings  mentioned  in  the
    grounds, the FTTJ placed weight on what I consider  to  be  significant
    inconsistencies in the appellant's account as  to  the  timing  of  the
    warnings he states he received from the Taliban  [76-78].   Furthermore
    at [79-82], the FTTJ remarks upon  the  evolution  of  the  appellant's
    claim between his substantive interview when he claimed not to know the
    details of two of  the  warnings  from  the  Taliban  and  his  witness
    statement made three years later when  details  were  provided.  Before
    concluding that the appellant had bolstered his claim in some  aspects,
    the FTTJ firstly took into consideration that any further details might
    have been due to careful questioning by his advisors  as  well  as  the
    brevity of some aspects of the asylum interview [81].  The  FTTJ  notes
    further inconsistencies at [83] regarding the  circumstances  in  which
    his father was abducted; at [84] in relation to what steps  his  mother
    took subsequently and at [88] where the appellant was when the  Taliban
    went to his home on the first occasion.

31. At [90] it is noted that the appellant claimed that  his  parents  were
    beaten by the Taliban for the first time,  only  six  years  after  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom.  At  [91]  the  FTTJ  records  that  the
    appellant told social workers of a conversation with his  father  about
    his age, which took place some months after he states that  his  father
    was abducted.

32. In conclusion, while the  FTTJ  may  have  fallen  into  error  in  her
    treatment of the Tiskara and the comments made  about  the  appellant's
    failure to appeal or obtain evidence earlier, I find  that  these  were
    not material to the outcome of the appeal, in view of  the  substantial
    inconsistencies and other areas of cause for concern with the  evidence
    before her.

33. The FTTJ made no material error of law.

34. I dismiss this appeal

35. An anonymity  direction  was  made  by  the  FTTJ  and  I  consider  it
    appropriate that this be continued and  therefore  make  the  following
    anonymity direction:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. "

Conclusions


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.


Signed      Date: 28 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

