
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08820/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2016                           |On 19 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    S G T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O James instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Respondent  (SGT).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

 2. For convenience, although this is an appeal by the Secretary of  State,
    I will refer to the parties as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea who was born on 4 June 1986.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 December 2014 and  claimed  asylum.
    On 13 May 2015, the Secretary of State refused  the  Appellant's  claim
    for asylum and on human rights  grounds.   However,  the  Secretary  of
    State  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to   humanitarian
    protection and on 14 May 2015 was granted five years' leave to  remain.



The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    to refuse his asylum claim.  The appeal was heard by Judge Price  on  1
    March 2016.  Before Judge Price, a number of facts were accepted:

         (1)  The Appellant is a national of Eritrea;

         (2)  The Appellant evaded military service in 2005;

         (3)  That having fled to Egypt, when returned to  Eritrea  in  June
             2008 he was detained and received political education;

         (4)  The Appellant escaped whilst being transferred to a prison and
             is a military deserter;

         (5)  The Appellant left Eritrea illegally;

         (6)  The Appellant has established that he  would  be  at  risk  on
             return to Eritrea as a consequence.

 5. What was not accepted by the respondent was that the  Appellant's  fear
    arose from a Convention reason, namely his imputed  political  opinion.
    Before  Judge  Price,  the  Secretary  of  State  contended  that   the
    background evidence did not establish that any ill-treatment  would  be
    based upon his political opinion.

 6. Judge Price, however, found that the appellant's  evasion  of  military
    service would be regarded as an expression of political opinion by  the
    Eritrean authorities.  As a consequence, she  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  Judge  Price's
    decision to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that she had failed to deal
    with the issues raised by the respondent in the refusal letter and  the
    submissions made at the hearing relevant to  the  issue  of  whether  a
    Convention reason was established.

 8. On 20 April 2016, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M J Gillespie) granted
    the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me.  At  the  hearing,  Mr  Richards,  who
    represented the Secretary of State relied  upon  the  grounds  and,  in
    particular, that the judge had failed to  engage  with  the  background
    material relied upon by  the  Secretary  of  State  before  the  judge.
    Whilst Mr Richards invited me to find that the  judge  had,  therefore,
    erred in law, he accepted that the legal position had  moved  on  since
    the hearing before the judge as a result of the Upper Tribunal's recent
    Country Guidance decision in MST and Others (national  service  -  risk
    categories) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 443 (IAC).  He accepted that, in the
    light of MST and Others, the appellant faced a real risk of persecution
    or serious harm on return to Eritrea as a military deserter and, as the
    Upper Tribunal had recognised, where there was  such  a  risk:  "It  is
    highly likely that it will be persecution for a Convention reason based
    on imputed political opinion."

10. Consequently, Mr Richards invited me, having found a material error  of
    law, to allow the appeal on asylum grounds in  the  light  of  MST  and
    Others.

11. Mr James, who represented the Appellant, concurred in that outcome.

Decision

12. I accept Mr Richards's submissions that the inevitable outcome of  this
    appeal is that it should be allowed on asylum grounds in the  light  of
    MST and Others taken together with  the  facts  accepted  before  Judge
    Price set out at para 4 above.

13. In the light of the position taken by the  parties,  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal on  the  basis  that  its  decision
    involved the making of an error of law.

14. I remake  the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.


                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date



