






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
AA/08316/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                             Decision &     |
|On 25 August 2015                 |Reasons Promulgated                         |
|                                  |On 2 October 2015                           |
|                                  |                                            |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                           entry clearance officer

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Phuc Huu Le
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:         Mr Henry Ti, solicitor, Kesar and Co
For the Respondent:        Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Vietnam, born  on  17  July  1994.  His
      appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse his claim  for
      asylum in the UK was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mackenzie
      in a decision promulgated on 5 June 2015.


   2. The appellant appeals with leave from First-tier Tribunal Judge  Reid.
      She found that  it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge's  conclusions  on
      credibility are lacking in reasoning, notwithstanding her reference to
      the appellant's age and further, they are arguably based on hypothesis
      and speculation.


     The background to the appeal


   3. The appellant claimed to have been brought to the UK in May  2011.  At
      the beginning of July 2011 he escaped from a house where he was  being
      kept against his will. He claimed asylum on 15 August 2011.  That  was
      refused on 13 October 2011 but he was granted discretionary  leave  as
      an unaccompanied minor.


   4. In January 2012 he submitted  an  HPDL  in  which  he  relied  on  the
      information provided as  part  of  his  original  asylum  claim.  That
      included a screening interview that took place on 22  August  2011.  A
      detailed witness statement was produced on 12 September 2011.  He  was
      interviewed on 3 October 2011.


   5. Judge Mackenzie rejected the appellant's  account  that  he  had  been
      kidnapped in Vietnam and trafficked to the UK [45].  She  nevertheless
      considered his claim at its highest, namely whether,  if  returned  to
      Vietnam, he is likely to be the subject of adverse interest from  loan
      sharks, entitling him to relief under the Refugee Convention or  under
      the Human Rights Convention[45].


   6. She found that there was no reasonable degree of  likelihood  that  he
      would be unable to reapply for permanent residence  when  returned  to
      Vietnam, or that he would be unable to relocate internally. [51]


   7. She did not  find  that  the  appellant  would  be  unable  to  obtain
      protection in Vietnam were he to be traced by the loan sharks. She had
      regard to the country of information report dated 9 August 2013  which
      noted that police organisations  exist  at  provincial,  district  and
      local levels  and  are  subject  to  the  authority  of  the  peoples'
      committees at each level. At the commune level, it is common for guard
      forces composed of residents to assist the police [52].


   8. She also dismissed his Article 8 claim.


   9. At the error of law hearing on 25 August 2015 Mr Ti adopted and relied
      on his skeleton  argument  which  sets  out  13  grounds  relating  to
      credibility and the remaining six to risk on return.


  10. Mr Ti submitted with reference to paragraph 1(a) of the  grounds  that
      the Judge's finding  that  there  was  an  inconsistency  between  the
      appellant's answer in  the  screening  interview  and  his  subsequent
      statement was legally flawed, as there had been no  responsible  adult
      present. She therefore did  not  give  any  indication  that  she  had
      exercised any degree of caution before relying on his answer form that
      interview.


  11. However, when Ms Savage responded to the application, she pointed  out
      that at paragraph 4.2 of the screening interview it is  recorded  that
      the appellant in fact had his  legal  representative  present.  Mr  Ti
      accepted that he had failed to notice  that.  When  asked  whether  he
      wished to make any further submissions relating to his  contention  in
      paragraph 1(a) of his skeleton argument, he stated that he had nothing
      further to add.


  12. Mr Ti has contended in several of the grounds that  the  Judge  placed
      unreasonably  high  expectations  on  the   child;   furthermore,   no
      opportunity was given to the representative or the appellant  to  deal
      with any matter affecting the appellant's credibility that was  relied
      on by the Judge in her determination.  Moreover,  the  Judge  did  not
      apply anxious scrutiny, bearing  in  mind  the  appellant's  age,  his
      background, lack of sophistication and lack of education.


  13. Thus, at paragraph 1b, Mr  Ti  submitted  that  the  Judge  placed  an
      unreasonably high expectation on a child from a rural area  with  only
      five years' education to be precise in language - where he said "I" or
      "we" borrowed the money - in answer to a question.


  14. It is also contended that the Judge wrongly stated  that  it  was  not
      credible that the appellant was not given the opportunity to  disclose
      to a representative or to a Court what had happened to him.  That  was
      an error, as the appellant had in fact disclosed to a court  what  had
      happened to him. He stated that in response to  question  109  of  the
      asylum interview.


  15. Ms Savage accepted that although there had been an error by the  Judge
      in that respect, this did not  constitute  a  material  error  in  the
      circumstances.


  16. Mr Ti also criticised the Judge's credibility finding at [33] that  it
      was not credible that after the appellant was released from  court  he
      was briefly taken back to the detention centre and then released.  Nor
      did she find it credible that he was not given any documentation prior
      to release and that no conditions were  placed  on  his  release.  The
      French authorities would  have  had  no  doubt  that  this  was  human
      trafficking and she rejected  the  appellant's  account  that  he  was
      simply released onto the streets.


  17. Mr Ti submitted that those findings are flawed as the  Judge  did  not
      state the basis for her understanding or  expectation  of  the  French
      immigration procedures. It was therefore baseless and irrational.  She
      failed to give adequate explanations as to how  she  arrived  at  that
      finding.


  18. She also failed to note the description of events  by  the  appellant,
      which  she  found  not  to  be  credible,  was  consistent  with   the
      information described in  the  Human  Rights  Watch  report  "Lost  in
      Transit". The Judge therefore failed to take  into  consideration  the
      relevant material. Alternatively, her finding is unreasonable  in  the
      light of the evidence.


  19. Mr Ti also attacked the Judge's finding at [34] that the appellant was
      picked up by a car on release and brought to  a  house  where  he  was
      again held captive. She failed to give any explanation or reasons  for
      that finding as required in MK (Duty to Give Reasons) Pakistan  [2013]
      UKUT 641.


  20. He submitted that the Judge's finding at paragraph 34 that there was a
      contradiction between what the appellant said in his 2011 statement as
      opposed to what he said in his 2015 statement was flawed as the  Judge
      failed to give the appellant or his representative an  opportunity  to
      redress  the  apparent  inconsistency.  That  constituted   procedural
      unfairness.


  21. Nor did the Judge apply anxious scrutiny, having regard to the context
      of the appellant's experience. Nor was there any inconsistency between
      "agent" and "a man I thought was linked to the  people  who  kidnapped
      me"  [34].  Even  if  there  was,  the  distinction   is   minor   and
      understandable given the appellant's background. The  Judge's  finding
      is unreasonable as it places too high an expectation on the  precision
      of language on a 17 year old boy with only five years' education.


  22. Furthermore, the finding at [34] that it did not make sense  that  the
      appellant would get into the car  with  that  man  without  trying  to
      escape was flawed. No opportunity was given to  address  the  apparent
      implausibility.


  23. Mr Ti also joined issue with the Judge's finding in  this  respect  on
      the basis that it was plausible that a 16 year old from a  rural  area
      with a limited education who finds himself in a strange land where  he
      does not speak the language or know how to read road signs having been
      told of serious consequences to himself or his mother  of  any  escape
      attempt, would be compliant even with his captors. The Judge  did  not
      apply anxious scrutiny.


  24. Paragraphs 7 of his  skeleton  contend  that  there  was  insufficient
      anxious scrutiny given by the Judge, who also made a material error of
      fact as to the location of the appellant's  contact  with  the  French
      authorities and that she failed to give any  weight  to  the  relevant
      evidence contained in the HRW report. He also attacked the findings at
      [39] where the Judge found that it was not credible that  upon  escape
      from the house, the appellant did not  immediately  find  someone  who
      could help him such as by knocking on doors in the middle of the night
      to try to get such help the following day.


  25. He again contended as part of his grounds that  the  Judge  failed  to
      give the legal representative an opportunity to address that  apparent
      implausibility. He submitted in  the  alternative  that  in  fact  the
      appellant's conduct was plausible as he believed it was unlikely  that
      anyone would open the door to him  at  that  hour;  that  waiting  for
      someone to get out of bed would have allowed his pursuers to catch  up
      with him; that he did not speak any English and would  not  have  been
      able to explain the situation to anyone if they did answer  the  door,
      and that he feared contact with the UK police, which would  have  been
      the most likely outcome.


  26.  Accordingly  the  Judge  failed  to  apply  anxious   scrutiny   when
      considering whether there might have been plausible  explanations  for
      his actions and the finding is unreasonable.


  27. The Judge also rejected the evidence given by the  appellant  and  the
      Vietnamese couple regarding the circumstances in which they met. Mr Ti
      submitted that the rejection was based on flawed  reasoning.  Further,
      the appellant and his representative were not given an opportunity  to
      address the apparent implausibility. The Judge herself "admitted" that
      she did not know what persons from Vietnam would  consider  acceptable
      in terms of offering help to people in difficulty. She failed to  take
      into account that in many diaspora communities, people are willing  to
      take in and assist others from their own  community  or  origin.   The
      Judge thus failed  to  consider  material  information  or  failed  to
      explain why she dismissed the couple's  explanation  in  their  letter
      dated April 2015.


  28. Mr Ti submitted that the Judge's finding that it was not credible that
      the Vietnamese  couple  were  too  busy  to  access  support  for  the
      appellant for a period of weeks, was not supportable and was based  on
      an error of facts. That is because they have stated  in  their  letter
      that they were so busy they could not help him  claim  straight  away.
      There was a gradual process of gaining his trust and  getting  him  to
      agree to see a solicitor. He had an appointment within  two  weeks  of
      staying with them. They had to trust each other.


  29. Mr Ti submitted that the Judge's findings at [43] that the appellant's
      statement that he believes that if he is in the UK  his  mother  would
      better, cannot be reconciled with his concerns reagrding his  mother's
      health. It is not clear why they  are  irreconcilable  and  are  prima
      facie consistent. The findings are moreover irrational.


  30. Mr Ti submits that the finding, in paragraph 44 where the Judge  found
      it difficult to accept  that  the  appellant  did  not  make  more  of
      'pressing efforts' to contact his mother other than write two letters,
      is flawed. Again, this was not a matter put to the  appellant  or  his
      representative. Nor  did  the  Judge  have  information  on  when  the
      appellant's  solicitor  gave  him   the   contact   details   of   the
      organisation. It was irrational to conclude that he had not  acted  on
      that information fast enough. Moreover, just over  two  months  passed
      since the interview and it was not  unreasonable  during  that  period
      that the appellant needed some time  to  recover  from  his  traumatic
      experience. He then wrote a letter and waited a period  to  receive  a
      reply and, not having received  one,  wrote  a  second  letter  before
      deciding whether further  action  needed  to  be  taken.  The  Judge's
      findings are accordingly "unreasonable".


  31. It is also submitted that the Judge took into account his age and  the
      difficulties  he  might  have  when  asked  to   discuss   distressing
      experiences in the past, but failed to take into  account  aspects  of
      the appellant's background relevant to the assessment of  credibility,
      namely his limited education and that he is from a rural area, and  is
      less assertive, sophisticated or streetwise than urban youth.


  32. With regard to the risk of return, Mr Ti submitted that the  rejection
      by the Judge at  paragraph  [46]  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
      trafficked as five years had passed and the kidnappers  did  not  know
      the appellant's name and  the  information  of  his  escape  from  his
      captors was unlikely to have reached the loan sharks was made  without
      applying  anxious  scrutiny  '.....and  consider  that  he  would   be
      recognised by the loan sharks by his appearance and his return to live
      in his mother's house in their village'. Further, punishing people who
      escape acts as a deterrent in the business of a loan shark  and  human
      trafficker. The Judge's findings are accordingly irrational and it  is
      unsafe to 'assume' that there would be no adverse consequences on  his
      return.


  33. He submitted that the Judge's findings  at  [47]  and  [48]  that  the
      appellant would not  be  at  risk  of  persecution  because  there  is
      sufficient protection in Vietnam is flawed. The Judge failed to  apply
      anxious scrutiny in considering this evidence. Vietnam  is  a  Tier  2
      status in the US TiP report as a country which does not  fully  comply
      with minimum standards set, but are making efforts to bring themselves
      into compliance. Accordingly Vietnam  has  not  achieved  the  minimum
      standards of protection.


  34.  The  Judge's  reliance  on  a  UKVI's  conclusion  that  support  and
      protection  from  governmental  and  non  governmental   sources   are
      generally available and that internal relocation  is  often  a  viable
      option failed to apply anxious scrutiny without  considering  'how  it
      was arrived at or whether it  is  applicable  to  the  appellant'.  He
      submitted that the conclusion relates to victims  of  sex  trafficking
      and not to the appellant. The Judge failed to take into  consideration
      relevant material at  paragraph  3.11.8-13.  In  the  alternative,  he
      submitted  that  the  Judge's  finding  that  there   was   sufficient
      protection is perverse and against the weight of the evidence.


  35. He also criticised the Judge's "statement" that she did not find  that
      there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant would be
      unable to reapply for permanent residence in his home area or that  he
      would be unable to internally relocate within the country.  He  argued
      that the appellant cannot return to  his  home  area  as  he  will  be
      recognised by the loan sharks whom he fears. "Objective evidence"  was
      submitted as to serious difficulties  that  a  person  would  have  in
      registering with their local authorities in a new area  of  relocation
      and of the hardship that would result as a consequence of  failure  to
      register. She has failed to give good reasons for her belief.


  36. He referred to various passages from a Centre  for  Social  Protection
      report dated January 2011 in respect of social  protection  for  rural
      urban migrants in Vietnam. The Judge did not consider the evidence  as
      to the problems for such migrants.


  37. The finding that there would be a sufficiency of protection did not go
      on to consider whether the police force has the ability and  readiness
      to operate that machinery. Nor did  the  Judge  consider  whether  the
      police  infrastructure  offered   any   protection   to   victims   of
      trafficking; accordingly no anxious scrutiny was applied, resulting in
      an unreasonable conclusion in the light of the evidence.


  38. In reply, Ms Savage relied on the Rule 24 response. She submitted that
      the Judge had applied the correct burden and standard of proof [4] and
      [7-8]. The Judge had noted the appellant's age and the passage of time
      that had elapsed. He would have been over 17  years  when  he  claimed
      asylum, a number of months after entering the UK.


  39. Apart from the written response she submitted generally that the Judge
      had  made  findings  and  conclusions  relating  to  the   appellant's
      credibility which were open to her. On  a  proper  assessment  of  the
      decision, the Judge did not have unreasonably high expectations of the
      appellant. She did provide proper reasons at [33]  for  rejecting  the
      account given by the appellant  concerning  the  interception  of  the
      lorry and that he was simply released onto the street after his  court
      appearance even though the authorities must have been in no doubt that
      this was human trafficking.


  40. She referred to Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223. She submitted that  the
      Human Rights Watch report was considered, and the Judge  was  entitled
      to find at [35] that it did not assist him. She  maintained  that  the
      finding at [35] is in fact correct.


  41. With regard to paragraphs 4-12 of  the  grounds,  she  submitted  that
      these make similar points, namely, that the findings were not properly
      reasoned. She submitted  that  in  any  event  there  is  no  positive
      obligation on the Judge to put every point to  the  appellant  or  his
      representative as claimed. Here the Judge considered all the documents
      before her before arriving at the credibility findings.  The  findings
      had accordingly been properly open to her.


  42. She referred to and relied on other authorities including MK (Duty  to
      Give Reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC).


  43. Moreover, she submitted that the finding that it was  highly  unlikely
      that his escape would reach  the  attention  of  the  loan  sharks  in
      Vietnam was available on the evidence  and  was  properly  made.   The
      appellant's submissions regarding the findings at  [46]  amount  to  a
      disagreement with the finding of the Judge.


  44. With regard to the contentions regarding  sufficiency  of  protection,
      she submitted that there is a system in place. An appropriate  finding
      was made at [47-48] which was  open  to  her.  The  reports  were  all
      referred to and the conclusions were properly reasoned.


  45. She submitted regarding the submission at  paragraph  16  relating  to
      internal relocation, that the Judge had given proper consideration  to
      the objective evidence, which included the COI report  and  there  was
      nothing to show that this had not been taken into account.  Nor  would
      conditions be unduly harsh for the  appellant.  In  that  respect  she
      referred to paragraph 46 of the reasons for refusal, where there was a
      reference to Januzi [2006] UKHL 5. The finding at [51] was open to the
      Judge as well.


  46. The Judge has, she submitted, properly  considered  all  the  relevant
      reports  and  has  addressed  the  issues  concerning  sufficiency  of
      protection.


     Assessment


  47. I have had regard to the authorities relied on, including  MK,  supra.
      There the Upper Tribunal stated [11] that the depth and extent of  the
      duty to give reasons will inevitably vary from one  case  to  another.
      The duty is  contextually  sensitive.  Thus,  as  the  Upper  Tribunal
      observed in Shizad [2013] UKUT 35, a Tribunal's reasons  need  not  be
      extensive if its decision makes sense. There is also reference to  the
      well known authority of R (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.


  48. It is axiomatic that a determination must disclose clearly the reasons
      for a Tribunal's decision. If a Tribunal finds  oral  evidence  to  be
      implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
      weight whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the determination  and
      for such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement that  a
      witness was not to be believed or that  a  document  was  afforded  no
      weight is unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons. I  have
      also had regard to the Court of Appeal decision in Y v SSHD [2006].


  49. I have considered Mr Ti's submissions as to the  alleged  unreasonably
      high expectations that the Judge had.


  50. She has however expressly stated when assessing credibility, that  she
      has taken into account the fact that the appellant was  a  minor  when
      the asylum interviews were carried out in 2011.  She  has  also  taken
      into account the difficulties an appellant might have  when  asked  at
      the interview to discuss distressing experiences in the past. She  has
      considered the relevant UNHCR paragraphs in  the  handbook  containing
      relevant  guidance,  as  well  as  paragraphs  339I  to  339N  of  the
      Immigration Rules [28]. Moreover, she has had regard to  the  contents
      of the appellant's witness statement relating  to  his  early  life  -
      "when he was very young." [14]. She referred to the fact that he  went
      to school from 2000 to 2005 but had to stop going because  his  mother
      could no longer afford the fees. From then on he worked in the  market
      with his mother.


  51. Accordingly the Judge has had proper regard to the appellant's limited
      education.


  52. She has considered the letter from an anti-human  trafficking  project
      worker with Hesita contained within the appellant's bundle  [29].  The
      worker stated that she had been  the  appellant's  case  worker  since
      December 2014 and that she met him every fortnight  and  provided  him
      with support. Although the letter did not confirm what experience  the
      author had in dealing with victims of trafficking,  the  Judge  stated
      that  she  gave  careful  consideration  to  what  is  said  and   the
      description of the appellant's presentation.


  53. She went on to state that she had to consider all the evidence in  the
      round when reaching her conclusions on the appellant's credibility and
      in determining the appeal. Having considered his evidence  of  how  he
      was kidnapped from his home in Vietnam, taken to France  and  then  to
      the United Kingdom, she concluded that the core of his account  lacked
      credibility [30].


  54. I accordingly find the submission that the Judge has  not  taken  into
      account that she was dealing with a 16 year old from a rural area with
      limited education was not made out. Nor is the assertion in  paragraph
      14 of the grounds seeking permission, made out,  namely,  that  at  no
      point did the Judge give  any  indication  that  she  has  taken  into
      account the fact that he has had only five years of education; that he
      is from  a  rural  area  and  is  accordingly  less  sophisticated  or
      streetwise.


  55. The grounds have repeatedly contended that the Judge  failed  to  give
      the appellant or his representative an opportunity to address apparent
      implausibility or  inconsistency  findings,  resulting  in  procedural
      unfairness. I do not however find in the circumstances  of  this  case
      that there was such a far  reaching  duty  on  a  Judge  to  give  the
      "opportunity".


  56. If the Judge were subsequently to rely on evidence which had not  been
      before  her  during  the  hearing,  there  would  be  such  procedural
      unfairness were she to  make  findings  relevant  to  the  appellant's
      credibility which included reference to such evidence. However, it  is
      not asserted that the Judge relied on any  evidence  beyond  the  four
      corners of the bundles and the oral evidence produced at the hearing.


  57. It is also contended that the Judge failed to apply  anxious  scrutiny
      in considering whether there might be plausible explanations  for  the
      appellant's actions. Alternatively, it is contended that some  of  the
      findings relating to implausibility is unreasonable. I  have  set  out
      the  specific  contentions  in  considering  Mr  Ti's  very   detailed
      submissions.


  58. However, I accept Ms Savage's submission in respect  of  grounds  4-12
      that the Judge has taken into account those matters relevant to a fair
      assessment of his credibility including age, the elapse of  time,  his
      lack of sophistication and education when making her findings.  It  is
      also evident that the Judge has  considered  the  background  material
      placed before her when making those findings.


  59. The Judge's findings regarding the appellant's credibility  were  open
      to her on the evidence presented and she has provided  proper  reasons
      for  her  conclusions.  The  grounds  in  this  respect  amount  to  a
      disagreement with the findings reached by the Judge. However, I do not
      find that the findings are in any way flawed, perverse or irrational.


  60. With regard to the submissions  relating  to  the  issue  of  risk  on
      return, the Judge had earlier rejected the appellant's account that he
      had been kidnapped in Vietnam and trafficked to the UK.  Nevertheless,
      she considered the claim at its highest, namely whether he  is  likely
      to be the subject of adverse interest from  loan  sharks  such  as  to
      trigger concerns under the Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human  Rights
      Convention.


  61. In that respect, the Judge rejected the submission that if returned to
      his home area, the loan sharks would recognise him  as  one  of  their
      former victims and would target him again or would want to punish  him
      for having escaped them.


  62. She has given reasons for that finding, including the fact that it has
      been over five years since the appellant left Vietnam. It had not been
      suggested that those who kidnapped him even  knew  his  name.  In  any
      event, she had regard to the chronology offered by  the  appellant  in
      his witness statement that it would appear that different agents  were
      involved in the different stages of the journey to the UK and it would
      seem highly unlikely that  any  information  that  the  appellant  had
      escaped from his captors in the UK would have reached the  loan  shark
      or anyone acting on their behalf in Vietnam [46].


  63. She found that there would not  be  a  risk  of  the  appellant  being
      persecuted on his return having regard  to  the  Operational  Guidance
      Note on Vietnam dated 15 July 2014. Various extracts were provided  in
      the appellant's bundle. The  Judge  has  also  quoted  from  the  USSD
      Trafficking in Persons Report 2012. She had regard to the  conclusion,
      namely  that  support  and  protection  from  governmental   and   non
      -governmental sources  in  Vietnam  are  generally  available  to  the
      victims of trafficking. Internal relocation will  often  be  a  viable
      option for applicants who fear reprisals from traffickers upon  return
      to the country [47-48].


  64. She accordingly found that there was some system  in  place.  She  has
      referred to the relevant parts of the Home Office Operational Guidance
      Note. She has also had regard to the  Country  of  Origin  information
      report dated 9 August 2013 with regard to those who have  been  absent
      from their permanent place of  residence  for  more  than  six  months
      without registering their  temporary  absence  and  without  plausible
      reasons  will  have  their  names  crossed  out  from  the   household
      registration book. They are required to re-apply for registration when
      they return.


  65. In  that  respect,  the  Judge  stated  that  she  has  given  careful
      consideration to the relevant background evidence and found that there
      was no reasonable degree of likelihood that  the  appellant  would  be
      unable to re-apply for permanent residence when returned  or  that  he
      would not be able to internally relocate within the country [51].


  66.  Whilst  acknowledging  the  potential  problems  that  would  present
      themselves to the appellant, she found having regard to  the  evidence
      adduced, that he would be able to re-apply for registration.


  67. She  has  also  had  regard  to  sufficiency  of  protection  and  has
      considered the sources produced and relied on by both parties [52]. In
      the circumstances, taking the appellant's claim at  its  highest,  she
      did not find that he would be unable to obtain protection  in  Vietnam
      were he in fact to be traced by the loan sharks. She found that police
      organisations were shown to exist at provincial,  district  and  local
      levels and are subject to the authority of the people's committees  at
      each level. At the commune  level,  it  is  common  for  guard  forces
      composed of residents to assist the police [52].


  68. In summary the Judge has properly directed herself with regard to  the
      appellant's  age,  level  of  sophistication,  lack   of   educational
      background and the fact that he comes from a rural area. She has shown
      that she has given anxious scrutiny to his evidence, having taken into
      account various factors referred to including the report from the Anti-
      Human Trafficking Project worker as to the appellant's presentation.


  69. The relevant findings by the Judge were supported on the evidence  and
      documentation presented and are accordingly sustainable.


  70. Finally, the Judge has properly considered whether the appellant faces
      any risk on return on the  basis  of  being  the  subject  of  adverse
      interest from the  loan  sharks.  She  has  also  taken  into  account
      problems  relating  to  re-applying  for  registration  and   internal
      relocation  in  Vietnam.  She  has  also   properly   considered   the
      availability of protection to the appellant based on the documentation
      relied on.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
      making of any material error on a point of law. It  shall  accordingly
      stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed                             Dated: 30 September 2015


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

