
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08054/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 3 July 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                         MOHAMMAD NASIR MOHAMMAD ZAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:       Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by Neil Barnes,
Solicitor
For the Respondent:      Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan whose date of  birth  has  been
   recorded as 1 January 1990.

2)  The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  for   reasons
   explained in a letter dated 17 August 2012.

3) First-tier Tribunal Judge Debra Clapham dismissed the appellant's  appeal
   for reasons explained in her  determination  promulgated  on  19  October
   2012.



4) These are the grounds of appeal  on  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted
   permission:

   It is respectfully submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  (hereinafter
   referred to as "the Tribunal") erred by failing to allow the  appellant's
   appeal and failing to grant permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
   The Tribunal accepted the appellant was an Afghan national and had worked
   for the British Army and the US Army as an interpreter (see paragraph 58)
   but did not accept the remainder of his account of being targeted by  the
   Taleban and found he would not be at real risk on return.  In  particular
   the Tribunal erred:


               i) in assessing whether  the  appellant  is  at  real  risk,
                  having accepted he  worked  as  an  interpreter  for  the
                  British and US Army.  At paragraph 67  the  Tribunal  has
                  regard  to  country  information  relating  to  incidents
                  against interpreters in Afghanistan.  The Tribunal  finds
                  that those incidents occurred when the interpreters  were
                  actually working for the coalition forces and  given  the
                  time between the appellant's resignation and his time  in
                  the UK, it seems that he did not come to the attention of
                  the Taleban during that period.  The Tribunal also  finds
                  that he was able to live in his  home  area  without  any
                  problems.  However, even if the  Tribunal's  findings  in
                  relation  to  not  believing  that  the   appellant   was
                  previously targeted by  the  Taleban  are  accepted,  the
                  Tribunal  has  reached  a  finding  on  prospective  risk
                  without having regard to  paragraph  86  of  AK  (Article
                  159c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  163  (IAC)   which
                  indicates the UNHCR risk profiles and inter  alia,  those
                  include those individuals associated with,  or  perceived
                  as  supportive  of,  the  Afghan   Government   and   the
                  international  community,  including  the   International
                  Security Assistance Force (ISAF), such as the  appellant.
                  The Tribunal has reached the finding on prospective  risk
                  without having regard to paragraph 43 of AK, supra  where
                  it is noted that individuals were abducted for  suspected
                  of spying for the government.  The Tribunal has reached a
                  finding on whether there would be a risk to the appellant
                  without having regard to  the  fact  that  the  appellant
                  would not be required to lie about his background  either
                  on return to his home are or were he to exercise internal
                  flight.  In those circumstances there is a real risk that
                  his previous employment would be found out and  he  would
                  be at a real risk.   The  Tribunal  has  thus  reached  a
                  finding on prospective  risk  without  having  regard  to
                  relevant factors.  If the Tribunal has  regard  to  those
                  factors the it has failed to supply adequate  reasons  as
                  to why the appellant would not be at real risk on  return
                  in light of those factors;


              ii) in not accepting the Taleban would continue  to  threaten
                  the appellant rather than just  kill  him  (at  paragraph
                  64).  However, the  Tribunal  has  reached  that  finding
                  without taking into account the  country  information  in
                  AK, supra.  There  is  no  indication  that  the  Taleban
                  operate in a particular modus operandi (see  for  example
                  AK, supra at paragraph 48) and the fact that the  Taleban
                  did not kill the appellant  should  not  be  taken  as  a
                  reason for doubting the appellant's claim when viewed  in
                  the context of the information  contained  in  a  Country
                  Guidance case.  If the Tribunal has had  regard  to  that
                  factor then the Tribunal has failed  to  supply  adequate
                  reasons as to what impact that had when  it  reached  the
                  finding;


             iii) at paragraph 62.  The Tribunal has failed to  assess  the
                  appellant's position in relation  to  initially  treating
                  the threats as a joke but  subsequently  discussing  them
                  with his Commander.  The Tribunal  finds  that  the  fact
                  that  the  appellant  has  been  unable  to  obtain   any
                  documentary evidence from his  commanding  officer  seems
                  incredible. Firstly the Tribunal has erred by effectively
                  looking for corroboration (see Kasolo  13190).   Secondly
                  even  if  the  Tribunal   is   entitled   to   look   for
                  corroboration, it has applied the wrong standard of  this
                  being "incredible" rather than whether such corroborative
                  material   could   reasonably   be   obtained   (see   ST
                  (Corroboration-Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT00119).    In
                  that regard the Tribunal has overlooked  the  appellant's
                  explanation in his statement that he  did  not  have  the
                  contact details for Captain Pride or the other people who
                  knew  him.   If  the  Tribunal  has  had  regard  to  the
                  appellant's statement, the Tribunal has  failed  to  give
                  adequate reasons as to the impact this  evidence  had  on
                  its finding.  The Tribunal has compounded this  error  by
                  proceeding on a speculative basis that records  would  be
                  kept  in  relation  to  the  conversations  between   the
                  appellant and his Commanding Officer;


              iv) by arriving at an irrational finding at paragraph  63  in
                  finding that the documentation  itself  is  self-serving.
                  This is irrational as the Tribunal could say  that  about
                  any evidence from an asylum seeker.  The Tribunal do  not
                  point to anything that would indicate the  documents  are
                  not genuine per se.  Further the Tribunal  has  erred  by
                  only looking at the documents after coming to a  negative
                  credibility  finding  at  paragraphs  60  and  61.    The
                  Tribunal has failed to look at the documents in the round
                  (see Kasolo, supra; Mibanga v Secretary of State for  the
                  Home Department [2005] INLR 377);


               v) by reaching an irrational finding at paragraph 65, namely
                  criticising the appellant for returning home to  see  his
                  family before he left.  The Tribunal has erred by failing
                  to place this action in context, namely it  was  a  brief
                  family  visit  (see  second  page  of   the   appellant's
                  statement).   There  is   nothing   irrational   in   the
                  appellant's actions and the  Tribunal  has  erred  in  so
                  finding;


              vi) by applying in practice too high a  standard  by  judging
                  the appellant's actions as to their incredibility  rather
                  than on the lower  standard  of  reasonably  likely  (see
                  paragraphs 62 and 64);


             vii) that the foregoing findings  of  the  Tribunal  would  be
                  undermined by the foregoing and accordingly the  Tribunal
                  has erred by failing to grant permission to appeal.

5) Further to ground (i), Mr Byrne submitted  that  AK  establishes  that  a
   person who has been employed as an interpreter by the UK or USA Forces in
   Afghanistan falls into a particular category of risk in terms of  Article
   3 of  the  ECHR  and  of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Refugee  Qualification
   Directive, or alternatively for purposes of Article 15(c) is at  the  top
   of a "sliding scale".  Paragraph 86 of AK quotes a list of specific  risk
   profiles as  established  by  the  UNHCR  eligibility  guidelines  of  17
   December 2010. Mr Byrne referred further to  the  guidelines  themselves,
   although these  were  not  drawn  to  the  attention  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.  (Mr Matthews accepted that this  material  is  in  the  public
   domain, and took no objection.)  Mr Byrne submitted that pages 7 and 8 of
   the guidelines explain what lies  behind  the  potential  risk  profiles,
   making it clear that civilians associated with or perceived as supportive
   of the coalition forces include interpreters.  Mr Byrne returned to AK at
   paragraph 190 onwards, where the Tribunal attaches considerable weight to
   the UNHCR guidelines.  The appellant as an interpreter could fall into  a
   risk category, without more.  The judge failed to distinguish between  an
   ordinary civilian  and  a  person  within  one  of  the  risk  categories
   recognised in the guidelines and in AK.

6) Turning to ground (ii), it was submitted that  there  had  been  evidence
   that repetition of threats from the  Taliban  was  typical  of  how  they
   operated.  It should not have been treated as adverse that they continued
   to issue threats rather than taking real measures against the  appellant.



7) As to ground (iii), Mr Byrne said there was error by treating absence  of
   corroboration as going  to  credibility.   It  was  not  clear  what  the
   Tribunal had in mind at paragraph 62,  although  it  may  have  been  the
   Tribunal expected that some  record  could  have  been  obtained  of  the
   appellant disclosing to his commanding officer the threats  made  against
   him.  Mr Byrne relied on ST at paragraph 15:

    ... an appeal must be determined on the basis of the evidence  produced
    but the weight to be attached to oral evidence may  be  affected  by  a
    failure to produce other evidence in support.


   The matter was one of weight and not one of credibility.  In  any  event,
   the evidence which the judge appeared to have in mind was not evidence of
   a nature which could reasonably be expected to have been available to the
   appellant.  The judge erred by drawing an adverse credibility  conclusion
   from inability to produce evidence of this nature.

8) On ground (iv) representatives agreed that the  documents  to  which  the
   judge refers at paragraph 63 are the police letter, two  warning letters,
   and translations, pages 5-10 in the appellant's inventory in  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.  Mr Byrne submitted that the judge gave no good reason for
   rejecting these as "self-serving", and that no reasonable Tribunal  would
   have dismissed the documents for such reasons as were given.

9) Mr Byrne had nothing to add to paragraphs (v) - (vii) of the grounds.

10) Finally, Mr Byrne submitted that a decision  should  be  substituted  in
   the appellant's favour under reference to AK on the  basis  that  it  was
   sufficient to prove that he had been an  interpreter  for  the  coalition
   forces; alternatively, a fresh hearing should be fixed in the  First-tier
   Tribunal, at which further background  material  could  be  produced  and
   fresh findings reached on the facts in dispute.

11) Mr Matthews pointed  out  that  the  appellant  ceased  to  work  as  an
   interpreter for the coalition forces in September 2011, 7  months  before
   he left Afghanistan.  The judge had not failed to  consider  whether  the
   appellant's former occupation as an interpreter placed him at risk.   She
   addressed that central issue in reaching her conclusions at paragraph 67.
    The UNHCR guidelines did include a history of  assisting  the  coalition
   forces as a risk factor, and that was recognised in AK,  but  nothing  in
   the case suggested that past employment as an  interpreter  automatically
   placed a person in any category of risk.  The judge correctly  identified
   that as an issue of fact to be determined in each  case.   The  appellant
   had ceased to be an interpreter.  The judge had not given credit  to  his
   claims of recent threats, but rather found that the Taleban had shown  no
   interest in him.  Her finding that he was not at risk due to a profession
   he no longer engaged in was properly open to her and properly  explained.



12) On ground (ii) Mr Matthews submitted that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
   conclude at paragraph 64 that if the  Taleban  genuinely  had  a  hostile
   interest in the appellant and had tracked him down to Kabul,  they  would
   have done something about it rather than continuing to issue  threats  on
   which they did not follow through.  A finding  of  that  nature  in  this
   particular case was not inconsistent  with  background  evidence  of  the
   Taliban's use of threats as a general way of intimidating the people.

13) Mr Matthews noted that ground  (iii)  narrates  the  Tribunal's  finding
   that the appellant was not credible in saying that he  initially  treated
   such threats as a joke.  The ground did not criticise that  finding,  and
   it was one properly open to the Judge.  Mr  Matthews  accepted  that  the
   appellant provided evidence that he was employed as an interpreter by the
   coalition forces.  The judge's point may not have been ideally expressed,
   but in essence it seemed to be that  the  appellant  had  given  no  good
   explanation of why he would be unable  to  resume  contact  with  Captain
   Pride, his commanding officer  in  the  USA  Forces.   That  was  not  an
   unreasonable expectation in the circumstances.  It arose  from  what  the
   appellant was recorded as saying in cross-examination  at  paragraphs  43
   and 44 of the determination.  The judge narrated the appellant's  answers
   that he had no contact details, and that he was not allowed to engage  in
   any further contact.  That was plainly unlikely.  The judge was  entitled
   to take into account that the  appellant  had  no  good  explanation  for
   failing to bring this item of evidence.

14) On ground (iv), Mr Matthews referred to  the  two  threatening  letters,
   and noted that these do appear to date from the  period  of  the  alleged
   threats against the appellant.  The extract police report also related to
   an incident of that period, although it was obtained significantly later.
    Mr Matthews accepted that the judge's view that  the  documentation  was
   self-serving  was  not  clearly  explained,  but  he  submitted  that   a
   conclusion on the documents could only be reached in the context  of  all
   the other evidence, and that the judge had been entitled to reach adverse
   conclusion for all the reasons given.

15)  Finally, Mr Matthews observed that Mr Byrne had not  sought  to  expand
   upon paragraphs (v) - (vii) of the grounds, and submitted that  they  did
   not advance the appellant's position.

16) Mr Byrne in response said that if it were to be accepted that  paragraph
   63 on the validity of the documentation is not well reasoned, that  would
   be a central error.  If a judge took the view that an appellant  produced
   unreliable documentation on a matter crucial to his case, that was  bound
   to colour all the other findings, and an error in that respect  would  by
   itself justify a fresh hearing.

17) I reserved my determination.

18) AK does not support the proposition that anyone who  has  worked  as  an
   interpreter  for  the  coalition  forces  is  ipso  facto   entitled   to
   protection, in any category.

19) The alternative submission that such an occupation lies towards the  top
   end of the scale of potential risk is more soundly based.   However,  the
   judge had that in mind when she asked at paragraph 67:

      ... The  question  is,  does  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was  an
   interpreter, as accepted, [put him] at risk?


20) The judge was entitled to reject the possibility that the Taleban  would
   continue to threaten the appellant rather than just kill  him.  The  fact
   that the Taleban operates in part through continued threats does not rule
   out such a conclusion in a case like this, where an appellant by his  own
   account was a significant target in his own right, not just a subject  of
   general intimidation.

21) The appellant produced  reliable  confirmation  that  he  worked  as  an
   interpreter for the coalition forces.  At  first  sight,  an  expectation
   that he could also produce some evidence  of  reporting  threats  to  his
   commanding officer goes rather high.  On closer examination, however, the
   judge was entitled to reject the appellant's evidence that there might be
   difficulty in communicating with his commanding officer.   That  went  to
   the heart of his claim.  The fact that he gave a feeble explanation could
   rationally count against him.

22) A fine distinction cannot be drawn between a consideration going to  the
   weight to be given to an aspect of the evidence and a consideration going
   to credibility.  The overall evaluation of the claim about  threats  from
   the Taleban was a matter of credibility.

23) It is correct that the judge had no very strong reason for  finding  the
   police report and threatening letters to be self-serving. However,  there
   is little that any judge could make of these  documents,  other  than  to
   find them reliable or not in the light of her other  conclusions.   I  do
   not find that ground (iv) discloses any error of reasoning  or  of  legal
   approach.

24) As to ground (v), the Tribunal was entitled to found on the  appellant's
   delay in leaving Afghanistan and on his return to the family home.

25) Paragraphs (vi) and (vii) of the grounds disclose nothing of substance.

26) Reading the determination fairly and as a whole, it adequately  explains
   to the appellant why his evidence has been found wanting.

27) The making of the decision did not involve the making of any error on  a
   point of law, such as to require the determination to be set aside, so it
   shall stand.

28) No anonymity order has been requested or made.

                               [pic]
                                4 July 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal

