
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/08293/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                  |     Determination         |
|                                       |Promulgated                |
|On: 11th May 2015                      |     On: 27th May 2015     |
|                                       |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                     PC
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Khan, Counsel instructed by David Wyld & Co


For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Nigeria date of birth 10th April  1976.   She
appeals  with  permission  the  decision  of   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
Youngerwood to dismiss her appeal against a decision to remove her from  the
United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  That
decision followed from the Respondent's rejection of the Appellant's  asylum
claim.

The basis of the Appellant's claim had been that she feared that  her  young
daughter would face a  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  Female  Genital
Mutilation (FGM) if they were returned together to Nigeria.  The  Respondent
had accepted that the family were from  a  part  of  Nigeria  where  FGM  is
widely practised, and indeed that the Appellant herself had been  cut  by  a
paternal aunt when she was younger.  The Respondent  was  however  satisfied
that the Nigerian authorities were able  to  offer  a  sufficient  level  of
protection and that the Appellant  could  avoid  her  family  by  going  and
living somewhere else in Nigeria.  It was noted that the Appellant would  be
removed to Nigeria with her daughter and partner, a failed asylum seeker  of
Nigerian nationality.

The First-tier Tribunal accepted the concession made by the  Respondent  and
went further. It was accepted that the Appellant's daughter would  currently
be at risk in their home village and that in such  a  rural  location  there
would there be no protective  presence  of  the  Nigerian  state.   The  key
issues remained whether there was a sufficiency  of  protection  outside  of
the home area, and whether the family could be reasonably expected to  avail
themselves of an internal flight alternative.

In  respect  of  protection  the  determination  notes  that  the   Nigerian
government have taken substantial measures to combat FGM; this  chimed  with
the Appellant's own evidence that in her  experience  people  in  Lagos  who
wanted their daughters cut were afraid of  the  police  so  would  take  the
children into the countryside to have the  procedure  done.   It  was  found
that the Nigerian authorities are willing to act.  If there was a  low  rate
of reported cases being prosecuted the  reason  for  that  is  unclear,  but
taking all of the evidence in the round  the  Tribunal  was  satisfied  that
there is a sufficiency of protection in the major cities of Nigeria.

In addressing internal flight the determination notes  that  Nigeria  has  a
large population and that there is freedom of  movement  with  the  country.
The size of the country meant that it would be difficult for, for  instance,
family members to track the Appellant and her child down. The Appellant  had
relied  on  her  subjective  fear  of  sorcery  as  a  reason  why  internal
relocation would be unduly harsh, but the Tribunal did not  accept  this  as
an objectively well- founded risk.  Taking into account the presence of  the
Appellant's partner the Tribunal could find no  basis  for  concluding  that
internal flight would be unduly harsh.

The appeal was therefore dismissed. The  grounds  of  appeal  are  that  the
Tribunal erred in the following material respects:

        i) The question of the "willingness" of the Nigerian authorities to
           act against FGM "irrelevant". The question is whether  there  is
           or is not a sufficiency of protection;


       ii) In assessing internal flight the Tribunal  has  failed  to  take
           into account relevant background material including the US State
           Department evaluation of the risk posed by Boko Haram,  and  the
           evidence in COIR relating to lone women.

No Error of Law

These grounds are  based  on  two  fundamental  misapprehensions  about  the
accepted evidence in this case.

The first is that the Appellant is a lone woman who  would,  without  family
support, be facing severe socio-economic deprivation and stigma if she  were
forced to try and raise a child alone in  a  strange  Nigerian  city.   Were
those the facts of the case we might well have found the  reasoning  in  the
decision to be inadequate. Those are not however the facts.  The  Respondent
proposes to remove this family - including  the  Appellant's  partner  -  to
Nigeria together. She will not therefore be alone. We  were  not  shown  any
evidence to support the proposition that internal  flight  would  be  unduly
harsh in those circumstances.

Second the complaint made in respect of  the  analysis  of  "sufficiency  of
protection" completely overlooks the fact that there has  been  no  positive
finding  of  fact  that  the  Appellant  requires  any  protection  in,  for
instance, Lagos. She is not at risk in any part of Nigeria  other  than  her
home area. The evidence was that it would not be possible for her family  to
find her.  It is therefore hard to see where any critique of the  Tribunal's
analysis could lead. As for the contention that willingness is  "irrelevant"
we reject that interpretation of the test.  Protection  must  be  effective,
but part of the analysis must be whether the authorities  are  willing,  for
instance, to implement their own laws. As  Judge  Youngerwood  observes,  it
was the Appellant's own evidence that people in Lagos  are  aware  that  the
police will act to prevent FGM and for that reason take their children  into
the countryside when the time comes.  The Tribunal found  that  evidence  to
be consistent with the background material before it.


Decisions

The determination contains no error of law and it is upheld.

In view of the subject matter of this appeal and that the  protection  claim
concerned a minor, we are satisfied, having had regard to  Rule  14  of  the
Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the   Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders that it  would  be  appropriate
to make a direction for anonymity and do so in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
         family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
         Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings".




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               20th May 2015
