
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08385/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4th September 2017                  |On 15th September 2017              |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown of Counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson
                    & Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision  of  Judge  Lambert  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 4th May 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a male Sudanese citizen born [ ] 1993.  He arrived  in
    the United Kingdom illegally on 14th November 2014 and claimed  asylum,
    claiming to be a member of the Berti  tribe  originating  from  Darfur.
    The asylum and human rights application was refused on  13th  May  2015
    and the appeal was heard on 26th April 2017.

 3. The FtT heard evidence from the Appellant and a witness, and  concluded
    that their evidence was not credible.  The FtT found that the Appellant
    had failed to establish that he is a member of the Berti tribe, or that
    he has participated in any political activities in  the  UK  likely  to
    bring him to the  attention  of  the  Sudanese  authorities.   The  FtT
    concluded that the Appellant would not be at risk if returned to  Sudan
    and his appeal was therefore dismissed.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    He relied upon three grounds.

 5. Firstly it was contended that the FtT  had  erred  in  considering  the
    expert report of Mr  Peter  Verney.   The  FtT  at  paragraph  9.5  had
    described the report as providing "lukewarm support for the Appellant's
    case" by comparison with other reports from the same expert, considered
    by the FtT in other cases.  It was contended that the FtT had erred  in
    law because the Appellant was not given an opportunity  to  assess  and
    compare those other reports.

 6. The Appellant should have been provided with those reports in order  to
    be given a fair opportunity to counter what the FtT  had  stated  about
    the language used by the expert.  Because the Appellant  had  not  been
    provided with those reports, unfairness had arisen.  It  was  contended
    that the FtT had not engaged with the content of the expert report, and
    had provided inadequate reasons for rejecting the expert evidence.

 7. Secondly it was contended that the FtT had erred in  law  by  providing
    inadequate reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    witness.  At paragraph 9.9 the FtT noted that no explanation  had  been
    offered as to why it had taken until March 2017 for  the  Appellant  to
    indicate to either the Home Office, the expert, or his own  solicitors,
    his connections with the witness, and produce a witness statement.   It
    was submitted that there may be a "whole number of reasons"  for  this,
    and the FtT should have put this point to the Appellant and his witness
    at the hearing  and  failure  to  do  so  had  resulted  in  procedural
    unfairness.

 8. Thirdly it was contended that the FtT had erred in law  by  failing  to
    have regard to material evidence, namely the Appellant's  responses  in
    his interview about his ethnic origin.  In  his  asylum  interview  the
    Appellant was asked questions about the Berti tribe,  and  his  answers
    appeared to be correct.  The Respondent  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter had made little or no  assessment  of  these  answers.   In  the
    absence of any suggestion that the Appellant's answers were  wrong,  it
    was incumbent upon the FtT to have regard to those answers when forming
    a view as to whether the Appellant was a member of the Berti tribe.  It
    was not permissible for the FtT simply to ignore  that  evidence.   The
    evidence should have been properly evaluated  and  either  accepted  or
    rejected with adequacy of reasoning being provided.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Saffer of the FtT and  I  set
    out below the reasons for granting permission;

         "3.  It is arguable that there was inadequate consideration of  the
             evidence arising  from  his  interview  regarding  his  tribal
             affiliation whose accuracy appears  to  be  unchallenged,  and
             that generalisations on the expert's report may have  unfairly
             affected the weight to be attached to it.  All grounds may  be
             argued."

10. Following the grant of  permission  the  Respondent  did  not  lodge  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  Directions were issued that  there  should  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. Mr Bates confirmed that there had been no rule 24 response but that the
    application was opposed.

12. Mr Brown relied upon the grounds upon which permission  to  appeal  had
    been granted.  With reference to the witness, Mr Brown  submitted  that
    notification that the witness was to be called  to  give  evidence  had
    been given to the Tribunal and the Respondent's Presenting Officer at a
    hearing on 2nd November 2016  and  a  handwritten  statement  from  the
    witness submitted at that hearing.

13. With reference to the Appellant's answers about the Berti tribe in  his
    asylum interview, Mr Brown pointed out that  questions  71-136  of  the
    interview related to the Appellant's ethnicity, and  the  FtT  had  not
    engaged with the answers.

14. Mr Bates submitted that the FtT had not erred in law.   With  reference
    to the first ground, Mr Bates submitted that the FtT had made a passing
    reference to other  reports,  but  had  given  sufficient  reasons  for
    finding that the expert report  in  this  case,  did  not  support  the
    Appellant's case.

15. With reference to the second ground, Mr  Bates  pointed  out  that  the
    witness statement made by the witness, contained within the Appellant's
    bundle, is dated 27th March 2017.

16. Mr Bates submitted that the grounds upon which permission to appeal was
    granted, did not disclose any material error of law, and  the  FtT  had
    given adequate reasons for findings made.

17. By way of response, Mr Brown referred to paragraph 256  of  the  expert
    report in which the expert indicated that the Appellant  "has  given  a
    moderately detailed account of his experiences which is coherent."   It
    was not clear without seeing other reports whether  this  was  language
    normally used by the expert.  The same applied to the expert's  comment
    at paragraph 264 of his report, "in my opinion,  his  fear  of  adverse
    treatment if returned to Sudan may be justified."

18. With reference to the second ground of appeal, Mr Brown submitted  that
    the FtT was factual wrong at paragraph 9.9 in concluding  that  it  had
    taken until March 2017 for the Appellant to make known  his  connection
    with his witness.  Mr Brown noted that Mr Bates in his oral submissions
    had little to say in relation to the third ground of appeal.

19. Mr Brown submitted that the FtT decision was flawed by material  errors
    of law, and should be set aside and the appeal remitted to the  FtT  to
    be heard afresh.

20. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. Dealing firstly with Ground 1 I do not find that any  unfairness  arose
    from the description of the FtT at paragraph 9.5 of Mr Verney's  expert
    report.  I do not  accept  that  in  view  of  the  FtT  comments,  the
    Appellant must be provided with the other reports considered by the FtT
    in other cases.  The relevant findings made by the FtT are set  out  in
    paragraph 9.5.  The FtT repeats some phrases made by the expert in  the
    report.  The FtT did not find, having considered that report,  that  it
    supported the Appellant's claim to be a member of the Berti tribe.

22. At paragraph 9.6 the FtT made specific reference to  paragraph  261  of
    the expert report in which Mr Verney comments  that  it  is  relatively
    easy for an individual to obtain sufficient information to be  able  to
    demonstrate knowledge of a tribe, and that therefore it is more helpful
    to have peer group recognition.

23. In my view it is clear from reading paragraphs 9.5 and  9.6,  that  the
    FtT did not find that  the  expert  report  supported  the  Appellant's
    claim, and the FtT complied with the principles in Budhathoki  (reasons
    for decision) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) by providing adequate reasons for
    the conclusions reached.  I do not find merit in  the  submission  that
    the FtT did not engage with the content of  the  report.   This  ground
    does not disclose an error of law.  The FtT has not acted unfairly.

24. Dealing with the second ground and the finding  by  the  FtT  that  the
    Appellant's witness was not credible, it  is  common  ground  that  the
    statement produced by the witness was dated 27th March  2017,  and  the
    FtT did not err in pointing that out.  However it  is  clear  from  the
    Tribunal file that at a previous hearing on 2nd November 2016,  details
    of the  witness  were  given  to  the  Tribunal  and  the  Respondent's
    Presenting Officer, and  at  that  hearing  a  very  brief  handwritten
    witness  statement,  dated  2nd  November  2016  was  submitted.   This
    statement confirmed the view of the witness that the  Appellant  was  a
    member of the Berti tribe.   Therefore  if,  which  is  not  absolutely
    clear, the FtT was suggesting that details of the witness had only been
    produced in March 2017, that is factually incorrect.

25. I do not, however, find any material error of law in this ground.  This
    is because at paragraph 9.8 the FtT considers the evidence given by the
    witness, and notes the significant discrepancies between his  evidence,
    and that of the Appellant as to the circumstances in which they claimed
    to  have  last  met  in  Sudan.   The  FtT  makes  it  clear  that  the
    discrepancies are significant, and as a result, the FtT was entitled to
    find that the evidence was not credible.  Adequate reasons  were  given
    for this finding, and this ground discloses no material error of law.

26. Turning to the third ground, the answers given by the Appellant in  his
    asylum interview, in relation to membership of the  Berti  tribe,  were
    provided to Mr Verney.  It is clear from Mr  Verney's  report  that  he
    received a complete copy of the Appellant's  asylum  interview.   Those
    answers were therefore considered by Mr Verney  when  he  prepared  his
    report.  The FtT did not comment specifically upon the answers given by
    the Appellant in his asylum interview,  but  that  is  not  a  material
    error, because those answers had been considered by the expert  in  his
    report, which was considered by the FtT.  The expert conducted his  own
    detailed interview with the  Appellant,  and  the  FtT  considered  the
    conclusions reached by the expert at paragraphs 256-264 of his  report,
    and recorded some of those conclusions at paragraphs 9.5 and 9.6.   The
    FtT notes Mr Verney's conclusion that the  Appellant  has  provided  "a
    moderately detailed account", and "his answers were partly although not
    wholly correct" and "reasonable  albeit  limited  with  regard  to  his
    ethnic identity."  It is not  therefore  the  case  that  the  FtT  has
    disregarded the answers given by the Appellant  when  questioned  about
    his ethnicity.  No error of law is disclosed by this ground.

27. What has not been challenged by the Appellant is  the  FtT  finding  at
    paragraph 9.4 that the Appellant had provided  no  detail  as  to  what
    injuries he suffered which caused him  to  be  hospitalised  for  eight
    days, which was the reason why he failed to report to  the  authorities
    and subsequently stated that he had to flee from his home.  The FtT was
    entitled, and did take this  into  account  when  reaching  an  adverse
    credibility finding.

28. Also not challenged was paragraph 9.7, in which  the  FtT  gave  cogent
    reasons for rejecting and placing no  weight  upon  evidence  from  the
    Berti community in the UK dated 25th May 2016.

29. The FtT has considered the  evidence  in  the  round,  has  taken  into
    account all material evidence, and provided adequate  reasons  for  the
    conclusions reached.  It is clear that  the  Appellant  disagrees  with
    those conclusions, but the grounds upon which permission to appeal  was
    granted, do not disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose an error of law such that it  must
be set aside.  I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.



Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the  Appellant  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.
This direction is made because  the  Appellant  has  made  an  international
protection claim and is made pursuant to rule 14 of The  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed                              Date 7th September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  The appeal is dismissed.  There  is  no
fee award.






Signed                              Date 7th September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

