
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08144/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10 June 2015                      |On 15 June 2015                      |
|Prepared on 11 June 2015             |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    S. H.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves
law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally on 14  May  2014
         and was arrested in doing so. He claimed asylum the following  day,
         on the basis that he had left Iran illegally and that he was wanted
         by the authorities as one opposed to them  politically  and  as  an
         apostate.

      2.  That  application  was  refused  on  16  September  2014,  and  in
         consequence a removal decision was made in  relation  to  him.  The
         Appellant  appealed  to  the  Tribunal  against  those  immigration
         decisions and his appeal was heard on 21 November 2014, and it  was
         dismissed by decision of Judge Clough, promulgated  on  3  December
         2014.

      3.  The  Appellant  duly  applied  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal, and that application  was  granted  by  Judge
         Lambert on 13 January 2015.

      4. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Apostate?

      5. The Respondent did not dispute that the Appellant was raised  as  a
         member of the Muslim faith, and that he had  practised  that  faith
         into adulthood. The Respondent did not accept  that  the  Appellant
         had undertaken any genuine conversion to Christianity, but  by  the
         date of the hearing he had been both baptised  and  confirmed  into
         the Christian faith by  an  evangelical  church  in  Stockton;  the
         Stockton Parish Church.

      6. The Judge heard evidence from the  Appellant  and  three  witnesses
         from the Stockton Parish Church, but felt able to  dispose  of  the
         appeal in what was described before me as an extraordinarily  brief
         decision,  the  material  parts  of  which  consist  of  only   six
         paragraphs.  Mr  Mangion  accepted  however  before  me  that   the
         Respondent had lodged no cross-appeal against the  Judge's  finding
         of fact to the effect that the Appellant was a genuine  convert  to
         Christianity. Thus it was accepted on behalf of the Respondent that
         the Judge should have proceeded to consider whether  the  Appellant
         would be at risk upon return to Iran as an  apostate,  and  it  was
         common ground before me that she failed to do so.

      7. It was in those circumstances common ground that I should set aside
         the decision, and remake the decision upon the appeal, both parties
         being agreed that there was no need for the appeal to  be  remitted
         to the First Tier Tribunal to do so. The central  finding  of  fact
         being unchallenged.

    SZ & JM (Christians, FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 82

      8. It was accepted by the Judge that the Appellant had  been  baptised
         into an evangelical faith, and that his conversion  to  that  faith
         was genuine.

      9. The evidence before the Judge was  that  the  Appellant  would  not
         pursue his new faith in Iran through fear of  the  consequences  of
         being identified as an apostate in the event that he did  so.  That
         evidence was not rejected as untrue, and there was no obvious basis
         upon which it would be rejected as untrue once the  core  claim  of
         conversion was accepted. Mr Mangion accepts before me that had  the
         Judge considered the matter in the light of HJ (Iran)  [2010]  UKSC
         31 she would have been bound to allow the appeal, and invited me to
         do so. Thus the Respondent accepts that the appeal  ought  to  have
         been allowed  on  asylum  grounds  in  the  light  of  the  Judge's
         acceptance of the Appellant's evidence about his faith.

     10. In consequence the parties are agreed that I should set  aside  the
         decision upon the asylum appeal and remake it so as  to  allow  the
         appeal on that ground.

DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 3
    December 2014 did involve the making of an error of law in the decision
    to dismiss the asylum appeal that requires  that  decision  to  be  set
    aside and remade. I remake that decision so  as  to  allow  the  asylum
    appeal.



Signed
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 11 June 2015



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.



Signed
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 11 June 2015



