
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08152/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th May 2016                          |On 1st June 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                                     K G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka whose appeal was  allowed,  in
    part, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Coaster under  Article  3  ECHR  but
    dismissed on other grounds and in particular asylum.

 2. Grounds for permission  to  appeal  were  lodged  (on  the  Appellant's
    behalf) solely against the Tribunal's assessment of risk on return.  It
    was to be noted that the judge had accepted as credible the Appellant's
    account that he was detained by the Sri Lankan authorities as  recently
    as February 2014 nearly five years after the end of the civil conflict.
     It was said the judge had failed to set out adequate reasons as to why
    on the facts of this particular case the absence of diaspora activities
    were sufficient to lead to a finding that the Appellant would not be at
    risk on return.  It was said the judge had erred in her application  of
    paragraph 339K of the rules.

 3. The judge had said what did amount to a  change  of  circumstances  was
    that there was the  ability  of  the  Sri  Lankan  Security  Forces  to
    identify LTTE activists and supporters returning to Sri Lanka  and  the
    Appellant having no political profile.

 4. The fact that the authorities detained the Appellant in  February  2014
    meant that at that particular point in time he must have been perceived
    to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as  a  single  state  and
    perceived to have some form of political profile.  The mere absence  of
    further evidence confirming involvement in  diaspora  activities  would
    not in itself be sufficient to eliminate the past  adverse  profile  or
    amount to a sufficient "change of  circumstance"  for  the  purpose  of
    paragraph 339K in the absence of any change in country situation.   The
    judge had erred by focusing her assessment under paragraph 339K on  the
    absence of diaspora activities in the UK as opposed  to  whether  there
    had been any material change in the country situation in Sri Lanka.

 5. Whilst the objective evidence suggested that the Sri Lankan  government
    had  developed  sophisticated   intelligent   gathering   of   diaspora
    activities, the mere absence of information or  intelligence  regarding
    an individual's attendance at diaspora  events  would  not  necessarily
    automatically lead the authorities to conclude that  a  person  was  no
    longer a threat where there was an  existing  record  of  detention  as
    recently as 2014.

 6. The judge had erred in minimising  the  significance  of  the  previous
    detention as part of her reasoning as to why he would not be at risk on
    return.  Furthermore the judge was wrong to say that his  release  from
    detention "strongly suggests" that this is because he was of no further
    adverse interest.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted because the grounds were found  to  be
    arguable.  A Rule 24 notice  was  lodged  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    indicating that the judge's findings were sustainable. It was said that
    the Appellant had not challenged the low LTTE profile findings  of  the
    judge.  The judge noted at paragraph 64 that  the  Appellant  had  been
    released by the court and there was no evidence of a bribe.   It  would
    be wholly irrational for the judge to have found that the Appellant was
    under such circumstances still perceived to  be  potentially  a  person
    seeking to destabilise the government of Sri Lanka by actively  working
    for the resurgence of the Tamil conflict.

 8. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 9. For the Appellant Ms Jegarajah appeared and referred me  to  the  Joint
    Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  2  of  2010  relating  to  vulnerable
    witnesses.  This Appellant was such  a  witness.  She  referred  me  to
    various  passages  in  the  Appellant's  asylum  interview  where   the
    Appellant had not been able to give full answers. The  judge  had  been
    correct to find that he had been traumatised in Sri Lanka and therefore
    he  could  not  explain  exactly  why  he  was  arrested  and  why  the
    authorities were interested in him and what had happened in court.   It
    was to be noted his arrest in 2014 was a post-conflict arrest.  It  was
    a question of the perception of the Sri Lankan authorities.  The  judge
    should have had regard to paragraph 11 of the Guidance which said  that
    where there were clear discrepancies in the  oral  evidence  the  judge
    should have considered the extent to which  the  vulnerability  of  the
    witness was an element of the discrepancy  or  lack  of  clarity.   The
    decision of the judge was illogical and perverse.

10. For the Home Office it was said that the judge had given clear  reasons
    as to why the Appellant would not be at risk on return - see paragraphs
    67 and 68.  The judge had been very careful in her decision.  There was
    no error and the decision should stand.

11. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

12. The judge gave very clear reasons for concluding that  the  Appellant's
    mental health was fragile and he was considered  a  high  suicide  risk
    even in the United Kingdom.  She therefore  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 3 ECHR - the  Secretary  of  State  does  not  challenge  that
    finding.

13. The judge had regard to the internal inconsistencies in the Appellant's
    account but found that none of those inconsistencies alone or  together
    displaced the weight of Dr  Halari's  mental  health  assessment.   The
    judge was fully  aware  that  the  Appellant  suffered  from  PTSD  and
    depression which disabled him from giving a clear concise  and  at  all
    times coherent account - see paragraph 57.

14. The judge dealt with the possible risk on return  at  paragraph  58  et
    seq.  She referred to GJ and correctly noted that she had to have  good
    reason to depart from this guidance.  She then set out the head note of
    the guidance, noting that in (vii) the current category of  persons  at
    risk of persecution were those individuals who were "perceived" to be a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state.   She  examined
    in detail the Appellant's claim that he would be at  risk  if  returned
    for four principal reasons.

15. Contrary to the submissions made to me she did not fail  to  take  into
    account the fact that the Appellant was a vulnerable witness but rather
    referred to the objective evidence.  She was well aware  that  the  Sri
    Lankan  government  remained  highly  paranoid  about  the  threat   of
    resurgence of the LTTE - see paragraph 63.   She  considered  all  the
    submissions made to her.  She noted the  very  minor  and  intermittent
    role the Appellant had with LTTE. She gave  reasons  why  the  security
    forces were interested in him in 2014.  She  noted  the  Appellant  was
    released by a court after  a  relatively  short  time.   There  was  no
    evidence to show that he was on a stop list.  She  explained  that  the
    situation in Sri  Lanka  today  is  that  the  government  forces  have
    sophisticated  intelligence  gathering  of  diaspora  activities.   The
    Appellant had not undertaken any such  activities.   He  was  therefore
    highly unlikely to be on a stop list.  She noted that a  returnee  such
    as the Appellant would be likely to be interviewed at the  airport  and
    unless it was established that they had significant diaspora activities
    were likely to be allowed to continue to their home area.

16. She referred to 339K of the Rules and said that what had changed  since
    2014 was the ability of the Sri Lankan Security Forces to identify LTTE
    activists and supporters returning  to  Sri  Lanka  and  the  Appellant
    having had no political profile such  that  he  would  be  detected  by
    security  forces  gathering  intelligence.   For  reasons   given   she
    concluded that the Appellant was not reasonably likely to be  perceived
    as a person seeking to destabilise  the  single  Sri  Lankan  state  or
    revive the internal armed conflict.  The security forces would be aware
    that he had no involvement and did not appear  in  their  data.   While
    acknowledging that he was detained and tortured in 2014  there  was  no
    real risk that he fell within the country guidance set out in GJ.

17. The grounds of application do not dispute the finding of the judge that
    the government forces  have  sophisticated  intelligence  gathering  of
    diaspora activities.  The judge specifically  noted  what  had  changed
    since 2014.  It seems to me that the  grounds  of  application  express
    disagreement with that finding  but  do  not  really  engage  with  the
    judge's reasoning and do not offer any clear reasons  why  the  judge's
    conclusion is unsound.  The judge had meticulously  explained  why  the
    government forces had tortured the Appellant in 2014 and why there  was
    no real risk that this would happen as at the date of  the  hearing  in
    January 2016.

18. Given the level of continuing human rights abuses within Sri  Lanka  as
    at the date of the hearing (of which there is much background  material
    and which is within judicial knowledge), it can probably be  said  that
    other judges might have found that  there  was  a  continuing  risk  of
    serious ill-treatment to this Appellant on return, given  that  he  had
    been tortured as recently as 2014.  However it seems  to  me  that  the
    judge's reasoning in this appeal is very far  from  being  perverse  or
    irrational and the grounds of  application  express  little  more  than
    disagreement with the judge's careful and reasoned decision.  There  is
    no error in law.

Notice of Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

20. I do not set aside the decision.

21. I shall continue the anonymity order.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Dated  1st June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
