
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08914/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 4 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                     sm
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction has been made in these proceedings and I  direct
    that it continue.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan  whose  date  of  birth  was
    assessed as 1 June 1996 by Kent Social Services but this  was  disputed
    by the appellant who claims that his date of birth is 1 January 1999.

 3.  He  appealed  against  a  decision  of  the  respondent  refusing  his
    application for leave to remain on asylum grounds and  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds and under Articles  2,  3  and  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 4. His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Goodrich  at
    Taylor House on 12 December 2014.  She dismissed this.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the Upper Tribunal Grubb on 22 May 2015.  His reasons for the grant  in
    relation to ground 1 were as follows:-

         "1.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Goodrich)  dismissed   the
             appellant's appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
             human rights grounds.  The  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
             appellant would be at risk on return to Afghanistan  from  the
             Taliban.

         2.   The Grounds argue that the Judge erred in law: (1) in  relying
             on the age assessment  to  indentify  inconsistencies  in  the
             appellant's evidence; and (2) in applying the  wrong  test  in
             assessing whether  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  as  an
             apostate.

         3.   Ground 1 is arguable for the following reason.  Whilst I doubt
             whether the Judge  placed  undue  weight  on  the  appellant's
             evidence in his age assessment, it  does  not  seem  that  the
             inconsistencies were relied upon by the HOPO  or  put  to  the
             appellant by the Judge in evidence.  If they  were  considered
             to be important factors in assessing the appellant's  account,
             it was arguably unfair not to do so.  Further, as the  renewed
             grounds point out, the Judge's assessment of  the  appellant's
             claim "at its highest" may not be consistent  with  AA  [2012]
             UKUT  00016  (IAC)  at  [16]  that  relatives  of   Government
             "collaborators" may be at risk from the  Taliban.   I  am  not
             persuaded that it is unarguable that any error was, therefore,
             necessarily immaterial.

         4.   Ground 2: the Judge was entitled to conclude for  the  reasons
             he gave at para 51 that the appellant  had  not  rejected  his
             faith and so would not be at risk as an apostate.

         5.   For these reasons, I grant permission on Ground 1 only."

 6. This appeal first came before me in the Upper  Tribunal  on  20  August
    2015 when I made the following directions:-

         "1.  The appellant to file  a  witness  statement  of  Counsel  who
             appeared at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, attaching thereto
             a typed copy of her notes of evidence.

         2.   If available the respondent also to file a typed copy  of  the
             notes  of  her  representative  at  the  First-tier   Tribunal
             hearing.

         3.   The appellant to file a further  skeleton  argument  detailing
             submissions in relation to the absence of issues being put  to
             the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal hearing where  it  is
             said the judge has relied upon such issues in finding  against
             the appellant.

         4.   The above to be filed and served no later than  fourteen  days
             prior to the application before the Tribunal."

 7. At  today's  hearing  I  had  further  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    representatives including:-

         1.   Appellant's supplementary skeleton argument.

         2.   Conversion of  the  date  "1  Hamal  1391"  to  the  Gregorian
             calendar.

         3.   Witness statement of Rachel Francis (Counsel).

         4.   Typed  notes  of  hearing  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
             Goodrich.

 8. Mr Smyth's focus within his skeleton argument  was  on  the  procedural
    unfairness arising out  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reliance  upon
    evidence  recorded  during   the   appellant's   age   assessment,   in
    circumstances where the appellant's discrepancies did not form part  of
    the respondent's case and were not put  to  the  appellant  during  the
    course of the hearing.  In  particular  paragraph  42  of  the  judge's
    findings.

 9. The evidence of Counsel in the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  was  not
    challenged and it was therefore unnecessary  for  Miss  Francis  to  be
    called.  Her witness  statement  is  simply  to  the  effect  that  she
    represented the  appellant  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  and
    attaches to it a typed version of notes she took at that hearing.

10. Mr Kandola accepted that some aspects of the evidence  relied  upon  by
    Judge  Goodrich  had  not  specifically  been  put  to  the  appellant.
    However, he asserted there was no onus on her to  put  each  and  every
    point to him and she had not focussed simply on the age assessment  and
    placed undue weight upon it.  Hence there was no procedural  unfairness
    and the decision should stand.

11. For all the reasons set out in Mr Smyth's latest skeleton argument I am
    satisfied that the judge had materially erred and  that  the  appellant
    was effectively deprived of an opportunity to  address  various  points
    raised in paragraph 42 of her decision which had a material bearing  on
    the outcome as they were relied upon  as  apparent  discrepancies  when
    finding that the appellant's claim was not credible.

12. Applying the authority of MM (Unfairness E & R) Sudan [2014]  UKUT  105
    (IAC) I am satisfied that the failure of the judge to  put  matters  to
    the appellant relied upon by her in assessing the  credibility  of  the
    appellant amounts to a material error of law and as such  deprived  the
    appellant of a fair hearing.

13. For these reasons I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains errors of law and has to be set  aside,  save  for  the  issue
    raised and rejected in ground 2,  in  light  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Grubb's  conclusion  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
    conclude, for the reasons given at paragraph 51 of the  decision,  that
    the appellant had not rejected his faith and so would not be at risk as
    an apostate.  In the circumstances it is appropriate for the appeal  to
    be considered de novo, subject to the caveat I have just  referred  to,
    within the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  The decision set aside subject to the above-
mentioned caveat.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to  be
dealt with pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b) before  any  judge  aside
from Judge Goodrich.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 27 November 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

