
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08155/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 July 2016                                |On 13 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                KI (NIgeria)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Cronin, Counsel, instructed by South West
                    London Law Centres
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to recognise  her  as  a  refugee,  or  as
    otherwise requiring international protection, on account of her being a
    victim of child trafficking and exploitation.  The Secretary  of  State
    cross appeals against the decision of the same Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on the alternative ground that to  remove  her  from
    the United Kingdom would be unlawful  under  Section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights 1998 as it would breach her private life rights under Article 8,
    ECHR.

Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 26 May 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer gave  his  reasons  for
    granting the respective applications for permission to  appeal  by  the
    appellant and the respondent:

    "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal  against  a  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Brown promulgated on 5 May  2016  whereby
         he dismissed the appeal against the decision  to  refuse  to  grant
         asylum.  The Respondent seeks  permission  to  appeal  against  the
         decision to grant ancillary protection.

    2.    I  am  satisfied  that  the  applications  are  in  time  as  the
         Respondent's  application  was  filed  on  16  May  2013  and   the
         Appellant's was filed on 23 May  2016  and  it  is  said  that  the
         determination was only received by the representative on 9 May 2016
         which I have no reason to  disbelieve.   Even  if  the  Appellant's
         application was out of time I would extend it as there is merit  in
         her argument and the delay appears  to  have  been  caused  at  her
         representative's end rather than hers for which she should  not  be
         penalised.

    3.   I can only grant permission to appeal if I am satisfied that it is
         arguable that there was a material error of  law  that  could  have
         made a material difference to the outcome. This  could  be  due  to
         perverse or irrational findings or  a  lack  of  findings  on  core
         issues (R (Iran etc) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982).

    4.   This was plainly a very difficult case.

    5.   In relation to the Appellant's application the Judge made findings
         that the Appellant was physically ill treated by family here having
         been brought over as a child to live with relatives. Whilst  it  is
         correct to say that the Judge does not have to detail  every  piece
         of evidence he has read or heard, and he does detail  much  of  the
         evidence, I am satisfied that it  is  arguable  that  some  of  the
         evidence that supported  the  Appellant's  position  has  not  been
         included and therefore been  given  no  weight,  and  that  by  not
         including some of this evidence it is arguable that the Judge  made
         a material error of law by  not  taking  into  account  potentially
         relevant evidence.

    6.   In relation to the Respondent's application it  is  arguable  that
         the Judge did misapply section 117B for the reasons  given  in  the
         application namely inappropriate weight being given to the  private
         life relationship with Mr Palmer.

    7.   Permission to appeal is granted on all grounds submitted  by  both
         parties."

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, whose date  of  birth  is  [  ]
    1994.  Her claim is that she was trafficked to the UK by  her  maternal
    aunt and uncle, entering with them as a visitor  on  a  false  passport
    which they arranged on 31 August 2006 when the appellant was  aged  11.
    She lived with her aunt and uncle in the  UK,  and  was  exploited  and
    mistreated by them until she was evicted by her aunt on 28 August 2012,
    when the appellant was aged 17.  The Salvation Army referred her to the
    NRM as a potential trafficking victim in  May  2014.   She  received  a
    positive reasonable grounds decision on  16  May  2014.   She  made  an
    asylum claim on 22 July 2014.  Her asylum claim  and  Article  8  claim
    were refused by letter dated 29 September 2014 and the  NRM  issued  a
    negative conclusion decision on her trafficking claim on the same date.
     Since 2014 she has been in the receipt of NASS support.  From 2012 her
    studies have been discontinued, and she has  been  barred  from  taking
    employment.  She is engaged to marry MP, a British national.

 4. Her claim on appeal is set out in considerable detail by Judge Brown at
    paragraph [13] of his decision.  For present purposes, it is convenient
    to note that her case on risk on return was that attempts to trace  her
    father in November 2015 had been unsuccessful and the police in Nigeria
    had been uncooperative; Kaduna  State,  where  her  father  lived,  was
    unstable  and  subject  to  violent  tensions  between  Christians  and
    Muslims; she had received an anonymous text from Nigeria,  saying  that
    she was a prostitute and pregnant; her uncle  moved  around  a  lot  in
    Nigeria, and she was worried that she might bump  into  him;  were  she
    required to relocate within Nigeria, she would  be  doing  so  entirely
    alone, without any support network or contacts or family, in a  country
    which was now unfamiliar to  her  as  an  obviously  westernised  young
    woman.  This would be unduly harsh.  She was distinct from other, young
    single and  unsupported  Nigerian  women  because  she  had  spent  her
    formative years outside Nigeria.

 5. As set out in paragraph [15] of the judge's  decision,  the  respondent
    accepted the appellant's account of the circumstances of her  departure
    from Nigeria, and the fact that she was to be cared for by her aunt and
    uncle in the UK.  But her account of neglect and abuse was rejected, as
    neither Social Services nor the police had evidence or records of abuse
    or neglect.  She was a well-educated young woman who had  contact  with
    her family, and it was not accepted that her father would  not  support
    her on return to Nigeria.  There was an adequately  functioning  police
    service and an effective legal system there, and according to a  Danish
    Immigration Service Report, any victim of trafficking who was ready  to
    cooperate would be assisted in Nigeria with  security  and  protection,
    counselling, family reunification, rehabilitation and reintegration and
    avoidance of re-trafficking.  There were a number of NGOs  who  offered
    support and assistance to people who had been trafficked.  In so far as
    the appellant's fears came from non-state agents, there were avenues of
    redress and protection.  But in any event it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant  to  relocate  internally,  for  example  to  Port
    Harcourt, Benin City or Abuja.  It was  possible  for  adult  women  to
    relocate, and given the  sheer  size  of  Nigeria,  it  would  be  very
    difficult for a family member to locate a woman who had  escaped.   She
    had spent the first eleven years of her life in  Nigeria  and  she  had
    skills that would enable her to gain lawful  employment.   It  had  not
    been shown to be unreasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  to  relocate
    internally and so there was not a reasonable degree of likelihood  that
    she would be persecuted on return to Nigeria.

 6. As was noted by the judge at the end of paragraph [15], the  Presenting
    Officer at the hearing did not take issue with the appellant's evidence
    that she had been beaten by her aunt and uncle, as was supported  by  a
    report  from  Dr  Turvill,  acting  on  behalf  of  the  Helen   Bamber
    Foundation.  She noted scars on her body which were  highly  consistent
    with her having been hit with a belt buckle, broom, stick, high  heeled
    shoe, and other objects, and also scarring  that  was  consistent  with
    bites from bedbugs.  She noted the appellant did not attribute  all  of
    her scars to bedbugs and beatings.  She was not a psychiatrist, but she
    had considerable experience in examining patients who claimed  to  have
    been  tortured.   She  recorded  the  appellant's  account  of  feeling
    isolated and alone, anxiety and tension, nightmares,  guilt,  intrusive
    thoughts and avoidance.  She concluded the appellant was suffering from
    depression and post-traumatic stress disorder, caused by  the  loss  of
    her mother and by the abuse which she had suffered at the hands of  her
    aunt and uncle.

 7. The judge's findings on the protection claim are set out in  paragraphs
    [24] to [52] of his decision.   He  accepted  the  appellant  had  been
    subject to corporal punishment at the hands of her aunt and uncle,  but
    there were a number of pieces of surrounding evidence which  undermined
    her account that outside schooldays she was working  at  home  for  her
    aunt's  childminding  business   in   conditions   that   amounted   to
    exploitation or forced labour.

 8. The judge went on to discuss these pieces  of  evidence  in  paragraphs
    [25] to [34].  The judge continued:

    "35. Ms Cronin makes the fair point that the denial of ill treatment by
         the appellant's aunt and uncle should carry no  weight  where  they
         have so obviously been shown to have lied. But, while I  accept  to
         the lower standard that the appellant was required to help  out  at
         home, and did  so,  and  was  subjected  to  unacceptable  physical
         violence, I am  not  satisfied  to  the  lower  standard  that  the
         appellant's living conditions came close to  those  which  she  has
         described, in light of the evidence of third parties which tends to
         suggest excellent school attendance, good  work,  engagement  in  a
         variety of extra-curricular activities, and  trips  away  from  the
         area, including time away at the weekends. The  picture  which  the
         appellant seeks to paint in her evidence, and  necessarily  has  to
         paint to  establish  a  case  on  an  oppressive  and  exploitative
         atmosphere is not, in my judgment,  made  out  even  to  the  lower
         standard in the face of so much evidence of participation  in  just
         the extra-curricular  activities  which  the  appellant  says  were
         denied to her by a strict curfew and oppressive working  conditions
         at home.

    ...

    40.  I do not consider that my  conclusion  on  the  facts  amounts  to
         preferring the appellant's evidence to that of the appellant's aunt
         and uncle. The significance of the  third  party  evidence  of  the
         appellant's good character, as much as it might  suggest  that  the
         appellant is not someone who would be untruthful, is that it  tends
         to suggest that she was not living in circumstances  which  stopped
         her from doing her home work, or attending school,  or  doing  very
         well at school, or  undertaking  extra  curricular  activities,  or
         making connections with people. The fact that the appellant's  aunt
         and  uncle  lied  about  their   immigration   status   and   their
         relationship to the appellant meanwhile does not  lead  necessarily
         to the conclusion that they are lying about everything else.  I  am
         simply not satisfied, on the evidence before me, that the appellant
         has established to the lower standard her  general  credibility  in
         respect of the core of her claim about her treatment, when so  much
         of the evidence she has tendered from third parties undermines  the
         core of that claim.

    41.  I therefore do not accept that the respondent's  decision  on  the
         question whether the appellant was  trafficked  was  an  irrational
         decision. I have noted Ms Cronin's  careful  submissions  (Skeleton
         argument, para 32  ff)  about  the  myriad  subtle  ways  in  which
         exploitation can occur in the context of domestic servitude, and  I
         accept her submissions,  but  the  primary  facts  do  not,  in  my
         judgment, allow an inference properly to  be  drawn,  even  to  the
         lower standard, that the appellant's treatment at the hands of  her
         uncle amounted to exploitation or  forced  labour.  The  respondent
         through Mr Briant has accepted that the appellant was  beaten,  and
         so do I, and whilst reprehensible, that, in  my  judgment,  is  not
         enough to show exploitation or forced labour. Where  treatment  has
         been so severe as to amount to exploitation or forced  labour,  one
         would expect to see some objective warning signs of that treatment,
         even if they were slight, or fleeting. I do not consider that there
         is evidence of treatment which goes beyond a requirement  that  the
         appellant help  out  at  home,  and  a  degree  of  harsh  physical
         punishment.

    42.  Therefore, I do not  consider  that  the  appellant  falls  to  be
         treated as a victim of trafficking. Nor am  I  persuaded  that  she
         would be perceived as a victim of trafficking were she to return to
         Nigeria. Her claim was based on the quality of her treatment  while
         living with close relatives.  She  does  not  claim  to  have  been
         trafficked by a gang, and the reason for her distinctiveness,  were
         she to return to Nigeria, would be that she has  been  educated  in
         the United Kingdom and not that she has  been  trafficked  for  the
         purposes of forced labour or any other purpose. I am not  persuaded
         to the lower standard that her situation has  left  her  vulnerable
         and susceptible to finding herself in a  domestically  or  sexually
         abusive situation in the future:  she  has  obtained  an  education
         while in the United Kingdom,  and  she  has  shown  herself  to  be
         resilient. She has engaged with the services who have  helped  her.
         She has clear ideas and ambitions about the kind of things that she
         wishes to do with her life. I do not consider that there is a  real
         risk that the appellant would, as a result of  her  experiences  in
         the UK, as I have found them to be, be unwittingly  susceptible  or
         vulnerable to exploitation in the future by strangers.

    43.  It also follows that the past treatment  on  which  the  appellant
         relies to establish a future  risk  of  persecution  has  not  been
         established."

 9. The judge noted at paragraph [46] that Ms Cronin's written  submissions
    focused exclusively on the question of the appellant's situation if  it
    was found that she was a victim of trafficking.   He  had  to  consider
    whether notwithstanding his rejection of the core  of  the  appellant's
    claim, she would otherwise be at risk on return.  In paragraphs [47] to
    [52], he gave his reasons for reaching the conclusion it was reasonable
    to expect the appellant  to  relocate  to  a  city  environment  within
    Nigeria and that in that city the appellant would not face a real  risk
    of serious harm requiring international protection, either because  she
    was a young single woman or arising from religious  conflict  elsewhere
    in the country.

10. At paragraphs [53] to [57], the judge gave reasons for finding that the
    appellant did not qualify for leave to remain under Rule 276ADE(1)(vi).



11. The judge addressed an Article 8 claim outside the Rules at  paragraphs
    [58] to [72].  For present  purposes,  it  is  convenient  to  set  out
    verbatim the judge's reasons for finding that the proposed interference
    was disproportionate, which are contained in paragraphs [70] and  [71]:



    "70. In the unusual and exceptional circumstances  of  the  appellant's
         case, I am satisfied that the removal of the appellant from the  UK
         would not  be  a  proportionate  means  of  securing  the  economic
         interests of  the  United  Kingdom  through  effective  immigration
         control. That is a factor deserving of the greatest weight,  but  I
         am satisfied that it  is  outweighed  by  the  combination  of  the
         appellant's circumstances over the time that she has  been  in  the
         United Kingdom, and her prospective circumstances  if  returned.  I
         attach great weight to the fact that the appellant arrived  in  the
         UK as a young person, without an appreciation of the significant of
         her immigration status, and has been  here  for  a  long  time,  at
         perhaps the most formative stage in her development  into  a  young
         adult, and came to age in the UK. I attach weight to the fact  that
         the appellant cannot reasonably be  expected  to  have  appreciated
         that her immigration status was unlawful (and therefore necessarily
         precarious). I attach weight to the fact that her  local  authority
         (being an emanation of the state) knew  that  the  appellant  being
         raised by people who  were  not  lawfully  present  in  the  United
         Kingdom and, between 2009 and 2012, no steps were taken in  respect
         of this. I attach weight to the very substantial private life ties
         that the appellant has to the United Kingdom as  a  result  of  her
         education and socialisation here.  I  also  attach  weight  to  the
         extent of the disruption to her private life and personal  autonomy
         that would ensue were she required to return to Nigeria as a young,
         single woman. Although I do not treat it as an aspect of her family
         life,  I  attach  some  weight  to  the  fact  of  the  appellant's
         relationship with Mr Palmer.

    71.  In my judgment, this exceptional set of factors,  bearing  on  the
         appellant's past and future private  life,  cumulatively  outweighs
         the aim, legitimate  and  weighty  as  it  is,  of  firm  and  fair
         immigration control. I am  therefore  satisfied  that  her  removal
         would be a disproportionate interference in her  right  to  respect
         for her private life."

The Error of Law Hearing

12. At the hearing before me, Mr Avery developed the arguments advanced  by
    his colleague Mr Jarvis  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  challenging  the
    decision under Article 8.  Ms Cronin mounted a robust  defence  of  the
    judge's decision as outlined in  her  Rule  24  response  opposing  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.  After  a  short  adjournment,  Ms  Cronin
    developed the error of law  challenge  in  respect  of  the  protection
    claim, which in large measure was based on  the  proposition  that  the
    judge had been perverse not to accept the appellant's core claim in its
    entirety, and thus not to treat her as being especially  vulnerable  on
    return to Nigeria as a former victim of trafficking.  On behalf of  the
    Secretary of State, Mr Avery adhered to the  robust  Rule  24  response
    settled by a colleague.   While  the  judge  had  found  the  appellant
    credible in some aspects of her account, it was not,  as  suggested  by
    the grounds of appeal, a basis to accept the entirety of  her  account.
    To undertake such an approach would be to disregard all  the  remaining
    evidence in the case.  The judge did not allow the  appellant's  appeal
    on the basis of evidence from the appellant's uncle and aunt, who  were
    not a party to proceedings, but because the  judge  was  not  satisfied
    having considered the appellant's evidence in the round  that  she  had
    discharged the burden of proof.  This was a finding open to the  judge,
    and did not demonstrate a contradictory finding or a disregard  of  the
    appellant's  evidence.   The  grounds  were  seeking  to  reargue   the
    appellant's case for a more favourable outcome.



Discussion

13. The grounds of appeal advanced by Ms Cronin are very discursive, and at
    times they present more as an attempt to reargue the case, rather  than
    as identifying arguable errors of law.

14. However, in respect of the judge's rejection  of  the  claim  that  the
    appellant was a victim of  trafficking,  two  principal  error  of  law
    challenges are identifiable.

15. The first one arises at paragraph [35], where the judge said  that  the
    picture which the appellant  sought  to  paint  in  her  evidence,  and
    necessarily had to paint to establish  a  case  of  an  oppressive  and
    exploitative atmosphere, was not made out even to the lower standard.

16. As Ms Cronin correctly points out, the definition  of  "trafficking  in
    human beings" when applied to children does not require  an  oppressive
    atmosphere.  All that is required is that  the  child  in  question  is
    recruited, transported, transferred,  harboured  or  received  for  the
    purpose of exploitation.  It is  not  necessary  that  the  trafficking
    should be by means of threat or the use of  force  or  other  forms  of
    coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, the abuse of power or a position
    of vulnerability, or the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to
    achieve the consent of the child.

17. However, the judge's observation needs to be seen in the context of the
    way in which both parties put  their  respective  cases.   It  was  not
    disputed by the respondent that when she first arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the appellant was required to conduct household  chores.   The
    respondent's case was that being requested to  wash  and  clean  for  a
    limited number of hours each day did not amount to excessive  work  and
    unbearable working conditions, and thus the appellant did not meet  the
    exploitation requirement.   The  issue  between  the  parties  was  not
    whether the appellant had been required to do chores for her  aunt  and
    uncle, but whether what she was required to do amounted to exploitation
    or forced labour.  The appellant's case was that it  did,  because  the
    amount of work she was required to do was  excessive  and  the  working
    conditions were oppressive and unbearable.

18. So on the particular facts of this case, I do  not  consider  that  the
    judge misdirected himself at paragraph [35] as  to  the  factual  issue
    which he needed to resolve in order to determine whether the  appellant
    was a victim of trafficking.

19. The other principal error of law challenge is one  of  perversity.   As
    the judge noted at paragraph [41], Ms Cronin  sought  to  persuade  him
    that the respondent's decision to reject  the  appellant's  trafficking
    claim was irrational, and hence  perverse.   The  judge  rejected  this
    argument, and Ms Cronin now turns her fire  on  the  judge,  contending
    that he was perverse not to agree with  her  that  the  respondent  was
    perverse.  There is a very high threshold in  establishing  perversity,
    particularly where, on the  face  of  it,  the  judge  has  extensively
    rehearsed  all  the  relevant  evidence,   and   given   detailed   and
    comprehensive reasons for reaching the conclusion  that  the  appellant
    was not a victim of trafficking.

20. In the grounds of appeal at paragraph 9 Ms Cronin  gives  a  number  of
    alleged examples of perversity. But on analysis they  are  examples  of
    where Ms Cronin submits the judge has acted "unfairly in his assessment
    of the  evidence".   The  charge  that  the  judge  has  been  unfairly
    selective in his assessment of the evidence is  a  very  different  one
    from the charge that the judge has reached a perverse conclusion on the
    evidence.

21. One specific example of alleged unfairness which Ms Cronin  highlighted
    in her oral submissions was the judge's reference in paragraph [26]  to
    a letter from Caroline Watkins dated 12 December 2012 at A80. She  said
    that a consent form had been received for the  appellant  to  attend  a
    dance event.  The judge cited this letter to illustrate the observation
    made earlier by him in paragraph [25]  that  there  were  a  number  of
    incidences  of  the  appellant  being   involved   in   extracurricular
    activities, and a consistent description of  her  excellent  attendance
    and punctuality, and praise for the quality of  her  work,  which  were
    inconsistent with the picture painted by the appellant  of  her  living
    conditions, in which she was required to get by on minimal  sleep,  had
    no time for homework, and was not permitted to participate  in  out  of
    school  activities.   In  short,  the  letter  from  Caroline   Watkins
    contradicted the appellant's  claim  that  she  was  not  permitted  to
    participate in out of school activities.

22. Ms Cronin's complaint is that the judge irrationally omitted to mention
    that in the same letter Caroline Watkins reported  that  the  appellant
    did not always eat prior to arriving at school, and that  she  did  not
    realise that the appellant had hidden so well the fact that she had, in
    all this time, been denied the human right to have food at breakfast.

23. As I explored with Ms Cronin in oral argument, Caroline Watkins was not
    saying that she was aware at the time  that  the  appellant  was  being
    denied breakfast by her aunt and uncle.  On the contrary,  nothing  the
    appellant had said or done had given her an inkling that this  was  the
    reason why the appellant  sometimes  turned  up  without  having  eaten
    breakfast.  It was only in retrospect, the appellant  having  made  the
    allegation, that she regretted not investigating the matter further  at
    the time.  So the letter was  not  probative  of  the  claim  that  the
    appellant had been denied food by her aunt and uncle, and  it  was  not
    "unfair" for  the  judge  to  cite  the  letter  as  showing  that  the
    appellant's aunt consented to her participation in a dance performance.



24. Ms Cronin submits that Caroline Watkins accepted that the appellant was
    abused, and blamed herself for failing to follow up her home situation.
     I accept that Ms Watkins believed in retrospect that the appellant had
    been abused in the way that she claimed, but her belief was not capable
    of being probative of the truth of the underlying allegation.

25. I do not find it necessary to deal with the other alleged  examples  of
    the judge being unfairly selective in the evidence which he accepted or
    rejected or did not specifically refer to.  I consider that  the  judge
    has adequately rehearsed the evidence relied on by the  appellant,  and
    has given comprehensive and sustainable reasons for  finding  that  the
    appellant was not a victim of trafficking.

26. Ms Cronin submits in paragraph 12 of the grounds  of  appeal  that  the
    judge's conclusion on risk on return  is  irrational.   But  as  stated
    previously, the threshold for establishing irrationality or  perversity
    is a very high one, and I find that the arguments advanced in paragraph
    12 fall far short of even raising a prima  facie  case  of  perversity.
    The judge has given adequate reasons for  finding  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk of serious harm on return, and he has not  ignored
    the medical evidence in reaching his conclusion.

27. For the above reasons, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

28.  Mr  Jarvis  presents  a  very  well-argued  case  in  the   permission
    application that the judge's implicit engagement with Section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act is materially flawed.  He submits  that  the  judge  acted
    unlawfully in refusing to place little weight on the only part  of  the
    appellant's claim which was left, which is her private life in the  UK,
    when Parliament expressly required that result through Section 117B(5).
     He submits it  was  also  illegitimate  for  the  judge  to  attribute
    material weight to the  relationship  with  MP  through  the  prism  of
    private life, (the appellant having not met the  definition  of  having
    established family life with MP for  the  purposes  of  Article  8(1)),
    where expressly required not to do so by Section 117B(4)(b).

29. Pursuant to Section 117A(2), the judge was required to have  particular
    regard to the considerations  listed  in  Section  117B.   But  Section
    117A(2) does not require the  court  or  Tribunal  to  have  regard  to
    considerations listed in Section 117B to the  exclusion  of  all  other
    considerations when assessing the public  interest  question.  Just  as
    satisfying the requirements of Section 117B(2) and (3) is not  a  trump
    card in  making  the  proposed  interference  a  disproportionate  one,
    equally the prescription that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
    immigration status  is  precarious  is  not  to  be  treated  as  being
    determinative the other way.

30. Most of the appellant's residence in the United Kingdom  had  been  and
    continued to be unlawful, and thus Section 117B(4) required that little
    weight should  be  given  to  her  private  life  per  se,  or  to  her
    relationship with MP.  But this did not preclude the judge from  giving
    weight to private life factors not covered by the Rules or  by  Section
    117B, such as the fact that she had spent her formative years in the UK
    from the age of 11 and that when growing up here for the  remainder  of
    her minority she could not reasonably be expected to  have  appreciated
    that her immigration status  was  unlawful.   Similarly,  although  the
    appellant did not qualify for leave to remain on private  life  grounds
    under the Rules as there were not very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    integration into the country of return, it was open  to  the  judge  to
    attach weight to the extent of the disruption in her private  life  and
    personal autonomy that would ensue  were  she  required  to  return  to
    Nigeria as a young, single woman, who could expect to face  significant
    obstacles to integration (albeit  not  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration) as he had earlier found at paragraph [65].

31. It was also open to the judge to find that the public interest  in  the
    maintenance of effective immigration controls  was  diminished  in  the
    appellant's particular case because by 2009 the public authorities were
    aware that her aunt and uncle had no lawful immigration status  in  the
    UK, and it followed that the appellant, then thought to be their child,
    did not  have  status  either;  but  nothing  was  done  to  alert  the
    immigration authorities to the situation; and thus  the  appellant  was
    allowed to strengthen her private life ties for a further  three  years
    before any enforcement steps were first taken.

32. In short, it was open to the judge to find that there were sufficiently
    compelling circumstances in the appellant's case to justify  her  being
    granted Article 8 relief outside the  Rules.   Another  Tribunal  might
    have reached a different conclusion on the same facts,  but  the  judge
    has given adequate reasons in an extensive discussion of the Article  8
    claim outside the Rules for reaching the conclusion that  the  proposed
    interference is disproportionate.   The  decision  was  one  which  was
    within the ambit of his discretion, and  it  does  not  contravene  the
    statutory obligation arising under Section  117A(2),  or  the  guidance
    given by the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo).

33. For the above reasons, the respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is
    also dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeals of the appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  Upper
Tribunal are each dismissed.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
not contain an error of law, and accordingly the decision stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 13 July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

