
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08675/2012
                                                               AA/08677/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 July 2015                      |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                      SOULEMAN SYLLA (FIRST appellant)
                      SACKO FOUSSENI (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr G Brown instructed by Lawrence Lupin, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, Souleman Sylla (date of birth 1 March 1980)  and  Sacko
    Fousseni (date of birth 10 September 1985), are cousins and citizens of
    the Central African Republic (CAR).  The appellants had appealed to the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Brunnen)  against  a  decision   of   the
    respondent to remove them from the United Kingdom following the refusal
    of their claims for asylum.  The reasons for refusal letter is dated 19
    September 2012.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed  the  appeals  in  a
    decision promulgated on 17 April 2015.  The appellants now appeal, with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Designated Judge McCarthy found that  the  pleaded
    grounds were arguable and, in addition, noted the following:

         "Before concluding this permission to appeal statement,  I  observe
         that at no juncture in the lengthy asylum and appeal procedures has
         either appellant sought to argue  that  the  Home  Office  did  not
         comply with paragraph 339ND of the Immigration Rules  (which  is  a
         transposition of  Article  13(3)(b)  of  the  Procedures  Directive
         (2005/85/EC)).  It is unclear whether the appellants have ever been
         able to give  a  full  account  of  their  claims  because  of  the
         difficulties obtaining a suitable  interpreter.   It  would  appear
         that even the  appellants'  solicitors  relied  on  an  unqualified
         interpreter whose fluency in English was doubtful.  It would appear
         that no-one thought of alternative ways  of  gathering  information
         such as using  relay  interpreters  (Sango  to  French,  French  to
         English).

         I  am  particularly  concerned  because  it  would  seem  that  the
         appellants did not give oral evidence at the hearing  before  Judge
         Brunnen because they were not confident in speaking  French.   That
         resulted in Judge Brunnen having to examine the  various  accounts.
         It is evident that Judge Brunnen noted a number  of  problems  with
         the accounts but was not confident whether they were the result  of
         the appellants not being credible or because of the interpretations
         being unreliable.  I flag it up in case it has any relevance to the
         issue of how Judge Brunnen  assessed  the  appellants'  credibility
         which will need to be considered by the Upper Tribunal  because  of
         the arguable legal point I have identified."

 3. Mr Brown characterised these comments  of  Judge  McCarthy  as  raising
    "Robinson" obvious arguable errors in the First-tier Tribunal decision.
     Mr Harrison, for the respondent, agreed with Mr  Brown.   Mr  Harrison
    was concerned that, notwithstanding the evident thoroughness  of  Judge
    Brunnen's decision, the appellants  had,  in  effect,  been  denied  an
    entirely fair hearing because they had been unable to give evidence  to
    the Tribunal (or, indeed, full particulars of  their  accounts  to  the
    respondent)  in  Sango,  their  first  language.   Mr   Harrison   also
    considered that the First-tier Tribunal had  failed  to  make  adequate
    clear findings as to the medical evidence,  wrongly  attaching  limited
    weight to that evidence because the authors of the report had not given
    a clear indication of alternative causation of the injuries with  which
    the appellants had presented.   As  Judge  McCarthy  stated  [3],  that
    approach has led the Tribunal to perpetrate an arguable  error  in  the
    assessment of the medical evidence.

 4. As Mr Brown accepted, difficulties over the medical  evidence  and  the
    fact that the appellants had been  denied  the  opportunity  of  giving
    evidence and being cross-examined in their first  language,  might  not
    prove material if the judge's alternative finding [146]  that,  on  the
    basis that the appellants' accounts of past  ill-treatment  were  true,
    they could yet avail themselves of internal flight within the CAR,  was
    sound.  However, in assessing internal flight, Judge Brunnen has failed
    to  take  any  account  of  the  characteristics  possessed  by   these
    appellants and which may render  the  internal  flight  alternative  an
    unduly harsh one.  It is not  clear  from  the  judge's  assessment  of
    internal flight that he has considered  the  medical  evidence  showing
    that the appellants suffer from post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

 5. Mr Harrison submitted that the inability of the Tribunal to  provide  a
    fair hearing to the appellants,  coupled  with  the  judge's  error  in
    respect of his analysis of the medical evidence and the fact  that  the
    internal flight analysis was also flawed, indicated that  the  decision
    had to be  set  aside.   On  considering  all  the  documents  and  the
    submissions, I find that I agree.  I do so with some  reluctance  given
    the customary thoroughness which  Judge  Brunnen  has  brought  to  his
    analysis of these appeals.  In setting aside  his  decision,  I  stress
    that I do not suggest that these appellants will  always  be  denied  a
    fair hearing if  they  cannot  give  their  evidence  through  a  Sango
    interpreter.  I do, however, believe that every effort should  be  made
    to examine how the evidence of the  appellants  might  be  given  in  a
    language in which they feel confident (for example,  by  a  "relay"  of
    interpreters as suggested by  Judge  McCarthy).   For  that  reason,  I
    direct that there should be a Case Management Review (CMR) in the First-
    tier Tribunal; it would be helpful for the Resident Judge at Manchester
    or one of the Designated Judges there to conduct that review.   At  the
    CMR,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  will  expect   to   receive   detailed
    submissions from the appellants' solicitors  as  regards  the  language
    interpretation difficulties, together with any contribution  which  the
    respondent may wish to make.  None of the findings of fact of the First-
    tier Tribunal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 17 April 2015 is
    set aside.  It is appropriate that these appeals should be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Brunnen) for that Tribunal to remake
    the decision.   I  direct  that  the  appeals  be  listed  for  a  Case
    Management Review (CMR)  in  Manchester  before  (if  practicable)  the
    Resident Judge or a Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge on  the  first
    available date.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date: 4 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

