
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08240/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 14 July 2016                     |On: 10 August 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     ZN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lay, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Brien in which he dismissed the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  a
    citizen of Uganda, against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    asylum and set removal directions.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  22  December  2002  and
    having been given leave to enter as a visitor for 6  months  overstayed
    that leave eventually making an application for leave to remain  on  27
    December 2012. That application was refused on 1 May  2013  and  on  19
    June 2013 the Appellant claimed asylum. Her application was refused  by
    the Respondent on 15 August 2013. The Appellant exercised her right  of
    appeal against this decision and her appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Whiting on 1 October 20143v and dismissed.  Following  a
    successful appeal against this  decision  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  the
    Appellant's appeal was remitted for hearing afresh  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. This is the appeal that was heard before Judge O'Brien on  27
    August 2015 and dismissed. The Appellant's application  for  permission
    to appeal against the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision was  granted
    on 9  November  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen  in  the
    following terms

       The grounds on which permission to appeal is sought submit  that  the
       Judge erred in law  in  that,  it  having  been  submitted  that  the
       Appellant was a vulnerable witness on account  of  the  diagnosis  of
       complex PTSD, he failed to make any findings as to whether she was  a
       vulnerable witness or as to the extent  to  which  her  vulnerability
       affected her evidence. The grounds cite JL [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC).


       The grounds are arguable. Paragraph 26 of the determination in JL  is
       of particular relevance.


 3. By a rule 24 response dated 23 November 2015 the Respondent opposed the
    appeal.

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Richards  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of
    State and Mr Lay represented the Appellant. No skeleton arguments  were
    submitted.

Background

 5. The Appellant is a 41-year-old  Ugandan  citizen  who  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom at the age of 28.  The Appellant  claims  that  she  was
    trafficked to the United Kingdom by a person who had agreed to help  to
    further her career as a traditional Ugandan dancer. She was  forced  to
    act as a nanny and housekeeper once in the United Kingdom and  sexually
    abused by her trafficker's brothers. Eventually the  Appellant  escaped
    with the help of a  man  whom  she  met  on  a  bus,  she  commenced  a
    relationship with this man and lived with him. However this man  became
    abusive to her and she was forced to beg on the streets and  engage  in
    prostitution. Initially the Appellant also claimed to  be  at  risk  on
    return because her father, a soldier in the  Idi  Amin  era,  had  been
    sentenced to death for murder and she feared revenge from the  families
    of his victims. Further she claimed to be at risk because of her sexual
    orientation. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing  before  Judge  Whiting
    the Appellant was found to be incredible on all grounds. This  decision
    was upheld by the Upper Tribunal so far as her  claim  based  upon  her
    sexual orientation and her  father's  involvement  with  the  Idi  Amin
    regime were concerned.  The  matter  was  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal only  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been
    trafficked and to face re-trafficking on return as a result.


 6. At the hearing before first-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien  the  Appellant
    gave oral evidence. In dismissing the Appellant's appeal the Judge  did
    not accept that the Appellant  was  giving  a  true  account  primarily
    because of various inconsistencies in her evidence.

Submissions

 7. In answer to my initial question Mr Lay said that  the  materiality  of
    the error of law asserted flows from the assessment of  inconsistencies
    in the Appellant's account. There is no indication that  the  Appellant
    was treated as a vulnerable  witness.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found that inconsistencies in the Appellant's account were fatal to her
    credibility and in doing so he has not considered the narrow  issue  of
    her accepted vulnerability and the ways in which this would affect  her
    evidence.  The  expert's  report  from  Dr  Battersby  shows  that  the
    appellant was a vulnerable  witness.  It  is  clear  from  JL  (medical
    reports-credibility) China [2013]  UKUT  00145  (IAC)  that  the  judge
    needed to deal with and consider the effect  of  vulnerability.  I  was
    asked to look at the Joint Presidential Guidance Note no 2 of 2010. The
    Judge does not take into  account  or  consider  whether  a  victim  of
    trafficking would be consistent in her  account.  He  should  not  have
    treated this like a normal asylum claim.


 8. For the Respondent Mr Richards  said  that  having  read  the  skeleton
    argument submitted to the First-tier Tribunal there is  no  mention  of
    the impact of vulnerability on  credibility  findings.  It  is  however
    clear that at the hearing Counsel made much of how the Appellant should
    be treated when giving evidence. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did what
    was required. Paragraphs 49 and 50 acknowledge the expert's  conclusion
    in respect of the Appellant's account but  the  Judge  rightly  reminds
    himself that he is entitled to form his own view and  in  doing  so  he
    takes into account  Dr  Battersby's  opinion.  Dr  Battersby  said  the
    Appellant had good recall and was able to  describe  past  experiences.
    The Judge was entitled to find this was an articulate witness with good
    recall. There was no error of law. Turning to  JL  (medical  reports  -
    credibility) China Mr Richards said that this fits  in  to  the  extent
    that if the expert concludes that the witness is articulate  with  good
    recall vulnerability does not have a significant impact. The Judge made
    clear findings on the evidence. There was no material error of law.


 9. In response Mr Lay referred again to the experts' report of Ms Stepnitz
    and Dr Battersby. The Judge needed to be explicit and he  was  not.  He
    did not indicate that he had applied JL (medical reports - credibility)
    China. Paragraph 55 refers to there being no cogent explanation for why
    the  account  has  mutated  over  time  and  whereas  the   Appellant's
    vulnerability  was  a  potential  explanation  that  should  have  been
    considered.


10. I reserved decision.



Error of law

11. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda who claims to have been trafficked
    to the United Kingdom and to have been abused by her trafficker  ("BM")
    and others in this country. On escape from her trafficker the Appellant
    claims to have formed a relationship with  a  Ugandan/British  man  who
    also abused her and forced her to work as a prostitute  to  earn  money
    for him. Having escaped this man  in  2012  and  having  failed  in  an
    application for leave to remain as the victim of domestic violence  the
    Appellant claimed asylum. Her claim was rejected and her appeal against
    refusal  was  dismissed.  Upon  referral  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  the
    dismissal of the Appellant's appeal was upheld on two out of the  three
    grounds upon which it was based. It  was  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing restricted to the third ground being that  as  a
    victim of trafficking the Appellant fell  within  a  particular  social
    group and had a well-founded fear of persecution through re-trafficking
    upon a return to Uganda.


12. At the hearing before the First-tier tribunal the  Appellant  submitted
    experts' reports from Abigail Stepnitz an expert in  human  trafficking
    and Dr Alison Battersby a consultant psychiatrist. She provided written
    witness statements and she gave oral  evidence.  The  Judge  was  fully
    alive to the contents of both reports as is readily apparent  from  the
    decision and having considered both reports and the Appellant's written
    and oral evidence he decided that the Appellant was not credible due to
    various discrepancies in  her  evidence.  The  only  challenge  to  the
    Judge's decision is  the  assertion  that  in  making  his  credibility
    assessment he did not consider whether  the  Appellant's  status  as  a
    vulnerable  witness  may  have  had  an  effect  of  her  evidence,  in
    particular whether the inconsistences in her evidence forming the basis
    of his credibility finding could be explained by the  trauma  that  she
    had suffered.


13. In my judgement this  is  an  assertion  with  significant  element  of
    artificiality and expediency. The original decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was based on adverse credibility findings in  respect  of  all
    aspects of her asylum claim. Adverse credibility findings were made  in
    respect of all limbs of her claim and the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal did not suggest that her status as a vulnerable  witness
    made these findings unsafe.  The  Upper  Tribunal  upheld  the  adverse
    credibility findings in respect of two limbs of her claim and set aside
    the decision in respect of the third limb, human  trafficking,  because
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not shown that he had considered  the
    expert report of Alison Stepnitz.  In these circumstances it  may  have
    been better and avoided the significant delay if the  matter  had  been
    retained in the Upper Tribunal for this limited issue to be resolved.


14. In any event the matter was remitted to  the  First-tierTtribunal.  The
    only issue was the question of trafficking. It is perhaps unclear  how,
    even if a positive credibility finding had been made, the issue of risk
    on return could have been made out with the alleged trafficking  having
    taken  place  some  14  years  previously.  Nevertheless,  the   appeal
    proceeded and the Judge made adverse credibility  findings  based  upon
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's account.  In  a  clearly  structured
    decision the Judge did not merely refer to taking all the evidence into
    account but, at paragraph 3 he details  that  evidence  giving  a  very
    clear indication that he  was  not  paying  mere  lip  service  to  the
    voluminous documentation that was before him. The Judge comprehensively
    recites the Appellant's account.


15. It is asserted that it was submitted at the outset of the hearing  that
    the Appellant should be treated as a vulnerable witness  and  noted  in
    the grounds of appeal that the judge appears to accept the diagnosis of
    complex PTSD. There is no reason in my judgment  to  suggest  that  the
    Judge did anything other than  treat  the  Appellant  as  a  vulnerable
    witness. There is no requirement for him to recite  that  fact  in  his
    decision. JL (medical reports - credibility)  China  does  not  suggest
    that the Judge needs to recite the  Joint  Presidential  guidance  only
    that he should apply it.


16. The Judge was assisted in his consideration by a  detailed  Psychiatric
    Report prepared by Dr Alison Battersby on 30 July 2015. This report was
    prepared after the case was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  re-
    make the decision in respect of the Appellant's trafficking  claim.  In
    preparing the report Dr Battersby took into account,  inter  alia,  the
    first and supplementary  reports  from  Abigail  Stepnitz,  the  asylum
    interview, the Appellant's  witness  statements  and  the  initial  and
    supplementary refusal letters. Dr  Battersby  was  asked  a  number  of
    specific questions. All of them are relevant but so far as this  appeal
    is concerned question 9 stands out.

        Do you think that (the Appellant's) ability to recall details of her
        past experiences has been  impaired  by  any  trauma  that  she  has
        suffered? If so, can you describe the nature of the  impairment  and
        explain how such trauma would have impaired her  ability  to  answer
        questions in interview or subsequently.

    The response reads:

        (The Appellant) appears to have good recall of the trauma  that  she
        has suffered. Objectively her concentration was good. In my opinion,
        her ability to recall trauma is not significantly impaired. She does
        become distressed when talking about sexual exploitation from (BM's)
        brothers. She does disconnect from her emotions connected  to  these
        events which could be misinterpreted as being unaffected by them. It
        is pathological that she is able to describe most  of  these  events
        without any emotional content and this  is  highly  consistent  with
        victims of repeated sexual victimisation.

    Question 13 is also pertinent:

        Do you think (the  Appellant's)  ability  to  represent  herself  is
        impaired by her mental health problems and/or past experiences?

    Answer:

        In my opinion, (the Appellant) although a traumatised individual  is
        able to adequately represent herself. She may become  distressed  at
        times and may need a short break but  can  describe  well  her  past
        experiences.


17. In my judgment the Report from  Dr  Battersby  clearly  identifies  the
    Appellant's vulnerability and having done so considers  the  effect  of
    that vulnerability and the causes behind it on the Appellant's  ability
    to recall and give evidence. It is a professional  report  prepared  on
    the Appellant's behalf. The Judge very clearly took  this  report  into
    account  in  reaching  his  own  conclusions  as  to  the   Appellant's
    credibility. The Judge was fully entitled, indeed bound, to  take  this
    report into account. Indeed, for the Judge to come to  a  separate  and
    different view of the Appellant's abilities  in  these  respects  would
    have not only been beyond his expertise but also irrational when expert
    evidence was being submitted on the Appellant's behalf.


18. There is in my judgement nothing to indicate that  the  Judge  was  not
    only  fully  aware  of  the  Appellant's  psychiatric   condition   and
    consequent vulnerability  as  put  forward  by  Dr  Battersby  and  its
    potential effect on her ability to give evidence but also that he  gave
    this full  and  proper  consideration  in  accordance  with  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance. There is in my judgment no error of law material
    to the Judge's decision to dismiss this appeal.


Conclusion

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law for the reasons set out above.

20. This appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.


Signed:                                            Date: 10/08/2016

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
