
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08681/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 3 February 2016                   |                                     |
|                                     |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                     NA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr K Smyth, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Eritrea and claims to be born on 21 June
    1995. He appealed to the Upper Tribunal against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom dated 29 October 2015 from the decision
    of the respondent dated 12 August 2013 refusing his  claim  for  asylum
    and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.




    The First-tier Tribunal's findings.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant
    Hutchinson stating that it is arguable that the Judge failed to  follow
    the approach in the country guidance case of MO (illegal  exit-risk  on
    return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 00190 (IAC) by rejecting the appellant's
    account of having left Eritrea  illegally.  The  Judge  considered  the
    appellant's claim to be of the Pentecostal faith which he found  to  be
    determinative and did not consider whether the appellant  left  Eritrea
    illegally. The Judge added that it must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the
    appellant was only nine years of age at the time when he claims to have
    left Eritrea illegally and only speaks Amharic.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in summary are the following.

 4. The Judge stated, "The submissions made by Mr Smyth focused on the case
    of MO on the appellant's claim  that  he  made  an  illegal  exit  from
    Eritrea. It was argued that this in  itself,  was  sufficient  for  his
    appeal to be allowed. The appellant's approach  expressly  acknowledges
    showed he had difficulty in answering questions about his  religion  at
    his  asylum  interview.  However,  the  Judge  was  reminded   of   the
    appellant's age and experiences".

 5. The Judge stated "having heard the appellant give evidence  and  having
    considered the evidence in the round, I am firmly of the view  that  he
    came to be a Pentecostal is a fabrication. This issue lies at the heart
    of the claim as it is  the  reason  given  by  the  appellant  for  his
    father's arrest and his mother's decision to flee the country".

 6. The Judge further stated "The appellant was given ample opportunity  to
    demonstrate that he had a reasonable grasp of the tenants of his  claim
    to faith at his asylum interview. The appellant failed to give  answers
    which would be expected of a person living with  a  Pentecostal  mother
    who was instructing him in the faith and he would not know  more  about
    the key features of that religion, such as which book of the  Bible  it
    is taken from and the importance of the baptism of the spirit. The fact
    he was able to say what the word Pentecostal gift  signifies  also  the
    meaning of the day of the Pentecostal are not sufficient  to  establish
    his claimed familiarity with  the  faith.  It  was  found  particularly
    significant that when offered the opportunity to talk about any part of
    the Bible which he liked, the appellant plainly floundered".

 7. The Judge stated "The appellant's explanations in his witness statement
    dated 6 May 2013 explained his performance  at  the  interview.  Having
    considered the applications it is not accepted that a single visit to a
    church might not be enough to register the name. The main  point  being
    that the appellant has only been to church once despite  professing  to
    be a practising Pentecostal and the  explanation  he  offered  that  it
    clashed with school is a decidedly  poor  one.  There  must  surely  be
    opportunities to attend church outside school hours. It would have been
    reasonable for the appellant to have sought clarification if there  was
    any doubt in the appellant's mind what he was being asked about  Easter
    and at his age it might not be reasonable to have expected him to  seek
    clarification. The recorded answer "once a year" does  not  answer  the
    question asked which was "at which time of year is Easter  celebrated".
    However, the question was repeated  twice  and  the  appellant's  final
    answer was "I don't know".  The  possibility  that  the  appellant  had
    misunderstood the question is  much  reduced  for  the  fact  that  the
    question  was  repeated  twice  and  the  appellant  confirmed  he  had
    understood the interpreter at the end of the interview.  The  appellant
    also said he was feeling fit and well. The interview was  conducted  by
    an officer who is likely to have been trained  in  interviewing  minors
    and the appellant was accompanied by his Solicitor and  an  independent
    interpreter. These factors  reduce  further  the  likelihood  that  the
    appellant's  performance  was  affected  by  his  becoming   emotional,
    something which is usually recorded in the transcript but which was not
    in this case. I infer that the appellant has sought to justify his lack
    of knowledge but his explanations are not reliable.

 8. The Judge found that in all the circumstances the appellant's claim  to
    be a Pentecostal list, either as a result of  his  parents  believe  so
    because he was genuinely adopted  the  fate  here  in  the  UK  is  not
    believed and his credibility is very severely damaged.

 9. The Judge stated "As to the issue of unlawful exit, as said,  Mr  Smyth
    submissions were directed towards this issue and sought to argue  that,
    even if an adverse finding were made regarding the appellant's  claimed
    faith, he should still succeed in showing entitlement to refugee status
    on this point alone. The appellant said he left Eritrea  in  the  first
    month of 2005 at which time he would have been nine years of age. I  do
    not therefore expect him to have clear personal  recollections  of  the
    journey. At his interview, he was able to say only that they  travelled
    in a lorry and the journey took two  days.  When  he  made  his  second
    witness statement in October 2013, the  appellant  remembered  his  mum
    packing a travel bag. He remembered the type of vehicle and that he had
    not known the driver. He remembered that they only travelled  at  night
    and the hid in the house during the day. He overheard his mother saying
    that they had to hide. He remembered the scant foliage in  the  desert.
    He remembered his mother talking to someone after they had  arrived  in
    Sudan. This new information is set out under a  heading  "illegal  exit
    from Eritrea ...". His evidence at the hearing was  less  detailed  and
    similar to the interview record. He said, in answer to the question how
    he left Eritrea, that is mother told him they travelled in  a  vehicle.
    Asked where he went, he said he remembered seeing desert and then  they
    went to Sudan".

10. The Judge remarked, "I found this vast and more detailed account  given
    in the second witness statement to be inconsistent  with  his  lack  of
    knowledge of the time of the interview and again  at  the  hearing.  As
    said, a nine-year-old child would not remember much. The fact that this
    vastly more detailed account would be  given  and  there  has  been  no
    explanation for the increased capacity to recollect  details  indicates
    to me that the second statement can be  disregarded  as  embellishment.
    This undermines the appellant's credibility. Bearing  in  mind  I  have
    found the appellant give a fabricated account of his reason for leaving
    Eritrea, I do not accept the left Eritrea illegally either".

11. The Judge stated "I have carefully considered Mr Smyth submissions.  In
    MO which was heard in February 2011, the  Tribunal  accepted  Professor
    Kibreab's evidence, regarding  the  available  categories  of  unlawful
    exit. Mr Smyth argued that the appellant did  not  appear  to  fit  the
    profile of either of the two possible categories numbered  (vi)  highly
    trusted government officials and their families and (vii)  (members  of
    ministerial staff recommended  by  the  Department  to  attend  studies
    abroad). The Tribunal accepted the number of people who would fall into
    these categories were small but rejected an argument  that  there  were
    fanciful or their existence could be wholly  disregarded.  The  turning
    point for considering the situation was different from that  previously
    appertaining in August/September 2008 when  the  authorities  suspended
    exit visa facilities. This appellant therefore falls within the earlier
    period considered in GM Eritrea and others v SS HD [2008] EWCA Civ  833
    where the appellant approaching draft age who was found  generally  not
    credible would not be assumed to have left illegally. The  Tribunal  in
    MO confirmed the guidance given in MA (draft evaders-illegal departures-
    risk)  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00059  that,  for  those  who   left   before
    August/September 2008, illegal exit could not be assumed  if  they  had
    been found wholly incredible. (See paragraph 16 and one 116)"

12. The Judge stated that "Mr Smyth argument were based  on  exceptions  on
    the part of the appellant's evidence has been uncontentious such as his
    claim to have had little formal education, to have come from Assab  and
    to be an Amharic speaker. It is true, that at least for 2008 cases, the
    Tribunal  said  that  inferences  might  be  drawn  from  uncontentious
    personal data as to whether legal exit within those two categories  was
    feasible. However, other than the appellant's facility with Ahmaric,  I
    do not see that the matters relied on  are  uncontentious.  Whilst  the
    appellant claims to come from Assab (where Ahamric is a lingua  franca)
    and to be uneducated, it seems to  me  that  these  matters  which  are
    likely to stand or fall with my overall credibility assessment. If  the
    appellant's account is a fabrication, then these facets of the  account
    would be likely to have been woven  into  the  narrative  in  order  to
    enhance it. The fact that the appellant can speak Amharic does not mean
    he cannot be regarded as falling within categories (vi) and (vii). Such
    a person is likely to have travelled and to be well educated".

13. The Judge concluded "I conclude the appellant has  not  established  he
    left Eritrea illegally or that, if he did leave in 2005, he  fled  with
    his mother after his father had been detained on account of the  family
    Pentecostal beliefs. I find  that  the  appellant  has  fabricated  his
    evidence on both matters. The appellant is therefore  not  assisted  by
    the country guidance case as set out above any has not established that
    there is a real risk he will come to harm  in  Eritrea.  The  appellant
    said he had two brothers, although he did not live with them. Given the
    appellant's account of religious  persecution  has  been  found  to  be
    false, there is no reason why his father would  have  gone  missing  or
    that his mother would have  left  Eritrea.  It  is  probable  that  the
    appellant's family remain in Eritrea and that he was  sent  abroad  for
    other reasons. The appellant will be able to return and  resume  living
    with his family" on his return".

14. The Judge stated "The core of the appellant's claim is to be in fear of
    persecution on his return to  Eritrea  because  she  left  the  country
    illegally. In MO  (illegal  exit-risk  on  return)  Eritrea  CG  [2011]
    supports the proposition that if anyone exits Eritrea  illegally,  they
    may face a real risk of persecution on return. However  MO  also  makes
    clear that the year in which a person left Eritrea is relevant. This is
    because it was not until August  of  September  2008  that  the  highly
    restrictive bar on exit visas was imposed. The appellant  left  Eritrea
    before the 2008 restrictions were imposed.

    Grounds of appeal

15. The appellant's grounds of appeal  state  the  following,  in  summary.
    There are material errors in the determination.  The  first  ground  of
    appeal is the Judge's  rejection  of  Pentecostalism  and  reasons  for
    departure wrongly considered that  determinative  of  the  question  of
    illegal exit. The First-tier Tribunal Judge rightly observed  that  the
    country guidance makes it clear that illegal exit cannot be assumed  if
    an individual has  been  found  wholly  incredible.  Nevertheless,  the
    categories of people who can be considered to have been in  a  position
    to have left Eritrea unlawfully, prior to  August/September  2008,  are
    limited. These limited categories of people are initially set out in MA
    and then subsequently revised slightly in MO. The  only  category  that
    the  appellant  could  realistically  fall  under  is  the  latter  two
    categories. In  (vi)  highly  trusted  government  official  and  their
    families or (vii) members  of  ministerial  staff  recommended  by  the
    Department to attend studies abroad. The Court of Appeal made it  clear
    in GM Eritrea and others with the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] EWCA Civ 833 that  at  paragraph  37  "when  we  know
    nothing about the individual situation of the appellants, the  question
    becomes whether there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that any  of
    them did not fall into any category".

16. In MO guidance was given as to how a  decision  maker  should  approach
    that question. It was stated, "We appreciate that  in  the  context  of
    this case the decision maker has found the appellant wholly lacking  in
    credibility. It is difficult to see any basis of  finding  conclusively
    that they would not fall within one of the above two categories. But at
    least in a range of cases the evidence may be such as to make it  clear
    that the claimant is concerned albeit, wholly  or  largely  lacking  in
    credibility, could not have had any links with the government officials
    of the regimes and could not have an education or skills profile making
    it likely they have been civil servants or have  an  educational  bent.
    What may be involved here  is  sometimes  clearer  recognition  by  the
    decision maker that when finding a treatment wholly incredible they are
    not in fact meaning that they lack  credibility  in  every  conceivable
    particular, since they may in fact accept, for example  that  they  are
    from a rural background and lack education".

17. The Judge did  not  follow  this  approach  and  instead  rejected  the
    appellant's claim  to  have  left  illegally  because  he  treated  the
    incredible account of his reasons for leaving Eritrea  is  his  claimed
    Pentecostal faith, as determinative. The approach taken by the Judge at
    paragraph 34 is contrary to the guidance given in MO in which the Upper
    Tribunal made clear that an  individual's  evidence  regarding  matters
    such as background and level of education did not necessarily stand and
    fall with the assessment of other aspects of the claim.

18. Further, the first-tier Tribunal Judge's reference to  the  appellant's
    ability to speak Amharic cannot be construed as an adequate  reason  to
    find that it is reasonably likely  that  he  does  not  fall  into  the
    categories of people who may have left unlawfully. This is because  the
    First-tier Judge refers to the appellant has  somebody  who  can  speak
    Amharic with the inference being that the appellant  is  bilingual  and
    therefore has a profile of somebody who is "likely  to  have  travelled
    and to be well educated". However the appellant  only  speaks  Amharic,
    and a lawful assessment of whether it is  reasonably  likely  that  the
    appellant is not the family  member  of  a  highly  trusted  government
    official or a member of ministry staff recommended to study abroad must
    take into account the fact  that  the  appellant  does  not  speak  the
    national language of Eritrea, Tigrinya".

19. The second ground of appeal is that failure to take  into  account  the
    relevance of the appellant's age at the date of departure to his  claim
    to have left Eritrea illegally.  The  appellant  claims  to  have  left
    Eritrea in 2005 aged nine years old. On two occasions the Judge appears
    to have accepted this claim as the date of departure. It was  incumbent
    upon the Judge to assess whether it was reasonably likely that somebody
    who left Eritrea as a nine-year-old child is not the family member of a
    highly trusted government official or a  member  of  ministerial  staff
    recommended to study abroad. However nowhere  does  the  Judge  conduct
    such an assessment with the appellant's age at the date of departure in
    mind.

    The hearing

20. I heard submissions from both parties as to whether there is  an  error
    of law in the determination.

    Findings as to whether there is an error of law in the determination.

21. I have given anxious scrutiny to the determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and have taken  into  account  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    Permission to appeal was granted only on the bases  that  even  if  the
    Judge rejected the appellant's asylum  claim,  the  Judge  should  have
    independently considered, the  appellants  claimed  illegal  exit  from
    Eritrea which leaves the appellant open to persecution  in  Eritrea  on
    his return.

22. I have considered Judge Froom's determination with all due scrutiny and
    care. I find that the determination is sound, well-reasoned and without
    error, material or otherwise. I struggle to understand  why  permission
    was granted because the same submissions made to me at the hearing were
    made to Judge Froom who gave cogent reasons for why he did  not  accept
    the appellant's claim that he left Eritrea illegally  would  bring  him
    into the risk category set out in MO on his return.

23. The very basis of the appellant's claim was that his father and brother
    disappeared due to  their  claimed  persecution  on  account  of  being
    Pentecostal and as a consequence,  he  and  his  mother  had  to  leave
    Eritrea unlawfully. The Judge did not accept  the  first  part  of  the
    story that his family were persecuted because  they  were  Pentecostal.
    The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant had not  demonstrated
    that he was Pentecostal because he had very  little  knowledge  of  the
    religion which was not credible given his claim that he  lived  with  a
    Pentecostal, mother who was teaching him about  the  faith.  The  Judge
    found that the appellant had fabricated his evidence in its entirety in
    respect of his claim that he is a Pentecostal and that his family  were
    persecuted for that reason. It followed that the Judge did  not  accept
    that the appellant and his mother had any reason to flee  or  had  fled
    Eritrea and stated that in all probability the appellant's  family  are
    still living in Eritrea. There is no perversity in these findings.

24. The Judge also took into account an alternative scenario, that even  if
    the appellant and his mother had left the country, they did  so  before
    the exit procedures came into place in 2008. He took into account  that
    the appellant left country in 2005 when exit procedures were not  being
    enforced. On the evidence the  Judge  was  not  only  entitled  to  but
    legally bound to come to the conclusion that he did of the evidence.

25. The only part of the submissions made by Mr Smyth  which  I  accept  is
    that notwithstanding rejection of the  appellant's  asylum  claim,  the
    Judge could nevertheless have found that the appellant  exited  Eritrea
    illegally. This does not mean that he had to so find but only  that  he
    could have. In this case the Judge did  not  find  that  the  appellant
    exited Eritrea, at all or unlawfully. It was open to the Judge  on  the
    evidence to find that the appellant did not tell the  truth  about  the
    reason why he and his mother fled Eritrea which was persecution on  the
    bases of his religion. As  this  was  the  only  reason  given  by  the
    appellant for fleeing the country, the Judge was therefore entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant and his mother did not leave  the  country,
    at all.

26. The Judge having found that  the  appellant's  family  were  not  being
    persecuted due to their religion and as day follows night,  found  that
    the appellant did not leave Eritrea with his mother for this reason.

27. The Judge also considered the appellant age of nine  years.  The  Judge
    stated that even if he accepted this evidence, that his mother took him
    out of the country, which he did not, said that it is trite law that  a
    child cannot be held responsible for an adult's actions. The  appellant
    went where his mother took him and would not be held responsible by the
    authorities in Eritrea. There was no evidence before the Judge  that  a
    child is held responsible by the Eritrea authorities for  his  parent's
    actions of taking him out of the country when he is a child.

28. The very basis of the appellant asylum claim fell  through  the  floor.
    The Judge very clearly stated in his determination  that  he  does  not
    believe the appellant exited Eritrea unlawfully the same way he did not
    believe his reason for why he exited unlawfully.  These  are  perfectly
    sustainable findings on the evidence. I can find no material  or  other
    error of  law  in  the  determination,  real,  imagined,  perceived  or
    embryonic.

29. I find that the Judge was entitled and required to reach his conclusion
    based on his consideration and evaluation of the evidence as  a  whole.
    The Judge relied on the country guidance case of MO  appropriately  and
    followed the guidance faithfully. The Judge's reasoning and  evaluation
    of the evidence in his determination has legal depth and  understanding
    of the background and case law on Eritrea.  I  find  that  the  Judge's
    reasoning is  understandable,  and  not  perverse.  The  arguments  put
    forward by Mr Smyth have been properly rejected by  Judge  Froom  as  I
    also reject them.

30. Considering the evidence in this appeal in the round,  I  find  that  a
    differently  constituted  Tribunal  would  not  come  to  a   different
    conclusion on the facts in this appeal.

31. I find that no error of law has  been  established  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination. I uphold his decision.

DECISION

Appeal dismissed


Signed by   Dated this 16th day of February 2016
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

.............................................
Mrs S Chana

