
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  AA/08852/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Date Sent                  |
|On 4th July 2013                                |On 15th July 2013          |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                YARAS RASAEV
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Counsel instructed on behalf of Elder
                  Rahimi Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  the  Russian  Federation  born  on  8th
    January 1985.  He appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Bart-Stewart)  who  in  a   determination
    promulgated on  30th  April  2013  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 14th September 2012 to refuse to grant  asylum
    under paragraph 336 of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) and  a
    decision to remove him from the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant by
    way  of  directions  under  paragraphs  8-10  of  Schedule  2  to   the
    Immigration Act 1971.

The background to the appeal:

 2.  The history of the appeal is as follows.  The  Appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 10th May 2010 having  left  Makhachkala  on  2nd  May
    2010, travelling to Riga in Latvia with the assistance of an agent  and
    then travelling from Latvia by lorry to the United Kingdom.  He claimed
    asylum on 10th May 2010.

 3.  The basis of his claim is that he is a Russian national from  Chechnya
    and claimed that as a result of having  been  arrested  by  way  of  an
    illegal detention in 2008 until January 2009 after  trying  to  reclaim
    his family home, when he had been forced to sign papers  which  he  had
    not been allowed to read, charges had been fabricated against him  that
    he was a rebel and that he feared arrest, imprisonment and  torture  if
    returned to the Russian Federation.

 4.   In the Appellant's account, he had given details concerning the death
    of his parents and following this having to live with  his  grandmother
    in Makhachkala, Dagestan and that having no legal right to  live  there
    was returned to Chechnya in April 2003 after having been detained.   He
    remained in Chechnya between 2003 and 2004, not able to work but living
    with a woman called Alina until in May 2004  he  travelled  to  Breslan
    where he worked as a porter until September 2004.  He then returned  to
    Makhachkala, Dagestan and had no problems with the authorities  between
    2004 and 2008.

 5.   In October 2008, on his return to Chechnya  to  obtain  documents  so
    that he could live and study, and upon return to  the  family  home  he
    found that a policeman had moved into the property.  He was not able to
    live in that property and it was claimed had  no  assistance  from  the
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Grosni when he had sought  to  complain.
    He was beaten, arrested and detained for a period of three  months  and
    made to sign documents that he was not allowed  to  read  before  being
    told to go.  He then returned to  his  grandmother's  home,  found  his
    birth  certificate  amongst  his  mother's  possessions  but  had  made
    arrangements in 2010 to leave Russia.

 6.   The  Respondent  in  a  refusal  letter  dated  14th  September  2012
    considered the factual aspect of the Appellant's claim and  did  so  in
    the light of country materials relevant to the Russian  Federation  and
    in particular, dealing with trial processes in Russia, the  ability  of
    citizens to avail themselves of the protection of  the  authorities  in
    Russia  including  the  number  of  independent  and   non-governmental
    organisations capable of advancing any complaints, freedom of  movement
    within the Russian Federation and the ability to obtain  documentation,
    such as internal passports and the ability to register as a resident in
    the Russian Federation.

 7.   In considering the Appellant's claim, the Respondent did  not  accept
    as credible the account given by the Appellant concerning the  material
    facts for a number of reasons.  The Respondent dealt with a  number  of
    issues in the refusal letter including the availability and sufficiency
    of protection, accessing protection from other agencies, the  issue  of
    internal relocation  and  the  ability  for  the  Appellant  to  obtain
    necessary  documentation  in  Russia  to  enable  internal  relocation.
    Article 8 was also considered in the refusal  letter.   The  Respondent
    did not find that the Appellant had demonstrated a well-founded fear of
    persecution and refused his application.

 8. The Appellant exercised his right to appeal and this led to the  appeal
    coming before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Beg) on 29th October 2012.
      Mr  Gayle,  who  represents  the  Appellant  in   these   proceedings
    represented the Appellant at that hearing.   Judge  Beg  dismissed  the
    appeal under the Refugee Convention and on human  rights  grounds.   An
    application was made for permission  to  appeal  which  was  originally
    refused on 28th November 2012 on the basis that the grounds amounted to
    nothing more than a lengthy attempt to re-argue matters that  had  been
    determined.  An application was made for permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal and permission was granted on 13th  December  2012.   In
    that grant of permission, the judge stated at paragraph 2 that  he  was
    minded to find an error of law and  set  aside  the  determination  and
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing "any  written
    objection to that course must be submitted to  the  Upper  Tribunal  no
    later than 3rd January."  On 18th February 2013, Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Lane noted that there had been no objection from either party thus  the
    determination was set aside  for  error  of  law  and  the  appeal  was
    "remitted to be heard afresh by the First-tier Tribunal on all  issues,
    including credibility."

 9. Thus the appeal  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Bart-
    Stewart) for a second time on 12th April 2013.  The Appellant was again
    represented by Mr Gayle, and the Respondent by  a  Presenting  Officer.
    The judge heard oral evidence of the Appellant and for that to  be  the
    subject of cross-examination.

10.   In  a  determination  promulgated  on  30th  April  2013,  the  judge
    dismissed his appeal.  In a comprehensive determination, he  considered
    the factual account given by the Appellant and set out the findings  of
    fact at paragraphs 29 to 41.  The judge did not  find  the  Appellant's
    account to be a credible one but in considering the core aspect of  his
    claim (relating to his illegal detention for a period of  three  months
    after trying to reclaim the family home and being forced to sign papers
    which were then used to fabricate charges against him of being a  rebel
    demonstrated by the subpoenas provided later on), were not accepted  as
    credible by the judge for the reasons given.  The judge also dealt with
    other issues concerning his claim to have had no official documentation
    and thus found his account to lack credibility providing  that  at  the
    time he left the Russian Federation he did not have a well-founded fear
    of persecution for a Convention reason.  In the alternative, the  judge
    considered the  issue  of  internal  relocation  at  paragraph  41  and
    considered that if he could not return to his home area (which she  did
    not accept) he could internally relocate within the Russian Federation,
    a matter that had been dealt with at length in the refusal letter.

11. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and on 22nd May
    2013 permission was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Poole  for  the
    following reasons:-

         "1.  The Appellant is a citizen of Russia.  He claimed  asylum  but
             that claim was rejected by the Respondent.  He  appealed  that
             decision and the appeal came before the Judge  of  the  First-
             tier Tribunal Bart-Stewart sitting at  Taylor  House  on  12th
             April 2013.  For reasons set out in a determination the  judge
             did not find the Appellant's claim credible and dismissed  the
             appeal on all grounds.

         2.   The Appellant now seeks leave to appeal on a number of grounds
             which could be viewed as simply disagreement  with  the  judge
             over her findings of fact.  It  is  also  suggested  that  the
             judge displayed a 'worrying lack of knowledge'  by  indicating
             that she had not heard of Dagestan.  There is no reference  to
             that  in  the  determination  and  no   statement   from   the
             representative confirming  that  comment.   I  note  that  the
             grounds seeking leave have not been prepared  by  Counsel  who
             appeared.  I therefore ignore that suggestion.  However  there
             is general comment that the  judge  misdirected  herself  with
             regard to the standard of proof.  Reference  is  made  in  the
             grounds to various paragraphs of the determination.  Paragraph
             2 of the determination refers  to  the  burden  of  proof  and
             whilst the words 'standard of proof' are not used reference is
             made to 'substantial grounds for believing.'  That could  well
             be sufficient.  However at paragraph 29 reference is  made  to
             the  judge  not  being  satisfied   'upon   the   balance   of
             probabilities.'  That  raises  concerns.   However  that  same
             paragraph does refer to the lower  standard  but  it  is  just
             arguable that the judge did indeed adopt too high  a  standard
             of proof.

         3.   For that reason leave is granted."

The error of law hearing:

12. Thus the matter came before the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  Appellant  was
    represented by  Mr  Gayle,  who  had  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the previous two occasions and Ms Isherwood  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State.  Mr Gayle relied upon the written  grounds  for
    permission and supplemented them with oral submissions  by  taking  the
    Tribunal through each paragraph of the determination in the same way as
    they were referred to  in  the  grounds  for  permission.   Whilst  the
    permission grounds make it clear that the only reason  that  permission
    was granted was in respect of the assertion that the judge applied  the
    wrong standard of proof, Mr Gayle relied upon the other  issues  namely
    that the judge failed to provide sufficient and/or sustainable  reasons
    for the adverse credibility findings made by the judge.

13.   Mr Gayle submitted that the judge applied the wrong standard of proof
    namely the balance of probabilities at paragraph 29 and this materially
    affected the judge's analysis of the  Appellant's  credibility  in  the
    determination thus the determination was flawed as a whole.

14.   In respect of paragraph 30, he submitted that the judge  ignored  the
    fact that there was no right to occupy and re-register a  property  and
    ignored the Appellant's efforts to  get  the  register  corrected.   At
    paragraphs 30 to 32, the judge did not take into account  the  evidence
    historically relating to Chechans and in respect of  paragraph  33  the
    finding was an unsustainable one and demonstrated a  failure  to  grasp
    the core of the Appellant's account.  He did  not  claim  that  he  was
    suspected of being a Chechan rebel and thus  he  would  not  have  been
    questioned about that at the time of  his  detention.   In  respect  of
    paragraph 34, the judge failed to consider  the  Appellant's  evidence.
    The Appellant was a child when his parents died therefore he would  not
    know that his grandmother was aware of the  birth  certificate  in  her
    belongings.  If she had known, she would have used  it  to  assist  the
    Appellant to become registered.

15.  Similar submissions were made in respect of paragraphs 35, 36, 37,  38
    and 39 as set out in the grounds.  At paragraph 39 Mr Gayle  reiterated
    his submission concerning the judge  adopting  the  wrong  standard  of
    proof and that there would be nothing implausible  about  an  Appellant
    being made to sign a document that he had not read.  Thus he  submitted
    that when the credibility findings were read  as  a  whole,  the  judge
    began on the wrong premise and furthermore failed to provide sufficient
    or sustainable reasons for the adverse credibility  findings  that  she
    had given in her determination when dismissing the appeal.

16. Ms Isherwood on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon  the  Rule
    24 response dated 6th June 2013.   In  that  document,  the  Respondent
    opposed the Appellant's appeal stating  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge directed  herself  appropriately  and  had  applied  the  correct
    standard  of  proof  and  that  the  grounds  were  "no  more  than   a
    disagreement with the outcome."  In respect of this, she submitted that
    a careful reading of the determination as a whole demonstrated that the
    judge did not apply the wrong standard of proof despite the  slip  made
    by her at paragraph 29 referring to "the balance of probabilities."  At
    paragraph 2 she referred to substantial grounds for believing and  also
    at paragraph 29, she referred to  the  "lower  standard"  that  clearly
    reflected the correct burden of proof and therefore it cannot  be  said
    that the judge applied the wrong  standard  of  proof  when  making  an
    assessment of credibility.

17. In respect of credibility, whilst Mr Gayle had submitted that the judge
    had not taken into account  a  variety  of  matters,  for  example,  in
    respect of paragraph 30 that a third party to occupy and re-register  a
    property in Chechnya, there had been no reference made  throughout  the
    submissions to any objective material to indicate that  the  judge  was
    wrong in making the findings that she did.  A careful consideration  of
    the  Appellant's  bundle  demonstrated  that  there  was  very   little
    objective material put forward on behalf of the Appellant in comparison
    with a large amount of objective material  that  was  set  out  in  the
    Respondent's bundle and referred to at length in  the  refusal  letter.
    Ms Isherwood went through the various paragraphs in the same way as  Mr
    Gayle had indicating that the findings of fact made by the  judge  were
    entirely open to her on the evidence that was before her  and  that  it
    had not been demonstrated that there was any  error  of  law  in  those
    findings but that the grounds  were  simply  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings reached.

18. Mr Gayle by way of reply, submitted that there had not been a  slip  at
    paragraph 29 and that when she  referred  to  the  "lower  standard  of
    proof" it may have been a reference to the balance of probabilities  by
    reference to the criminal standard.  In respect to the submission  that
    he made relating to the Appellant's use of aunt and uncle in  which  it
    was submitted that they were not relatives in the  sense  of  being  an
    aunt and uncle but that that was a term commonly  used  as  a  mark  of
    respect for elders in many cultures, whilst he could not point  to  any
    objective evidence in relation to this, it was  a  matter  that  should
    have been in the judge's knowledge.   He  submitted  that  the  judge's
    approach to credibility demonstrated that there was a  flawed  approach
    overall thus the determination should be set aside.

19. I reserved my decision.

My assessment:

20.  The grounds advanced on behalf of the Appellant by Mr Gayle  are  two-
    fold; firstly, the  analysis  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    undermined by the reliance  on  an  incorrect  standard  of  proof  and
    secondly there was a failure to provide sufficient  and/or  sustainable
    reasons for the adverse credibility findings that were given.  Mr Gayle
    in his submissions and  in  the  written  grounds  makes  reference  to
    paragraphs 29 to 41 of the findings of fact of the judge.

21. I should set out the basis of the factual  account  of  the  Appellant.
    The Appellant was born on 8th January 1985 in Noviy Aldy, Chechnya  and
    was a Russian national of Chechan ethnicity.  It  was  claimed  by  him
    that his father was killed on 5th February  2000  after  going  to  the
    house of a friend whom he had heard had been killed by  soldiers.   His
    brother left with him and had not been seen  or  heard  of  since  that
    date.  It was said that his mother was also  killed  in  February  2000
    whilst travelling to the home village from  Mahkachkla  where  she  was
    staying with  the  Appellant's  grandmother.   She  travelled  back  to
    Chechnya after hearing of her husband's death.

22. In May 2000, after the death of his parents and  disappearance  of  his
    brother, he moved  to  live  with  his  grandmother  in  Mahkachkla  in
    Dagestan and lived there from May 2000 until May 2010.  As  he  had  no
    legal right to reside there because he was not registered  and  had  no
    documents  or  an  internal  passport,  he  worked  illegally  in   the
    construction industry but otherwise was supported by  his  grandmother.
    He had no contact with the authorities between May 2000 and April 2003.



23. In April 2003 he was detained by the police  and  held  in  an  unknown
    police station for one week.  He was  not  questioned  but  was  beaten
    several times and was taken back to Chechnya in  a  car  with  a  woman
    called Alina and left in the Zavodskoi borough.  He went to  live  with
    this lady and her daughter and did not work or leave the house  because
    he  was  too  scared.   He  was  supported  by   various   humanitarian
    organisations providing him with supplies and  blankets.   He  did  not
    attempt to register or apply for documentation because he was afraid.

24. In May 2004 he travelled to Beslan in Ossetia as a clandestine  in  the
    back of a potato lorry.  On arrival there, he lived in a container in a
    market where he worked as a porter.  He did this until  September  2004
    and then he left because the authorities  checked  people's  documents.
    The Appellant returned to Mahkachkla.  He  had  no  problems  with  the
    authorities between September 2004 and 2008.

25. In October 2008 the Appellant returned to Chechnya because he wanted to
    get documents and live there and study.  He intended to  prove  who  he
    was because he intended to live in  his  father's  house  and  use  the
    authorisation for the house.  When he returned to the  family  home  he
    found a policeman had moved into the property  with  his  family.   The
    Appellant went to the government body responsible for housing in  order
    to get an official document to prove that the house  belonged  to  him.
    He was told that they did not want to get involved in the  dispute  and
    refused to give him documents.  The housing authority told him that the
    policeman had registered the house under his own name.   The  Appellant
    travelled to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Grosni to complain  but
    was not allowed in.  He did not seek independent legal advice about his
    situation.  He returned to the house attempting to rally the neighbours
    but they refused.  He was arrested and taken to a  police  station  and
    locked in the basement for a  period  of  three  months.   He  was  not
    charged or questioned at any time during that detention and was  beaten
    on five occasions.  Before he was released on 30th January 2009 he  was
    made to sign several documents which he was not allowed  to  read.   He
    was told to "get lost" when  he  was  released.   He  returned  to  his
    grandmother's house in Mahkachkla on the same day.  She  died  on  10th
    March 2010.

26. In April 2009 he found  his  birth  certificate  amongst  his  mother's
    possessions in the grandmother's house.  He did not attempt to register
    himself using the document because he had made  arrangements  to  leave
    and travel to the UK.  In April a friend introduced  him  to  an  agent
    named Vakha who had asked  for  6,000  US  dollars  to  facilitate  the
    journey but accepted gold and jewellery from the Appellant.  He left on
    2nd May 2010.

27. Since he left Russia, the public prosecutor's office  have  issued  two
    subpoenas asking him to attend their office to provide "an explanation"
    or face criminal proceedings if he failed to comply.

28. The Appellant fears that as a result of  his  illegal  detention  after
    trying to reclaim the family home, having been forced  to  sign  papers
    that he was not allowed to read the policeman who had  taken  his  home
    had used influence to fabricate charges against him of being a  Chechan
    rebel thus the subpoenas relate to fabricated charges.  The judge dealt
    with the Appellant's factual account  at  paragraphs  4  to  9  of  the
    determination.  At  paragraphs  18  to  21  the  judge  summarised  the
    Appellant's evidence, including his asylum statement dated 8th  October
    2010, an appeal statement dated 17th October 2010 and a statement dated
    28th March 2013.  In the appeal statement he commented on  the  reasons
    for refusal letter (and was set out in detail  at  paragraph  19).   At
    paragraph 20, the judge set out the further evidence of  the  Appellant
    in his statements and at paragraph 21 dealt with the  Appellant's  core
    concern relating to the subpoenas that had been issued namely that  his
    details were on an official database throughout the Russian  Federation
    that he was wanted by the authorities.  Thus  he  was  forced  to  sign
    papers that he was not allowed to read, he was certain that a policeman
    who stole his home had used his influence to fabricate charges of being
    a rebel against him.  As the judge said, "he has no formal  interaction
    with the Chechan authorities therefore the  subpoenas  must  relate  to
    fabricated  charges."   Those  statements  were  then  adopted  as  his
    evidence-in-chief.  The determination at paragraphs 23 to  27  set  out
    the  evidence  before  the  judge  that  was  elicited  through  cross-
    examination of the Appellant and also from questions asked by the judge
    by way of clarification.

29. It is also clear from the determination  that  the  judge  set  out  at
    length in the same way as she did with the  Appellant's  evidence,  the
    Respondent's reasons for refusing the application that was set out in a
    letter dated 14th September 2012.  It was set out in paragraphs  10  to
    16.  It is right to observe that the refusal letter was a comprehensive
    document of fifteen pages that made reference to  a  number  of  issues
    including the Appellant's credibility but also the  objective  evidence
    relevant to consideration of his claim including that  of  registration
    in the Russian Federation, the obtaining of internal  passports  (which
    the Appellant stated he could not obtain) and  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation.  It is entirely clear from reading the determination  as  a
    whole, that the judge gave careful consideration to all of the evidence
    that was placed before her.  Whilst it is submitted  in  general  terms
    that the judge displayed "a worrying lack of knowledge for  a  decision
    maker in this jurisdiction" on the basis that she had  never  heard  of
    "Dagestan"  and  that  "many  of  her  findings  betray  a  failure  to
    understand core aspects of the Appellant's account (see paragraph 3  of
    the grounds) that is unwarranted.  It is clear from  the  determination
    that the judge understood what was the core aspect of the  account  and
    indeed at paragraph 21 set out, what the  Appellant  had  said  in  his
    final statement, drawing together the factual account he had given that
    he was at risk of persecution as a result now  of  having  been  served
    with subpoenas which he claimed had been generated by the policeman who
    had obtained his property and that as he had been forced to sign papers
    that he had not been allowed  to  read,  they  had  led  to  fabricated
    charges that he would be a Chechan rebel and this formed the  core  now
    of his risk on return.  As noted in the grant of permission, there  was
    no statement from the representative confirming  the  comment  and  the
    grounds had  not  been  prepared  by  Counsel  who  appeared  thus  the
    suggestion set out at paragraph 3 was ignored when granting permission.
    I agree.  However, it has been asserted on behalf of the Appellant that
    the findings of the judge do betray a failure to  understand  the  core
    aspects of the Appellant's account.

30. It is advanced on behalf of the Appellant that the determination should
    be set aside as a whole because the judge applied the wrong standard of
    proof.  As Mr Gayle submits, at paragraph 29 of the  determination  the
    judge stated "I am not satisfied upon the balance of probabilities ..."
     It is therefore submitted that the judge adopted the wrong standard of
    proof for an asylum claim which was a material error of law.

31.   In my judgment, the determination should be  read  as  a  whole  when
    making an assessment of the approach adopted  by  the  judge  concerned
    concerning evidential issues and the assessment of credibility.  It  is
    clear at paragraph 2 of the determination that the judge dealt with the
    legal issues such as burden and standard of proof.  She correctly noted
    that the burden of proof was upon the Appellant.  It is also  right  to
    observe that when considering humanitarian protection, the judge  noted
    that the Appellant had to show "that there are substantial grounds  for
    believing" relating to that issue.  At  paragraph  29,  (which  is  the
    paragraph relied upon by Mr Gayle) where the judge  states  "I  am  not
    satisfied upon the balance of probabilities  the  Appellant  has  shown
    that he has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason," does not take into account the second part of paragraph 29  in
    which the judge makes it clear that when considering  the  account  she
    has applied "the lower standard."  The judge states,  "the  Appellant's
    account while broadly consistent is primarily speculative in nature and
    I do not consider that even on the lower standard  objectively  amounts
    to persecution."  Thus whilst she began  by  stating  the  "balance  of
    probabilities", it is clear that the judge did apply what she described
    as "even on the lower standard" the  correct  standard  of  proof  when
    considering the  factual  account  of  the  Appellant  and  making  her
    assessment of credibility  as  a  whole.   In  those  circumstances,  I
    consider that the judge did make a slip at paragraph 29 by stating  the
    balance of probabilities when it is clear  when  the  determination  is
    read  as  a  whole,  by  her  reference  to  "substantial  grounds  for
    believing" paragraph 2 and paragraph 29 "even on  the  lower  standard"
    demonstrates that she did adopt the correct standard of proof.   Whilst
    Mr Gayle in his reply submitted that she may have been referring to the
    criminal standard when stating the "lower standard" by reference to the
    balance of probabilities, I reject that  submission.   It  is  entirely
    clear from reading the determination that it is  not  likely  that  she
    would have been referring to the criminal standard at any time  in  her
    determination.

32. I therefore turn to  the  second  ground  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant in which it is said that the judge failed to give  sufficient
    and or sustainable reasons for the adverse  credibility  findings  that
    she made.  The judge's findings of fact are set out at paragraphs 30 to
    42.

         "30. The Appellant said that he and his family left their  home  in
             2000.  Both his parents were dead and his brother disappeared.
               The  Appellant  went  to  his  grandmother's  house   in   a
             neighbouring part of the Russian Federation and did not return
             to his home area until six years later.  By that time he  says
             the property was occupied  by  another  person.   On  his  own
             evidence therefore the property would appear to a third  party
             to be  abandoned  and  even  if  the  policeman  occupied  the
             property without permission and  then  was  able  to  have  it
             registered in his name this in itself is not evidence  of  him
             being powerful.  I find this no more than an opportunistic act
             by a third party.

         31.  By the  time  the  Appellant  returned  to  the  property  the
             policeman had obtained documentation to show  that  officially
             the property was now his and the Appellant  concedes  that  he
             himself has had no evidence himself to support his claim.   In
             the  circumstances  it  would  not  be  unreasonable  for  the
             authorities not to intervene.

         32.  With regards to his detention, his evidence  is  that  he  was
             accused of being a thief and in oral evidence in answer to  my
             question he said that the policeman accused  him  of  being  a
             thief.  He does not suggest that the policeman was  previously
             known to him and even if the policeman did call  other  police
             and have him arrested  this  in  itself  is  not  evidence  of
             persecution.  There is no evidence that this  was  other  than
             the random act of an  individual.   The  policeman  had  taken
             possession of a property.  The Appellant had  no  evidence  to
             show that he had any entitlement to the property.  Even if  he
             was arrested and  detained  this  would  not  be  evidence  of
             persecution.

         33.  There is no objective evidence for the Appellant's claim  that
             he would be considered as a rebel.  He  claims  to  have  been
             detained for three months.  I find it implausible that for the
             whole three months he was never asked any questions and  never
             told why he was there.  It undermines the credibility  of  the
             claim that he was detained for three months.  He then said  he
             was released and told to go away.  This does not suggest  that
             he was of continuing interest.  It is not credible that he was
             not questioned if he was of interest especially if  he  claims
             that they thought him to be a Chechan rebel.  I do not  accept
             that he was detained.

         34.  The Appellant does not  give  any  credible  explanation  with
             regards to his claim to have  no  official  documentation  and
             being unaware that such documentation existed until after  the
             death of his grandmother.  Throughout his claim  he  gives  an
             account of having difficulty in working and living  officially
             because he had no papers yet he says that at no  time  did  he
             ask his grandmother with whom he lived from 2000  whether  she
             had any documents.  The Appellant was born in 1985 and so  was
             still a minor when he went to live with his  grandmother.   He
             says that his mother left papers with his  grandmother.   Most
             of his account is pure speculation.  He said  that  he  thinks
             his mother took the documents there for safekeeping during the
             war and he thinks his grandmother did not know  the  documents
             were there.  It was not plausible that having  had  difficulty
             he did not ask his grandmother about steps he  could  take  to
             regularise his position.  It is not credible  his  grandmother
             did not know what documents she held for his mother.

         35.  The Appellant claims that in 2003 he was sent back to Chechnya
             by police as  he  did  not  have  a  propiska.   No  plausible
             explanation is given for why the  police  would  send  him  to
             Chechnya if he had no documents showing that he is  from  that
             area.

         36.  I do not accept as credible the Appellant's claim that  he  is
             wanted by the authorities as a  suspected  Chechan  rebel.   I
             also do not accept as plausible the  claim  that  the  alleged
             subpoenas were sent to him by a neighbour.   In  his  original
             witness statement he says he went to the village  to  try  and
             get the neighbours to confirm it was his family home and  they
             refused to become involved.  It therefore stretches  credulity
             to suggest that  two  years  later  he  should  write  to  his
             neighbour, Adam.

         37.  His claim in his recent statement that he has no relatives  in
             the Russian  Federation  and  that  his  uncle  and  aunt  are
             neighbours lacks credibility.  A translation of the letter  is
             at page C45 of the Respondent's bundle.  The contents  of  the
             letter suggest that it is from someone close to the Appellant.
              The letter refers to another paper  sent  after  he  left  in
             February 2000 and subpoenas.  There is  no  reference  of  the
             Appellant returning to Chechnya in 2008 neither is  there  any
             reference to the  policeman  or  anybody  else  occupying  his
             property.  The Appellant says that the area is a small village
             and everybody knows everything.  In these  circumstances  this
             is a surprising omission.

         38.  With regards to the alleged subpoenas as stated in the refusal
             letter, these merely invite the Appellant to attend the public
             prosecutor's office to provide an explanation.   There  is  no
             indication  of  what  is  being  investigated   although   the
             Appellant is also asked to provide documents  to  confirm  his
             identity and his  place  of  permanent  residence.   There  is
             nothing in the document to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  has
             committed any offence and as the  Appellant  claims  to  never
             have had any identification documents or being  registered  it
             is surprising that the documents should  refer  to  him  as  a
             citizen of Chechnya, give a date  of  birth  and  confirm  his
             residence at the same address where he said he lived with  his
             family.  This too I find undermines his claim that there is no
             official documentation establishing his residence and that  he
             would not be able to register were he to return  to  Chechnya.
             Applying Tanveer Ahmed I attach no weight to  these  documents
             as anything other than self-serving produced  to  bolster  the
             claim after the first refusal.

         39.  I do not accept as plausible his  claim  that  he  has  signed
             documents which can be used against him suggest that he  is  a
             rebel.

         40.  The Appellant's  evidence  is  that  having  found  his  birth
             certificate his intention was to travel to the United Kingdom.
              He has never had secure employment and following the death of
             his grandmother instead of registering himself in Dagestan  he
             instead made enquiries about coming to the United Kingdom  for
             which he paid a considerable sum of money.  I  find  that  the
             Appellant's account lacks credibility and at the time he  left
             the Russian Federation he did not have a well-founded fear  of
             persecution for a Convention reason.

         41.  In light of RM, the Appellant as a young Chechan male  is  not
             at risk of persecution or a breach of Article 3 on  return  to
             Russia or in Chechnya merely as a  result  of  his  ethnicity.
             Further RM refers to a viable internal  relocation  option  in
             Ingushetia.  The  letter  from  the  Appellant's  uncle  makes
             reference to a certificate from Ingushetia which suggests that
             his family already have some connection there as refugees  and
             refers to everything being 'more or less  normal.'   Both  his
             aunt and  uncle  are  in  employment  and  whilst  the  letter
             suggests that there were problems because of the war  it  does
             not suggest ongoing problems.   The  Appellant  said  that  he
             wrote to them after his asylum claim  was  initially  refused.
             This suggests that he  remains  in  contact  with  his  family
             members and his claim in his witness statement in October 2010
             that he had no family and everyone was killed and he felt that
             he had no choice to try and find a safe country where he could
             rebuild   his   life   is   not   a    truthful    statement."



33.  Mr Gayle, has identified by reference to each paragraph, matters  which
    he maintains demonstrate that the judge gave insufficient  reasons  for
    her decision or  were  perverse  findings.   I  have  considered  those
    paragraphs identified by Mr Gayle but I read them in the light  of  the
    evidence and the decision when read as a whole.

34.   At paragraphs 30, 31, 32, 33, 36 and 38 the judge deals with the  core
    of the Appellant's account as to the events in October  2008  when  the
    Appellant returned to Chechnya intending to live in  the  family  home,
    but found a policeman living there and his claim to have been locked up
    in a basement of a police station for three months and then released in
    2009.  It also deals with his account of being at risk  of  persecution
    on account of being illegally detained  after  trying  to  reclaim  the
    family home, having been forced to sign papers that he was not  allowed
    to read and that  the  policeman  who  stole  his  home  had  used  his
    influence to fabricate charges against the Appellant of being  a  rebel
    which is the reason for the subpoenas being issued against him.

35.  At paragraph 30, the judge considered the Appellant's  factual  account
    when making her assessment of his claim.  Namely,  that  the  Appellant
    had said that he and his family had left their home in the  year  2000,
    both his parents were dead and his brother had disappeared and that the
    Appellant had gone to his grandmother's house in a neighbouring part of
    the Russian Federation and had not returned home until six years later.
     As the judge records

         "By that time he says that the property  was  occupied  by  another
         person.  On his own evidence therefore the property would appear to
         a third party to be abandoned and even if  the  policeman  occupied
         the property without permission  and  then  was  able  to  have  it
         registered in his name this in itself is not evidence of him  being
         powerful.  I find this no more than an opportunistic act by a third
         party."



  36. As to the evidence of him being powerful, this  relates  back  to  the
      oral evidence that she heard noted at paragraph 26 that the  Appellant
      thought that he was  powerful  simply  on  the  basis  that  a  simple
      policeman could not have written a house from  one  person's  name  to
      another and live in the house.   It  is  asserted  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant that the judge's analysis was flawed because "yet  there  is
      no right for a third party  to  occupy  and  re-register  property  in
      Chechnya."   It  is  further  asserted  that  the  judge  ignored  the
      Appellant's evidence pertaining to his efforts to  have  the  property
      register corrected.  As pointed out by  Ms  Isherwood,  there  was  no
      objective evidence put before the Tribunal on behalf of the  Appellant
      to support that submission that there was no right for a  third  party
      to occupy and re-register the property in Chechnya.

  37.  The judge at paragraph 30 considered the Appellant's account  and  by
      reference to what the judge stated was "on his own evidence" that  the
      property would appear to be abandoned, the property not being lived in
      for a substantial period of time.  It was  noted  in  the  Appellant's
      interview that he had been in the property between the years 2000  and
      2003 but had not obtained the documents then (question  118)  relating
      to the ownership of the home and furthermore that  he  had  stayed  in
      Chechnya between 2003 and 2004 but had not made any attempt to reclaim
      the house at that stage.  The Appellant's  account  in  interview  was
      that he did not want to stay there because of  the  dangers  (question
      119).  It was therefore open to the judge  to  find  on  the  evidence
      before her that it was no more than an opportunistic act  by  a  third
      party.

  38. At paragraph 31 the judge dealt with the Appellant's account  that  he
      had gone to the housing authority who had refused  to  intervene.   In
      this context, it is clear that the judge  considered  the  Appellant's
      own evidence where she stated "the Appellant can see that  he  himself
      had no evidence to support his claim," thus her finding that in  those
      circumstances it would not be unreasonable for the authorities not  to
      intervene, was a matter entirely open to  the  judge  to  find  having
      considered the Appellant's own evidence.

  39. At paragraph 32, it is asserted that the  judge  incorrectly  asserted
      that there was no evidence to show the Appellant's entitlement to  the
      property and thus the judge misunderstood the  policeman's  motivation
      in having the Appellant arrested.

  40. I reject that.  Paragraph 32 was not an incorrect  assertion,  as  the
      judge records it was based on the Appellant's own evidence set out  at
      paragraph 31 that he had no evidence to support his claim  thus,  when
      the judge referred to the Appellant "having no evidence to  show  that
      he has  no  entitlement  to  the  property,"  was  referring  back  to
      paragraph 31 which was the Appellant's own evidence.   The  judge  was
      entitled to  rely  upon  that  evidence  when  reaching  a  conclusion
      concerning the property.

  41.   In the grounds it  is  asserted  that  the  judge  showed  a  flawed
      analysis on the basis that there was official  documentation  held  by
      the Chechan authorities to show  the  property  had  belonged  to  the
      Appellant's family and the crux of the case was the policeman had used
      his influence thus the judge completely  missed  that  aspect  of  the
      account.  I reject that submission.  It is entirely clear from reading
      paragraphs 30 and 31 and also paragraph 32 (in which the  judge  noted
      that the Appellant had no evidence to show that he had any entitlement
      to the property), they  were matters that were entirely open  for  the
      judge to find taken from the evidence of this appeal as a whole.

  42.   What is being said in the grounds in relation to each  paragraph  is
      simply a disagreement with the findings of fact made.

  43.   Paragraphs 33, 32 and 38, deal with the alleged detention and  being
      of interest to the  authorities.   As  to  the  circumstances  of  the
      detention, the Appellant's account of being forced to  sign  documents
      subsequently being used to fabricate charges that he is a rebel,  were
      considered.  The judge found that there was no objective evidence that
      he would be considered a rebel (paragraph 33) that  presumably  arises
      out of the matters relating to the property.  She also found  that  it
      was implausible that the Appellant would be detained for three  months
      but would never be asked any questions or never told why he was there.
       The judge  found  that  that  undermined  his  credibility  of  being
      detained for a prolonged period of three months.  The judge considered
      the evidence of the Appellant that he was released  and  told  "to  go
      away" and found that that evidence did not suggest that he was of  any
      "continuing interest." Thus she did not accept his detention.

  44.   It is asserted that the judge's finding that it was implausible that
      he was not interrogated during his three month detention about being a
      Chechen rebel demonstrated a failure  to  comprehend  the  Appellant's
      account.  Careful consideration of the determination as a whole and by
      particular reference to paragraph 21 where she sets out the core  part
      of his account concerning the  fabrication  of  charges  of  a  rebel,
      demonstrate that the judge clearly had in mind what the  core  account
      of the Appellant was.

  45.  At paragraph 33, when she was taking  into  account  the  Appellant's
      alleged detention, it was entirely open to the judge to  consider  the
      circumstances of that detention relating to his arrest generally.  She
      found it implausible that for the whole of the three  months  when  he
      was detained that he was never asked any questions or never  told  why
      he was there ( this was taken   from  the  Appellants  own  evidence).
      That does not simply relate to whether or not he was a  Chechen  rebel
      but relates to the failure to being questioned at any time. It was the
      judge's view that it was not credible  that  they  would  subsequently
      attempt to fabricate a claim he was a rebel if no  evidence  was  even
      elicited from his 3 months in detention.   She did not  find  that  it
      was credible that someone, who was later to fabricate  evidence  would
      not have  asked  him  any  questions  whatsoever  during  a  prolonged
      detention of a three month period.

  46.   Furthermore, the judge made a finding that the circumstances of  his
      release, demonstrated that he  was  not  of  any  continuing  interest
      namely that he was released and was told "to go away."  That  was  not
      consistent with the Appellant's core account that after being released
      in 2009, two subpoenas were then issued a significant  time  later  on
      9th December 2010 and 2nd or 29th December 2010.

  47.  At paragraph 38, she dealt with the two subpoenas that were  provided
      by the Appellant. In respect of  the  documentation  that  was  placed
      before the Tribunal in the form of a letter  and  also  from  the  two
      subpoenas, it is submitted on behalf of the Appellant in  the  grounds
      that the judge failed to follow the guidelines laid  down  in  Tanveer
      Ahmed where it was held "only rarely will there be the need to make an
      allegation of forgery or evidence strong enough to  support  it.   The
      allegation should not be made without such evidence."  It is  asserted
      that no such evidence was presented  at  the  hearing  of  the  appeal
      therefore the decision to place no  weight  on  the  documents  was  a
      material   error   of   law.    I   reject   that   submission   also.



  48. When considering documentation, I remind myself of the guidance  given
      in the decision of the Tribunal in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 in
      which the Tribunal  acknowledged  the  argument  that  "documents  and
      information  contained  in  them  may  be  either  genuine  or  false;
      documents may be genuine but that information  itself  may  be  false;
      documents may not be genuine but the information  may  nonetheless  be
      true."  The Tribunal in that case went on to state

         "It is trite in immigration and asylum law that we must  not  judge
         what is or is not likely to happen in other countries by  reference
         to our perception of what is normal within in the  United  Kingdom.
         The principle applies as much to documents as to any other form  of
         evidence.  We know from experience  and  country  information  that
         there  are  countries  where  it  is  easy  and  often   relatively
         inexpensive to obtain 'forged' documents.  Some of them  are  false
         in that they are not made by whoever purports to be the author  and
         the information they contain is wholly or partially  untrue.   Some
         are 'genuine' to the extent that they emanate from a proper source,
         in the proper form, on the proper paper, with the proper seals, but
         the information they contain is wholly or  partially  untrue.   ...
         The permutations of truth, untruth, validity and 'genuineness'  are
         enormous.  At its simplest we need to  differentiate  between  form
         and content; that is whether a document is properly issued  by  the
         purported author and whether  the  contents  are  true.   They  are
         separate questions.  It is a dangerous oversimplification merely to
         ask whether a document is 'forged' or even 'not genuine'."

    The only question is whether the document is one  upon  which  reliance
    should properly be placed.  Such documentation should be not looked  at
    in isolation but should be assessed along with other pieces of evidence
    and therefore "in the round".

  49. It is entirely clear from the determination when read as a whole  that
      the judge did follow the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed. She  gave  reasons
      that were open to her for not attaching weight to those subpoenas that
      had arrived subsequently the first one dated 9th  December  2010,  and
      the second 29th December 2010, bearing in mind that the Appellant  was
      imprisoned allegedly for three months from October  2008  having  been
      released in January 2009 and thus there was  a  long  period  of  time
      before those documents had been  allegedly  issued.   Nonetheless  the
      judge considered those documents by  making  an  assessment  of  their
      contents in the light of the Appellant's account.

  50.   At paragraph 38, she notes as to the  content  of  those  subpeonas,
      they invite the Appellant to attend the public prosecutor's office  to
      provide an explanation.  The judge correctly observed that  there  was
      no indication of what  was  being  investigated  in  either  of  those
      subpoenas and that there was nothing in the document to  suggest  that
      the Appellant had committed any offence. The  judge  was  entitled  to
      take those matters into account  when  making  an  assessment  of  the
      reliability.  There was no allegation of forgery being made on  behalf
      of the Respondent or by any other person it was  simply  a  matter  of
      considering those documents and their reliability and the  judge  gave
      reasons as to why she attached no weight to them.

  51.   Furthermore, at that paragraph she considered the  contents  of  the
      subpoena in the light of the issue of documentation generally and when
      making an assessment of their weight.  She  took  into  account  other
      parts of its contents relating to the Appellant being referred to as a
      citizen of Chechnya, giving his  date  of  birth  and  confirming  his
      residence as the same address where he said he lived with  his  family
      which in fact is the address where the policeman was living.

  52.   She was entitled to consider those matters when making an assessment
      of the weight of those documents  in  the  light  of  the  Appellant's
      account as a whole in which he had claimed he had never had access  to
      documents  concerning  his  residence  in  Chechnya  and  the  Russian
      Federation.  It is of note that the Appellant, who sought to rely upon
      those documents, produced  no  objective  material  to  support  their
      content and form nor was there any evidence led by  the  Appellant  to
      authenticate such documentation.

  53.  Thus judge found at paragraph 38 having considered  the  contents  of
      the subpoenas that in the light of the Appellant's claim to never have
      had any identification documents or having  been  registered,  it  was
      surprising that the document should refer  to  him  as  a  citizen  of
      Chechnya, give a date of birth and confirm his residence at  the  same
      address where he said he lived with his family (this was the  property
      in which the policeman was currently living).  The judge  found  "this
      too  I  find  undermines  his  claim  that  there   is   no   official
      documentation establishing his residence and that he would not be able
      to register if he were he returned to Chechnya."

  54.  In those circumstances, those findings  were  entirely  open  to  the
      judge and it has not been demonstrated that there  was  any  error  of
      law.

  55.   At paragraph 34 the judge dealt  with  the  issue  of  documentation
      further.  At this paragraph, the judge considers  that  the  Appellant
      did not give any credible explanation with regards  to  his  claim  to
      have  had  no  official  documentation  or  being  unaware  that  such
      documentation existed until after the death of his grandmother.

  56.   The judge correctly observed that throughout his claim  he  gave  an
      account of having difficulty working and living officially because  he
      had no papers, yet at no time did he ask his grandmother with whom  he
      lived from 2000 whether she had any documents.  The Appellant was born
      in 1985 and was a minor when he went to  live  with  his  grandmother.
      The judge considered that  his  account  was  "pure  speculation"  and
      records what the Appellant had said about the issue of  documentation,
      namely, that he thought his mother had taken the documents  there  for
      safekeeping  and  thought  that  his  grandmother  did  not  know  the
      documents were there.  The judge considered that evidence and rejected
      it.  She found that it was "not plausible that having  had  difficulty
      he did not ask his grandmother  about  the  steps  he  could  take  to
      regularise the position."  She also found, "it  is  not  credible  his
      grandmother did not know what documents she held for his mother."  The
      judge later at paragraph 40 dealt with the documentation that in  fact
      he did have.  It had been the Appellant's evidence that he  found  his
      birth certificate amongst his mother's possession in his grandmother's
      house in April 2009 and as the judge observed at paragraph 40,

         "He has never had secure employment and following the death of  his
         grandmother instead of registering himself in Dagestan  he  instead
         made enquiries about coming to the United Kingdom for which he paid
         a considerable sum of money.  I find that the  Appellant's  account
         lacks credibility and at the time he left the Russian Federation he
         did not have a well-founded fear of persecution  for  a  Convention
         reason."

  57. Thus the judge  found  that  his  conduct,  after  finding  the  birth
      certificate that was a relevant document in establishing his  identity
      and would be instrumental in being able  to  register  in  that  area,
      instead of taking the opportunity to register himself in Dagestan,  he
      made enquiries about coming to the United Kingdom.

  58.   The grounds generally refer by reference  to  particular  paragraphs
      that the judge demonstrated  a  flawed  analysis  of  aspects  of  the
      Appellant's case, did not take into account the  Appellant's  evidence
      and did not give sufficient reasons.   In  respect  of  the  issue  of
      documentation, it is submitted that the judge's findings at  paragraph
      34  in  which  the  judge  considered  the  Appellant's  conduct   and
      chronological account of having  lived  with  his  grandmother  for  a
      substantial period of time yet asking at no time whether she  had  any
      documents relevant to him  as  a  perverse  finding.   I  reject  that
      submission.  There is no perversity about that finding or any  of  the
      judges findings whatsoever.  It was entirely  open  to  the  judge  to
      consider the Appellant's account of  subsequently  finding  the  birth
      certificate amongst his  mother's  possessions  at  the  grandmother's
      house in April 2009 set against his account that he had lived with her
      from 2000 (apart from certain periods) yet he had not asked her at any
      time whether she had any documents.

  59.    Furthermore,  the  judge  found  it  was  not  credible  that   his
      grandmother, knowing of all the difficulties that there  would  be  in
      relation to failure to demonstrate your identity and  your  residence,
      did not know what documents he held for his mother.   And  as  regards
      paragraph 40, it was entirely open to  the  judge  to  find  that  the
      Appellant  had  not  given  a   credible   account   concerning   what
      documentation he had when she considered his account to have found the
      birth certificate in April 2009 yet instead of using  it  to  register
      himself in Dagestan,  which  had  been  a  problem  according  to  his
      account, he preferred to make enquiries about  coming  to  the  United
      Kingdom for which he "paid a considerable sum of  money."   I  do  not
      find that it has been demonstrated that those findings  of  fact  were
      not open to the judge on the evidence.

  60. I have considered with care the challenges  made  to  each  individual
      paragraph as set out in the grounds and relied upon by Mr Gayle in his
      oral submissions.  Having done so, I am  satisfied  that  the  matters
      raised are simply a disagreement with the findings of fact reached  by
      the judge.  I consider that those findings were made on  the  evidence
      before the First-tier Tribunal and were entirely  sustainable  reasons
      given from the evidence placed before the judge.  I have given  regard
      to the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Muse and Others v  The
      ECO [2012] EWCH Civ 10 on challenges to the adequacy  of  the  judge's
      reasons.  In South Bucks District Council v Porter (2) [2004] UKHL 33,
      cited with approval by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 33, Lord Brown
      said:

         "The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable a reader to understand why  the  matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principle important  controversial  issues,'  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily been drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the main issues
         in dispute, not to every material consideration."

    The decision of the Upper Tribunal in Shizad (Sufficiency  of  Reasons:
    Set Aside) [2013] UKUT 0085 similarly refers to the need to give  brief
    reasons on the central issue, and reminds us that there is  a  need  to
    read the decision as a whole and see if it makes sense having regard to
    the material accepted by the judge, it goes on to point out that  where
    there has  been  no  misdirection  in  law,  an  adequate  fact-finding
    process, then a decision should not be set aside, even if  the  reasons
    provided fall  short,  unless  the  conclusions  are  perverse  on  the
    evidence available.  I have considered with  care  the  decision  as  a
    whole of the First-tier Tribunal and do not  find  that  there  is  any
    merit in the grounds advanced on behalf of the Appellant.  Thus I  find
    that it has not been demonstrated that the First-tier Tribunal erred in
    law and the decision shall therefore stand.

Decision

The original Tribunal did not make an  error  of  law;  the  decision  shall
stand.






Signed                              Date 11/7/2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
