






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08453/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                  |          Decision and Reasons      |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On: 9 April 2015                       |           On: 20 April 2015        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                                   Mr F K
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, counsel (instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Albania, born on 6  December  1996.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge who dismissed his asylum and human rights claims  in  a
      determination promulgated on 16 January 2015.


   2. The background to the appeal was that the appellant arrived in the  UK
      on 12 March 2014 when still a minor. He claimed asylum  the  following
      day on the basis that he feared his traffickers, alleging he had  been
      trafficked from Albania to Italy. He was forced to sell drugs and  was
      later also used as a prostitute.


   3. The only issues on appeal related to the asylum claim and a real  risk
      of ill treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.
      Humanitarian Protection was not pursued, nor was any Article 8 claim.


   4. Mr Collins referred to the basis of the claim  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal as set out in the witness statement of the  appellant  before
      the Tribunal at B22. His  father  drank  and  abused  him  physically.
      While in Albania he was working and begging on the  streets.  He  came
      into contact with a gang of criminals in November 2013.


   5. The appellant also asserted that his father  threatened  him  that  he
      would kick him out of the house if he failed to bring in enough  money
      and would stay without food. He thus thought he would  have  a  better
      life in the company of gang members. They told him that they would get
      him a decent job in Italy and then took him to Milan. He used his  own
      passport to travel to Bari. From there he travelled  with  members  of
      the gang to Milan and stayed with them from 29 January 2014  until  he
      escaped from them on 9 March 2014. His passport was  retained  by  the
      members of the gang.


   6. He referred to his having been kept in the house and locked in a room.
      He was abused and raped. He was forced to  engage  in  this  behaviour
      with different men. He was used by the gang as a male  prostitute  and
      was abused sexually by Italian men of all ages.


   7. He was treated like this for  a  period  of  six  days.  Whilst  being
      transported from one house to another, he had a chance  to  leave  the
      car, and ran towards a group of flats. He  had  some  money  with  him
      which he used to get to the  airport,  and  purchased  a  ticket  from
      Milan. He then went to Brussels in order to escape the gang.


   8. There was a group of students at the airport  and  he  travelled  with
      them to Brussels. The following day he met a group  of  Albanians  who
      were coming to the UK. He came with them to France  by  car  and  then
      from France they boarded a lorry and came to the UK on 12 March 2014.


   9. In the UK he was supported by Greenwich Social Services.


  10. He fears that if returned to Albania he will be persecuted  or  harmed
      by his father and those men who sexually abused and threatened him. He
      fears danger to his life from the members of the gang in  Albania.  He
      cannot seek police protection because the gang members have close ties
      with them.


  11. Mr Collins stated that he had produced a skeleton argument before  the
      First-tier Tribunal. It was contended that the appellant was a  member
      of  a  particular  social  group,  a  young  Albanian  who  has   been
      trafficked. He relied on the  country  guidance  case  of  AM  and  BM
      (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80. He informed the Tribunal
      that there was no decision relating to trafficked male  children  from
      Albania. He submitted that there was a reasonable degree of likelihood
      that the appellant was at risk of being found and ill treated by those
      who had trafficked him, or alternatively  of  being  re-trafficked  by
      them.


  12. Mr Collins submitted that there had been a series of  material  errors
      rendering the determination unsustainable.


  13. The first ground related to  what  he  referred  to  as  an  essential
      contradiction in the determination.


  14. At paragraph 19 the Judge gave 'the  benefit  of  the  doubt'  to  the
      appellant, having regard to his  age.  He  referred  to  some  of  the
      inconsistencies and incoherencies of  his  evidence.  These  could  be
      excused by reference to his age. He then  stated  that  for  the  same
      reason, ".....I give the appellant the benefit  of  the  doubt  as  to
      whether he was truly held in forced captivity  by  the  gang  for  the
      approximate six week period claimed by him... despite the  appellant's
      failure in evidence to account for more than,  approximately,  two  to
      two and a half weeks of that period." The Judge further noted  in  the
      same paragraph that the appellant's evidence as to his drug  work  was
      inconsistent as to whether, on a daily basis,  he  had  to  deliver  a
      single parcel of drugs to a single person, or up to 30 bags  of  drugs
      to a number of different persons.


  15. The Judge also noted that there were other "implausible and  untenable
      elements" of the appellant's evidence relating to his escape.  It  was
      implausible that only a single gang member would accompany him, in the
      capacity of a driver,  to the clients' houses [21].


  16. Mr Collins submitted that having given the appellant  the  benefit  of
      the doubt as to whether he was truly held in  forced  captivity  by  a
      gang, the Judge made an inconsistent finding at paragraph 24,  namely,
      that his asylum claim lacked credibility and integrity,  and  that  he
      was far from satisfied that the appellant had been taken into  captive
      labour and the sex trade by traffickers, a fate which he allegedly was
      able to escape.


  17. Mr Collins submitted that there was only one period of forced activity
      and not different periods. In real terms, the adverse findings related
      to his ability to escape and other issues such as what happened at the
      airport and thereafter.


  18. In his second ground, Mr Collins contended that the Judge indulged  in
      speculation and conjecture rather than an objective  analysis  of  the
      evidence. What was also "startling" about the  determination  is  that
      there was no analysis of  the  extensive  background  material  placed
      before the Immigration Judge which he only referred to in  passing  at
      paragraph 11.


  19. Given the  extensive  background  material  produced,  "it  cannot  be
      enough" to  consider the issues of credibility without  having  regard
      to or being informed by the  background  material.  That  material  is
      probative of the appellant's assertions.


  20. He submitted that the appellant made his claims in a detailed  witness
      statement. A number of reports were also produced in section  2,  part
      2, of the appellant's bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  This
      included a report from "Save the Children" where it is noted at page 2
      that violence against children in Albania is an issue of concern.  The
      overwhelming  majority  of  adults  maintained   that   physical   and
      psychological violence has positive effects on a child's education.


  21. Albania is  a  source  country  for  men,  women  and  children  being
      subjected to trafficking, specifically forced prostitution and  forced
      labour, including the forced begging of children. Evidence shows  that
      during the period 1999 to 2002, about  4,000  Albanian  children  were
      trafficked in different countries, the majority of whom were from Roma
      families. These victims are subjected to conditions of  forced  labour
      and sex trafficking  within  Albania  and  Greece,  Italy,  Macedonia,
      Kosovo and Western Europe. The government of Albania  does  not  fully
      comply with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking.


  22. There was also a reference to child labour  and  the  exploitation  of
      children remaining a serious  issue  there.  In  2006  the  Children's
      Rights Centre  in  Albania  declared  that  there  were  about  50,000
      children involved in child labour and working on the streets.  32%  of
      children aged 6-17 work and many of them perform the  worst  forms  of
      child labour such as begging, building, recycling and so on.


  23. There was a further report from a Mr Daniel Renton - Child Trafficking
      in Albania (a Save the Children report). The  statistics  relating  to
      trafficking of women and children are again set out. It  is  estimated
      that there are 30,000 Albanian prostitutes abroad. The  study  in  the
      Save the Children report concluded  that  trafficking  has  been,  and
      still is, widespread in the country and the majority  of  victims  are
      children. Trafficking is usually conducted  through  offers  of  false
      marriages and jobs, or abduction and selling in some parts of Albania.


  24. In Italy and Greece, there were an estimated 15,000 and 6,000 Albanian
      prostitutes respectively. Their passports are taken  and  threats  and
      intimidation to them and their families prevents  them  from  escaping
      and testifying against their pimps.


  25. Those who do return to Albania,  many  after  deportation  from  Italy
      daily,  are  given  very  little  help.  The  report  refers  to   the
      trafficking of children to Greece for begging and forced  labour.  The
      trafficking of women and children,  drugs  and  weapons  is  a  multi-
      million dollar industry, directly and indirectly employing many people
      in Albania. Albania is now a major transit country for the trafficking
      of thousands of foreign women every year.


  26. There was also a report "Child Abuse in  the  Albanian  Family"  dated
      August 2005, page 8-42. There are a number of  case  studies  referred
      to.


  27. At page 42, various measures taken to improve the performance  of  the
      government's labour and social policies are identified.  Child  rights
      and protection issues remain a serious concern in Albania. The  number
      and quality of  child  protection  and  welfare  services  in  Albania
      continues to remain low in terms of  financial  and  human  resources,
      preventative  focus  and  sustained  impact.  There  are   155   child
      protection units in municipalities and communities. The number of CPUs
      needs to be substantially increased to meet child protection needs and
      the country's vulnerable children in a meaningful way.


  28. Mr Collins submitted that having regard to the background evidence, an
      assessment of an individual claim, including that  of  the  appellant,
      must be informed with regard to the  background  material,  especially
      where, as in this case, there is no country  guidance  case  regarding
      trafficked male children.


  29. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Clarke submitted that it is clear from
      paragraphs 19 onwards that the First-tier Tribunal  did  look  at  the
      issues that arose. The Judge considered whether it had  in  fact  been
      claimed to be two and a half weeks and not six weeks. There were other
      inconsistencies relating to drugs that  were  identified.  There  were
      also valid criticisms relating  to  the  escape  as  well  as  airport
      problems.


  30. It is only after considering this that he stated at paragraph 24  that
      he was not satisfied that the appellant had been  taken  into  captive
      labour and the sex trade by traffickers.


  31. With regard to  the  background  evidence,  the  Judge  did  refer  at
      paragraph 11 to the appellant's submissions,  supported  by  objective
      information. Accordingly, it cannot be said  that  the  Judge  had  no
      regard to the relevant background material.


  32. Given the credibility findings therefore, it is difficult to  see  how
      much the Judge would have been assisted by this  background  material.
      The report did not identify people,  including  children,  having  the
      profile of the appellant. The background information is thus  "not  on
      all fours."


  33. Mr Collins replied that the core of the appellant's case  is  that  of
      being trafficked from Albania and subjected for the  period  to  be  a
      prostitute and to supply drugs on behalf of  the  traffickers.  It  is
      difficult to separate the Judge's findings at paragraph  19  when  the
      appellant is earlier given the "benefit of the doubt" with  regard  to
      enforced captivity. Even though the background material may not have a
      specific reference to the appellant himself, it does disclose  that  a
      large proportion of those trafficked are children.


     Assessment


  34. Paragraph 19 of the determination is problematic. I have attempted  to
      construe it fairly in its context. The words used by  the  Judge  were
      that he gave the appellant the benefit of the doubt as to  whether  he
      was truly held in forced captivity by the gang for the approximate six
      week period claimed by him. That appears to be an  acceptance  of  the
      appellant's core account that he was being trafficked from Albania  to
      Italy.


  35. It is accordingly difficult to square that with what the  Judge  later
      went on to find that he was far from satisfied that the appellant  had
      been taken into captive labour and sex trade by traffickers [24].


  36.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne,  in  granting   the   appellant
      permission to appeal, noted that the Judge had given him  the  benefit
      of the doubt at paragraph 19 as to whether he was truly held in forced
      captivity by the gang; he then stated at paragraph 24 that he was  not
      satisfied that he had been taken into captive labour.       He  stated
      that these  positions  are  so  diametrically  opposed  that  he  must
      conclude that an arguable error of law is demonstrated. He also  found
      that although the Judge identified and listed some of  the  background
      evidence available to him, he  made  no  further  assessment  of  that
      evidence within the body of the decision itself.


  37. I note the Rule 24 submissions made by anther presenting  officer  who
      sought  to  explain  the  asserted  inconsistencies:  the  Judge   was
      considering the plausibility of the claim that the appellant was  held
      in two different properties for a  six  week  period.  The  Judge  has
      considered the inconsistencies in his evidence relating to two  houses
      and the six weeks detention can be explained by reference to his age.


  38. It was also asserted that the  Judge  made  no  findings  of  fact  at
      paragraph  19  but  merely  a  consideration  of  the  account   being
      plausible, considering the discrepancies or missing  evidence  of  two
      and a half weeks.


  39. It cannot be appropriate that different  persons  reach  fundamentally
      different conclusions in construing the same paragraphs. The appellant
      is entitled to know the exact basis upon  which  his  claim  has  been
      refused. Having been given the benefit of the  doubt  with  regard  to
      that  claim  earlier,  it  remains  difficult   to   reconcile   those
      diametrically opposed positions.


  40. Further, I also find that there is substance in Mr Collins' submission
      that there was an element of speculation and conjecture rather than an
      objective analysis of the evidence. He allowed the issues relating  to
      the appellant's account of being able to escape and what  occurred  at
      the airport to adversely affect his assessment of the remainder of the
      appellant's account.


  41. Moreover, even though the  background  material  did  not  necessarily
      relate pertinently to the position of a male child  being  trafficked,
      nevertheless, it was relevant to the  issues  of  credibility  of  the
      appellant's core claim that children in  Albania  do  in  fact  suffer
      forced labour and that Albania is a substantial source  of  trafficked
      children abroad, including Italy.


  42. In the circumstances, I find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal did involve the making of errors on a point of  law.  In  the
      circumstances, the parties agreed that the determination should be set
      aside and would have to be re-made.


  43. Mr Collins submitted, without any opposition from Mr Clarke, that this
      was an appropriate case to be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (Taylor House) for the re-making of the decision.  Mr  Collins  stated
      that Taylor house was  more  convenient  for  the  appellant  and  any
      potential witnesses.


  44. In considering the application for  remitting  the  case  I  have  had
      regard to the Senior President's guidelines. It is evident that  there
      will not only have to be a substantial amount of fact finding, with no
      findings preserved, but that  the  appellant  has  not  had  a  proper
      opportunity of having his claim considered on the evidence as a whole.


           Decision


          Having set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I
direct that the  case  be                      remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal  (Taylor   House)   for   the   decision   to   be   re-made.   The
necessary administrative arrangements should accordingly be put in place.


           Anonymity direction


           Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is                             granted  anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly                      identify
him or any member of their family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the
                 Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with
this direction could lead to         contempt of court proceedings.


         Signed                              Date:  16/4/2015


         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

