

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08108/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Sent           |
|On 15 November 2013                           |On 5 December 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                  WALI KHAN

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Tettey, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  to  this  Tribunal   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge G A Black allowing on  human
    rights grounds an appeal  by  Wali  Khan  (the  "Claimant")  against  a
    decision to remove him as an illegal immigrant.

 2. The Claimant is  a  national  of  Afghanistan.   Following  a  previous
    decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge A M Black he is to be treated  as
    born on 1 January 1989.  He came to the  United  Kingdom  when  he  was
    about 17.  He has been here since then, and has received  the  help  to
    which he was entitled as a child in need and subsequently as  a  former
    relevant child.  He is not a refugee.

 3. His claim before the First-tier Tribunal was that his removal from  the
    United Kingdom would be a breach of his rights under Article 8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights, primarily  because  removal  would
    deprive him of the benefits he receives as  a  former  relevant  child,
    including access to university education and assistance  with  housing.
    In her submissions to the First-tier Tribunal, Miss Khan (who does  not
    represent the Claimant before  us)  is  recorded  as  saying  that  the
    Claimant "was entitled to the full obligations  under  these  [Children
    Act 1989] provisions until the age of 25 years".   Earlier,  the  judge
    had noted that 'it was conceded that  the  Children  Leaving  Care  Act
    provides assistance up to the age of 25 years'.  At paragraph [58]  the
    judge says this:

        "Turning to the Children Leaving Care provisions, it is clear  that
        the appellant has been given support and assistance  in  accordance
        with the duties arising under Section  17  of  the  Children's  Act
        [sic] incorporated into the Pathway Plan.  As submitted by Ms  Khan
        it is clear that the respondent accepted and  met  her  obligations
        under this legislation thus far.  The  Children  Leaving  Care  Act
        specifically extends parental duties and responsibilities until the
        age of 25 years.  There is no reason for such obligations to be cut
        short for this appellant as to do so would be an arbitrary decision
        and a failure to meet the  commitments  expressed  in  statute  and
        explicitly applicable to asylum seeking  children.   I  propose  to
        deal with this issue in the context of the  appellant's  Article  8
        rights.  This was not an issue that was raised before or dealt with
        by Immigration Judge A Black.  It  is  a  strong  argument  in  the
        appellant's favour and which must properly  be  considered  in  the
        balancing exercise.  The appellant as an  unaccompanied  minor  has
        been provided with support by the local authority and the authority
        has acted as corporate parent for the appellant.  The appellant has
        an expectation that having been treated as a vulnerable  child  and
        given support including educational opportunities, accordingly that
        support and care should continue until the age  of  25.   I  accept
        that beyond that age the appellant would no longer be able to avail
        himself of assistance and/or any obligations under  the  Children's
        Act, notwithstanding that by that stage he would not have completed
        his planned studies.  I conclude that the respondent  has  accepted
        responsibility for her obligations as a corporate parent and  under
        Section 55 of  2009  Act.   This  duty  and  responsibility  is  of
        significance and tips the balance as regards proportionality in the
        appellant's favour under Article 8.  I direct that  the  respondent
        therefore grant the appellant a  further  period  of  discretionary
        leave to remain until the age of his 25th birthday."

 4. It is that conclusion against which the Secretary of State appeals, and
    has permission on the ground that it is arguable that the judge  placed
    excessive weight on the statutory provisions cited.

 5. It seemed to us appropriate to attempt to identify precisely what those
    provisions were.  Despite assistance from Ms Pettersen, Mr  Tettey  and
    the internet via the latter's tablet, we have had  some  difficulty  in
    doing so.  The attaining of the age of 25  is  relevant  for  a  person
    pursuing education or training for  the  purposes  of  s  23CA  of  the
    Children Act, but it is difficult to see how that section can  be  what
    the judge was referring to, as it was  not  inserted  by  the  Children
    Leaving  Care  Act  2000  and  cannot  realistically  be  described  as
    extending parental duties and responsibilities  until  the  age  of  25
    years in any general sense.  For some, at least  of  the  other  duties
    under the  Children  Act,  the  final  cut-off  is  the  person's  24th
    birthday, and it is noteworthy that the evidence before the  judge  was
    that the local authority regarded its duties as extending,  at  latest,
    to the Claimant's 24th birthday.  There does not appear  to  have  been
    any assessment of the specific needs of the Claimant on the basis  that
    s 23CA applied to him and we have difficulty in seeing, on the material
    before us, that any duty to provide assistance under s 23CA(5) has been
    shown to have arisen.  A further point is that if duty does  arise,  it
    does not necessarily cease at 25: see subsection (6).

 6. The matter therefore remains somewhat mysterious.  We suspect that  the
    judge erred in law on the effect of the statutory provisions: certainly
    nobody was able to provide to us any route  by  which  she  could  have
    reached her interpretation or description of them.

 7. The question whether she placed too much weight on  them  is  therefore
    equally difficult to answer; but we consider  that  if  the  provisions
    were as she said she failed to appreciate that access  to  benefits  of
    any sort will typically not be sufficient to justify  a  decision  that
    removal of them, so causing their  loss,  will  be  a  disproportionate
    interference in Article 8 rights.  Further, the leaving care provisions
    have as their aim and justification the need to  cover  the  transition
    between being in care and leading an independent  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom: the particular provisions necessary to cover a  transition  to
    leading an independent life in Afghanistan  were  not  the  subject  of
    evidence and it is simply not arguable that of itself the lesser of the
    former is a disproportionate interference in the life of a  person  who
    needs, if anything, the latter.

 8. We are therefore inclined to conclude that the judge erred  in  law  in
    her weighing of the factors going to proportionality.

 9. However, Ms Pettersen has come nowhere near showing that on the correct
    interpretation of the law and an appropriate weighing of the facts,  an
    article 8 appeal ought not to have succeeded.  After all, the  Claimant
    has been here for a considerable time, and  is  the  beneficiary  of  a
    considerable investment of taxpayers' money in  his  higher  education:
    these again are not determinative factors, but they tend to  show  that
    the assessment of article 8 in this case  is  a  complex  matter:   set
    against that is the fact that the judge's conclusion was limited to the
    period before 1 January 2014, now only six  weeks  away,  during  which
    period it is exceedingly unlikely that a proper assessment could be re-
    made (or indeed that the Secretary of State could actually  remove  the
    Claimant if we allowed her appeal).
10. As we indicated at  the  hearing  therefore,  and  with  a  measure  of
    agreement from the parties, we will dismiss the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal.  In doing so we make it clear that the effect of the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision is only that the Claimant is  entitled  not  to  be
    removed before 1 January 2014.  Any relief after that date he will need
    to secure by application; and if he does nothing further, the Secretary
    of State will, we think,  be  entitled  to  issue  a  further  decision
    against him after that date.

11. Appeal dismissed.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 3 December 2013

















