
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08493/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Manchester                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 4 May 2016                               |On : 12 May 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    [a s]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Iran born on [ ]  1980.  He  claims  to  have
arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 November 2014  and  claimed  asylum  the
same day, following his arrest for illegal entry. His claim was  refused  on
1 May 2015. He appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard  by  the
First-tier Tribunal on 27 October 2015  and  was  dismissed  in  a  decision
promulgated on 2 November 2015.

The appellant claims to fear return to Iran on the basis of  his  conversion
from Islam to Christianity. He claims that he decided to become a  Christian
when he attended a house church in August/ September 2014 and  he  continued
attending the house church regularly until he was  told  to  stop  and  then
found out that the house was being watched. In October  2014  he  discovered
that three of the people who had attended had  been  arrested  the  previous
month. In November 2014 four men came to his office looking for him when  he
was not there and his wife told him that four men had  also  come  to  their
house looking for him  and  had  taken  his  laptop  and  some  books  about
Christianity. He left the country after that,  with  the  assistance  of  an
agent. His wife had since been questioned by Herasat at her  place  of  work
and his colleagues had been questioned about his whereabouts.  He  has  been
attending church in the UK. He fears being arrested or killed  by  Ettela'at
if he returned to Iran because of his conversion to Christianity.

The respondent did not accept the appellant's claim  to  have  converted  to
Christianity, owing to inconsistencies in his account, and  considered  that
he would be at no risk on return to Iran.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 27 October 2015 by Judge Davies. At the hearing, an  adjournment
request was made on behalf of the appellant, on the basis that the  minister
of the church of which he was a member, Reverend [M], had not been  able  to
attend but was willing to attend  if  the  hearing  could  be  postponed  to
another day. The judge did not agree to  adjourn  the  proceedings  and  the
appeal was heard, with oral evidence given by the  appellant  and  Mrs  [J],
the churchwarden of Reverend [M]'s  church.  The  judge  did  not  find  the
appellant to be a credible witness. He rejected his claim to have  converted
to Christianity in Iran and considered that his interest in Christianity  in
the UK was solely to bolster a false asylum claim. He did  not  accept  that
the appellant had left Iran illegally. He found that the appellant would  be
at no risk on return to Iran and he dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  Judge  Davies'  decision  and
permission was granted on 30 November 2015.


At the hearing before me, Mr Schwenk relied and expanded  upon  the  grounds
of appeal. He submitted that there had been  procedural  unfairness  in  the
appeal proceeding without  Reverend  [M],  since  her  evidence  could  have
persuaded the  judge  that  the  appellant's  conversion  was  genuine.  The
failure to adjourn to enable the Reverend to  attend  was  contrary  to  the
principles in Dorodian (01/TH/1537). Mr  Schwenk  also  submitted  that  the
judge had given inadequate reasoning for his findings and had  rejected  the
appellant's claim as to his  conversion  and  illegal  exit  without  proper
explanation. He had also failed to engage with  the  significant  amount  of
evidence submitted in relation to illegal  exit  and  the  risks  to  failed
asylum seekers returning to Iran.


Mr Harrison, whilst opposing the appellant's appeal, nevertheless  expressed
concern about the inability of the Dorodian witness to  attend  the  hearing
and also noted that the question of illegal exit from Iran was  the  subject
of country guidance to be heard the following week.


In light of Mr Harrison's concerns I decided that  the  appropriate  course,
in the interests of justice and fairness, was for the  judge's  decision  to
be set aside and  re-made  afresh  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with  the
benefit  of  the  Dorodian  witness,  Reverend  [M],  and  the  new  country
guidance. Although it is understandable why Judge Davies refused to  adjourn
the hearing, given in particular that  there  had  been  a  case  management
review hearing only a week or two  earlier  where  no  indication  had  been
given of any difficulties in  the  witness  attending,  and  that  no  prior
adjournment request had been made, I agreed with Mr Harrison and Mr  Schwenk
that the appellant himself was not at fault and that  the  failings  of  his
representatives should not detract from his ability to have a fair hearing.

Accordingly, I remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  de
novo, with none of the credibility  findings  made  by  Judge  Davies  being
preserved.

DECISION


The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with  afresh,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Davies.










                               Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
