

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08061/2010
                                                               AA/08066/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Sheldon Court                      |Date sent:                   |
|On : 13th June 2013                           |On : 21st June 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                        aubery mUdiwa & mercy chapepa

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr James Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Neville Smart, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   These two linked appeals have  a  convoluted  procedural  history.   Mr
    Mudiwa (the spelling 'Madiwa' appears to be a  mistake)  came  to  this
    country on a visit visa in November 1999, having taught  at  a  primary
    school in rural Manicaland for one year.  He obtained leave  to  remain
    as a student until the end on June 2001, and thereafter  he  overstayed
    until in September 2007 he claimed asylum.  The claim was refused,  but
    the subsequent appeal was allowed on the sole basis that the  Secretary
    of State had not considered the factors listed at paragraph 395C of the
    Immigration Rules before deciding to remove Mr Mudiwa as an overstayer.
     Another 'immigration decision' was therefore taken, and this time  the
    appeal came before Immigration Judge  Meah  on  28th  July  2008.   The
    appellant's story of having been in trouble with the authorities before
    leaving Zimbabwe was  not  believed,  while  his  activities  with  the
    Walsall branch of the MDC were thought to be too low-level to bring him
    to the adverse attention of ZANUU-PF on his return.  Nor did Judge Meah
    think that the appellant's stint as a teacher in the academic year 1998-
    1999 would get him into trouble, even if his occupation was  marked  on
    his Zimbabwean passport.

2.   Mr Mudiwa became 'appeal rights exhausted' by 21st August 2008, but  in
    May 2009 Bake & Co. made further representations on his  behalf,  based
    on the country guidance in RN (returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT  83,
    which had found that "the fact of being a teacher,  or  having  been  a
    teacher in the past, again is capable of  raising  an  enhanced  risk."
    The Case Resolution Directorate was also informed that  Mr  Mudiwa  had
    undergone a customary marriage with a lady of  Malawian  origin,  Mercy
    Chapepa, who had  borne  him  a  daughter  on  27th  March  2009.   The
    solicitors  asked  that  the  daughter  (though  not  her  mother)   be
    registered as dependent on their client's asylum claim.

3.   These further submissions were accepted as a fresh  claim  for  asylum,
    but the claim was rejected in a letter dated 19th May 2010, and another
    decision was taken to remove Mr Mudiwa.  Two days later, a decision was
    taken to refuse the asylum claim which Mercy Chapepa had  made  in  her
    own right.  Ms  Chapepa  had  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  from
    Zimbabwe in December 2001, having been issued with a Malawian  passport
    earlier that year.  She obtained another  Malawian  passport  while  in
    this country, valid until October 2012.  After  her  initial  leave  to
    enter as a visitor, Ms Chapepa obtained grants of leave to remain as  a
    student until 2009, but her leave had run out by  the  time  she  claim
    asylum on 1st April 2010. The claim was based upon assaults by  ZANU-PF
    militants upon her and her brothers in 2001, because of  their  support
    for the MDC.  But she had no involvement with the MDC in this country.

4.   The appeals by Mr Mudiwa  and  Ms  Chapepa  against  the  decisions  to
    remove them came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  7th  July  2010.
    Judge Thomas considered the country guidance in RN, with  its  enhanced
    risk for teachers, but took Judge Meah's determination as her  starting
    point, in accordance with Devaseelan.  She found Mr Mudiwa's continuing
    activity with the MDC in Walsall to be no more high-profile than it had
    been in 2008,  when  the  earlier  appeal  came  before  the  Asylum  &
    Immigration Tribunal.  There was no real risk that this activity  would
    get him into trouble on return to Zimbabwe, and he had not suffered any
    persecution when he was a teacher in Zimbabwe for one year.  As for  Ms
    Chapepa, Judge Thomas did not find her account of what happened to  her
    in Zimbabwe credible, and did not think  that  she  would  attract  any
    adverse attention on return there.   Both  appellants,  she  concluded,
    would be able to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF if required to do so.

5.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  sought  on  behalf  of
    both Mr Mudiwa and Ms Chapepa, and was refused in both cases by  Senior
    Immigration Judge Ward, sitting as a  First-tier  judge.   On  renewal,
    however, Mr Mudiwa's application came before SIJ Gleeson,  who  granted
    permission in September 2010, on the basis that "the appellant's  brief
    foray into  teaching,  which  ended  in  1999,  ...  was  not  properly
    considered", whereas Ms Chapepa's application  came  before  SIJ  Peter
    Lane, who refused it.  Something must have gone wrong administratively,
    since both applications should have been put  before  the  same  judge.
    There were further procedural problems and delays, as Designated  Judge
    Bowen presided over hearings in December 2011 and  November  2012,  and
    Blakemores, the firm which had represented both appellants, went out of
    business.  Eventually, Principal Resident Judge Southern directed  that
    Ms Chapepa should be given permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    along with her husband, and so the two linked appeals have come at last
    before me.

6.   My first task is to decide whether Judge Thomas made a  material  error
    of law in dismissing either  of  the  appeals.   I  have  been  greatly
    assisted in this task by the oral  submissions  of  Mr  Howard  and  Mr
    Smart, to which I shall refer in giving my decision, which  I  reserved
    at the end of the hearing.

7.   Although three years have elapsed since these  appeals  were  heard  by
    Judge Thomas, I must confine myself to the circumstances  obtaining  at
    that time.  Mr Howard's strongest point is the warning in the head note
    of RN, repeated in the body of the determination at paragraph 261, that
    teachers were an 'enhanced  risk'  category.   "There  is  no  credible
    evidence", says Judge Thomas at  paragraph  44  of  her  determination,
    "that he [Mr Mudiwa]  or  his  family  were  involved  in  politics  in
    Zimbabwe or that he suffered persecution there on account  of  being  a
    teacher for one year."   The  judge  does  not  address  in  terms  the
    question whether Mr Mudiwa's one-year stint at a rural  primary  school
    some eleven years before the hearing would cause him to  be  persecuted
    in the future.  But realistically, his career in teaching was so short,
    and took place so long ago, that I cannot find this omission  to  be  a
    material error, which could have made a difference to  the  outcome  of
    the appeal.  As the head note in RN puts it, "having been a teacher  in
    the past is capable of raising an enhanced risk", but that is  not  the
    same as saying that everyone who has ever been a teacher  in  Zimbabwe,
    no matter how long ago and no matter for how short a time, is  at  risk
    on return.  Mr Mudiwa's circumstances were clearly not such as  to  put
    him at real risk for having been a teacher.  Mr  Howard  contends  that
    his client's occupation is given on his passport  as  'teacher',  which
    could get him into trouble with the CIO at  Harare  Airport.   But  the
    passport on which Mr Mudiwa travelled to the  United  Kingdom  in  1999
    will almost certainly have expired before his appeal was heard by Judge
    Thomas.  He would need a new passport or travel document  in  order  to
    return to Zimbabwe.

8.   The ability of either appellant to demonstrate loyalty to  ZANU-PF  has
    not been an issue before me, and indeed the first head note to RN makes
    clear that a bare assertion that an appellant would be unable to do  so
    "will not suffice, especially in the case of an appellant who has  been
    found not credible in his account of experiences in Zimbabwe."  Neither
    appellant in the instant case has been found credible in this respect.

9.   Mr Howard draws attention to the fact that Mr Mudiwa's home area  is  a
    rural part of Manicaland, where support is split between  the  MDC  and
    ZANU-PF.  Judge Thomas was wrong, he contends, to suppose that  because
    some people there support the MDC, his client will not be at risk  from
    ZANU-PF.  But as Mr  Smart  counters,  his  wife  lived  in  the  Mbare
    district of Harare, where support for the MDC is  much  stronger.   The
    family would not be at risk there.  In any event, it was Judge  Thomas'
    finding that neither appellant had a real commitment to the  MDC,  such
    as to land them in trouble with ZANU-PF supporters.

10.  As a citizen of Malawi, Ms Chapepa cannot avail herself of the  Refugee
    Convention in relation to Zimbabwe.  Mr Howard takes issue  with  Judge
    Thomas' supposition that Mr Mudiwa would be able to go to  Malawi  with
    his wife, but in any event the judge also found that Ms  Chapepa  would
    not be at risk in Zimbabwe, and that finding  has  not  been  seriously
    challenged.  Judge Thomas' optimistic expectation that the family would
    be able to settle in Malawi may or may not be right, but if the  couple
    can return to Zimbabwe, the issue falls away.

11.  Finally, Mr Howard submits that  Judge  Thomas  did  not  consider  the
    'section 55 duty' in relation to the couple's  daughter,  Pamela.   All
    she said was that "their daughter is young  enough  to  adapt  to  life
    elsewhere with her parents."  But as Mr Smart points  out,  Pamela  was
    only 15 months old at the date of the hearing.  For  a  child  of  that
    age, it is well settled that her best interests lie in living with  her
    parents, in whichever country her parents happen to be.  As an  infant,
    she could not have formed ties with the United Kingdom which  it  would
    be a breach of her human rights to sever.

12.  The upshot is that I do not find the First-tier Tribunal to have  erred
    in law.  Had I come to the opposite view, so that the decision  on  the
    appeals would have needed  to  be  re-made  on  the  basis  of  current
    circumstances, the outcome could hardly have been any  different.   The
    couple now have an 8-month old baby boy as well as a  daughter  who  is
    now 4, but the recent country guidance cases of CM [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC)
    and NN [2013] UKUT 198 (IAC) would make their appeals  much  harder  to
    win.




     DECISION

     The appeals are dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              20th June 2013



