
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08797/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|On 3rd September, 2013                        |On 24th October 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                           JUNIOR NDAKA AKUBAKELE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Rasoul of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms H Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of the Congo  who
    was born on 30th August, 1981 and who entered the United Kingdom on  an
    unknown date.  He was arrested on suspicion of having illegally entered
    the United Kingdom  in  2008.  The  appellant  claimed  asylum  in  the
    identity of 'Kevin Masala', but left  the  United  Kingdom  before  the
    decision was made on that application.  He subsequently claimed  asylum
    in the Republic of Ireland in the identity of Junior 'Ndaka  Akubakele'
    on 29th September, 2009.

2.   The respondent was returned to the United Kingdom by the Government  of
    the Republic of Ireland and then made an application for asylum in  his
    name Junior Ndaka Akubakele.

3.    The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application  and  on  13th
    September, 2012, gave directions for  his  removal  to  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo.  The appellant appealed that decision and his appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes who, in  a  determination
    promulgated on 9th November, 2012, found that there was  no  real  risk
    that on return to the DRC the appellant would be persecuted or  suffers
    harm. He dismissed the appellant's asylum and  humanitarian  protection
    appeal and on the same  factual  basis  he  dismissed  the  appellant's
    Article 3 appeal.

4.   The judge then went on to consider the  appellant's  Article  8  appeal
    and in doing so considered Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 and  Hayat  (Nature
    of Chikwamba principle) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 44.   He  noted  that  the
    appellant had  a  poor  immigration  history  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant's removal was not disproportionate.

5.   The appellant challenged that decision, asserting that  the  judge  had
    failed to give adequate consideration to  the  best  interests  of  the
    child and not applied the  guidance  set  out  in  Sande  [2012]  UKUT,
    concerning the  reasonableness  of  relocation  where  the  appellant's
    partner and child are both British nationals.  The judge accepted  that
    the appellant met his partner in December 2009 and that on 19th  April,
    2012 the appellant's partner gave birth  to  their  son,  Darnel.   The
    evidence before the judge was that the appellant's partner's family are
    all based in London.

6.   I referred Miss Rackstraw to the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Hayat  (Pakistan)  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 105 and in particular  to  paragraph  30.   This  was  a  case
    decided on 31st July, 2012, but not apparently relied  upon  by  either
    party in the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes.

7.   Miss Rackstraw accepted, entirely properly in my view, that  the  judge
    had made an error of law in his determination.

8.   I suggested to Miss Rackstraw that in the  circumstances  and  applying
    the decision in Hayat it appeared that the proper course would  be  for
    me to allow the appellant's Article 8 appeal.  She  said  that  on  the
    particular facts of this appellant she agreed.

9.   I have produced this  determination  merely  to  record  the  agreement
    between the parties.  The appellant's human rights  appeal  is  allowed
    under Article 8.




Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

