
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08042/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On: 29th January 2019                |On 6th March 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                  AQ (Iraq)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Ms Bayati, Counsel instructed by Thakrar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  Iraq  born  in  1986.   He  seeks
    international protection.


 2. By his decision handed down on the  3rd  August  2018[1]  the  Hon.  Mr
    Justice Lane found the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  M  Davies
    to dismiss the Appellant's protection appeal defective for error of law
    and set it aside.  By order of Principle Resident Judge O'Connor  dated
    the 17th January 2019 the matter now comes before me for remaking.

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim for protection is that  he  faces  a
    real risk of persecution in Iraq for reasons of his  imputed  political
    opinion/religious belief. His case, in summary is that:

               . His father was a high-ranking Ba'athist who directly served
                 Saddam Hussain from 1980 until the regime fell in 2003;


               . His father fled Iraq in 2004 after a warrant was issued for
                 his arrest;


               . Other  members  of  the  family  lived  in  the  Al-Mansour
                 district  of  Baghdad,  but  'kept  a  low  profile'.   The
                 Appellant worked in construction and  subsequently  started
                 to study law at the University of Baghdad;

               . In March 2008 the family home was raided by Iraqi  security
                 officials who dragged the Appellant and his brother outside
                 and physically mistreated them before they  were  released.
                 The officers were looking for the Appellant's father;

               . The Appellant and his family leave Baghdad fearing  further
                 arrest and move to Fallujah. The Appellant  starts  working
                 with a cousin in his car sales business;

               . In 2009 a close friend of the Appellant was  kidnapped  and
                 killed. After  this  the  Appellant  became  depressed.  He
                 started drinking alcohol and smoking;

               . In April 2014 received a threatening  telephone  call.  His
                 'un-Islamic' behaviour had come to the attention of Islamic
                 militants ('ISIS') who were running what purported to be  a
                 Sharia court in the area. He is  told  to  present  himself
                 within three days;

               . The Appellant goes into hiding. On  his  way  back  to  his
                 family home, some ten days later, his car is intercepted by
                 other vehicles. He is kidnapped by a group  of  masked  men
                 whom he believed to be members of ISIS. He was  kept  in  a
                 room for 10-11 days with other  prisoners.  He  managed  to
                 escape when the building he was imprisoned in  was  bombed,
                 and local villagers freed him;



               . His brother subsequently took him to Baghdad. Whilst  there
                 the Appellant spoke with his  father  who  advised  him  to
                 leave  the  country.  The  Appellant  left  Iraq  with  the
                 assistance of an agent in July 2014;


               . In August 2016 the Appellant's brother S is kidnapped by an
                 armed group in Baghdad. They make derogatory remarks  about
                 his father and his Sunni faith. Another brother, A, pays  a
                 $50,000 to secure his release.


 4. On the basis of this historical narrative the Appellant asserts a  fear
    of harm because of his own identity and association with his  Ba'athist
    father, as well  as  a  fear  of  harm  visited  upon  him  by  Islamic
    militants.




    The Matters in Issue

 5. The first issue is whether the  claim  is  credible,  that  is  to  say
    whether the  Appellant  has  established,  to  the  lower  standard  of
    'reasonable likelihood', that his account, as summarised at paragraph 3
    above, is true.   The Respondent had originally challenged  the  entire
    account, but by the  date  of  the  hearing  before  Judge  Davies  had
    accepted, in the face of not-inconsiderable documentary evidence,  that
    the Appellant's father is who he says he is, namely the former director
    of the Presidential Bureau  of  Saddam  Hussain.    I  note  that  this
    tranche of evidence includes photographs of the Appellant's father with
    Saddam Hussain.


 6. Before me the Appellant attended the hearing with a view to giving live
    evidence.  Mr  Diwnycz  and  Ms  Bayati  were  able,   in   pre-hearing
    conference, to agree  that  there  was  little  utility  in  that.  The
    Appellant has been extensively interviewed by  representatives  of  the
    Secretary of State. He has twice been subjected to cross-examination by
    experienced Home Office Presenting Officers (the hearing  before  Judge
    Davies was the  second  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  an  earlier
    determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge EMM Smith  having  been  set
    aside in its entirety by Upper Tribunal Judge C. Lane on the 17th  July
    2017).  No material discrepancies emerged from any  of  that  evidence.
    Indeed the record of the evidence summarised in the First-tier Tribunal
    decisions indicate that the Appellant has consistently  maintained  his
    account.  Mr Diwnycz wisely concluded, therefore,  that  there  was  no
    point in going through the exercise for a third time.

 7. Instead the Respondent asked me to consider  whether  the  account  was
    plausible,  given  what  we  know  about  the  behaviour  of  ISIS.  In
    particular the  Respondent  did  not  find  it  credible  that  Islamic
    militants would summons the Appellant  to  court,  rather  than  simply
    executing him; nor was it plausible that villagers  would  assist  ISIS
    prisoners in the aftermath of a bombing raid.  I was asked to weigh the
    account, and the supporting  documentary  evidence,  in  light  of  the
    country background material.

 8. The second matter in issue is whether,  on  the  facts  as  found,  the
    Appellant faces a real risk of persecution or serious harm if  returned
    to Iraq today. For the purposes of my decision I am  invited  to  treat
    his Baghdad as his 'home area'. His family originate from Baghdad, that
    is where he would be  returned  to,  and  his  CSID,  issued  in  2008,
    identifies his place of origin as Al-Mansour  (a  district  of  Baghdad
    known for its association with the Ba'ath party: see 4.2.9 of the  June
    2017 CPIN). I do note that the  Appellant  has  also  produced  a  torn
    residency card which indicates that when it was issued, his  home  area
    for the purpose of that registration  was  recorded  as  Fallujah:  see
    paragraph 177 Dr Fatah's  report.  It  is  however  apparent  from  the
    chronology set out at �3 above that his move to Fallujah was an attempt
    to avail himself of an internal flight alternative.

 9. Ms Bayati acknowledged that since the Appellant left  Iraq  the  threat
    from ISIS has considerably diminished. She  could  not,  for  instance,
    show me today that the Appellant would  be  at  risk  in  Baghdad  from
    members of that self-proclaimed 'caliphate'.  As such she did not  seek
    to persuade me that the Appellant was at any risk because he failed  to
    attend his Sharia court hearing, or that he would be at risk from  this
    group in the future.  She did  however  submit  that  the  account  was
    wholly plausible and that there was no good reason, applying the  lower
    standard of proof, to reject it.


10. She instead identified, with reference to the extant  country  guidance
    BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC) the following risk
    factors going forward:

              i) Sunni
             ii) Kidnapping risk- been in the west of 4 years
            iii) Association with a "particularly high-ranking Ba'athist"

To these factors I must further weigh in the balance the fact that the
Appellant has exhibited a

             iv) 'Non-Islamic' lifestyle.




    The Appellant's Evidence

11. The Appellant has been interviewed twice, has  provided  three  witness
    statements and has been cross examined twice.  He has also  produced  a
    good deal of documentary evidence. Given the Respondent's concession in
    respect of the  Appellant's  father's  position  I  need  not  set  the
    documents relating to that issue out here.

12. In respect of the abduction and assault on the Appellant's  brother  S,
    he has provided a signed witness statement dated 17th December 2017. He
    explains that he was on his way to university on the morning of the 3rd
    August 2016 when he was abducted by a group of armed  men  in  a  white
    Toyota pickup truck.   He was taken to an unknown destination where  he
    was locked in a room. They  insulted  his  religious  beliefs  -  their
    comments about his Sunni faith led him to conclude  that  they  were  a
    Shi'a militia.  They beat him and make references to his  father  being
    part of the former regime.  They called  him  "dirty  names".   He  was
    released on the 9th August 2016 after a  ransom  was  paid.  S  is  now
    residing in Turkey with the rest of the family.

13. In support of this statement the Appellant's  brother  has  provided  a
    number of documents.  There are five  which  appear  to  relate  to  an
    investigation conducted by  officers  at  al-Doura  police  station  in
    Baghdad. The first is dated the 3rd August 2016. It is a  copy  of  the
    original report filed by the Appellant's brother  A  with  the  police.
    The second is dated 9th August 2016. This appears to be  a  copy  of  a
    police record showing that on that date the Appellant's other brother A
    attended the police station in Al-Doura to inform them that his brother
    S had been released by his abductors. The third is a statement  from  S
    himself giving officers his account of what happened.  The  fourth  and
    fifth, dated the 14th and 28th  August  2016,  appear  to  be  official
    receipts given to the family by the court after they  requested  copies
    of the aforementioned items from the investigation file.  Finally there
    is a forensic medical report dated the 10th August 2016 issued  by  al-
    Yarmouk hospital in Baghdad, confirming that  S  attended  on  the  9th
    August 2016 with extensive bruising and a head injury.


14. I was further  provided  with  a  tenancy  agreement  relating  to  the
    family's accommodation in Turkey, and Turkish residence cards  for  the
    Appellant's father and mother.



    The Country Background Material

15. I was asked  by  both  parties  to  have  regard  to  relevant  country
    guidance. I have in addition been assisted by Ms  Bayati's  preparation
    of a reference  index  to  the  'objective'  bundle.  She  referred  in
    particular to the following:

               .  the  'Country  Information  and  Policy   Notes'   (CPINs)
                 published by the  Secretary  of  State  in  November  2018,
                 October 2018, January  2018,  September  2017,  June  2017,
                 August 2016


               . a report by Dr Rebwar Fatah, prepared specifically for this
                 appeal, dated the 1st December 2016


               . The UNHCR position paper on the return  of  refugees  dated
                 the November 2016


               . Human Rights Watch report dated 2018


16. Some of the information before me is now, it is agreed, out of date. It
    has been adduced however to support the Appellant's case in respect  of
    the overall plausibility of his historical account. In  particular  the
    UN position paper confirms (and  I  do  not  perceive  this  to  be  in
    contention) that by early 2014 Fallujah and its environs had fallen  to
    Islamic militants.


17.  Some  of  the  information  before  me,  it  is  agreed,  is  relevant
    background, but not determinative. For instance the evidence would tend
    to indicate that a Sunni male in post-ISIS Fallujah may  now  encounter
    real difficulties from those that defeated that group:

         "The UN and human rights organizations  have  documented  extensive
         abuses committed by elements  of  the  PMUs  [popular  mobilisation
         unit], and in some cases the ISF [Iraqi security  forces],  against
         fleeing civilians, particularly Sunni Arab men and  boys,  who  are
         broadly perceived as supporting ISIS, irrespective of the existence
         or absence of evidence linking  an  individual  to  ISIS.  Reported
         abuses  include  arbitrary  arrest,  abduction,   physical   abuse,
         enforced disappearance, summary killing and mutilation of  corpses,
         68 including, for example, during military operations to retake the
         town of Fallujah (Al-Anbar) and  surrounding  areas  from  ISIS  in
         May/June 2016. Hundreds of men and boys reportedly  remain  missing
         after having been taken into custody by forces affiliated with  the
         PMUs.  The media also  reported  arson  and  looting  after  forces
         affiliated  to  the   PMUs   entered   Fallujah.   Despite   public
         announcements by the Iraqi authorities  on  the  accountability  of
         those involved  in  abuses  against  civilians,  it  often  remains
         unclear if  investigations  have  been  conducted  or  prosecutions
         initiated."


         [UN Position Paper, para 20]


    Since it is not proposed that the Appellant return  to  Fallujah,  such
    evidence is only of limited assistance, and would only be  relevant  to
    any consideration of internal flight.


18. In respect of current risk I was asked to take as my starting point the
    decision in BA. Insofar  as  it  is  relevant  to  the  Appellant,  the
    Tribunal found that no one factor is going to give rise to a real  risk
    of serious  harm  in  the  city.   It  was  however  satisfied  that  a
    combination of risk factors could discharge the  burden  of  proof.  In
    particular it found:


         Kidnapping has been, and  remains,  a  significant  and  persistent
         problem contributing to the breakdown of law  and  order  in  Iraq.
         Incidents of kidnapping are likely to be underreported. Kidnappings
         might  be  linked  to  a  political  or  sectarian  motive;   other
         kidnappings are rooted in criminal activity for a purely  financial
         motive. Whether a returnee from the West is likely to be  perceived
         as a potential target for kidnapping in Baghdad may depend  on  how
         long he or she has been away from Iraq.  Each  case  will  be  fact
         sensitive, but in principle, the longer a person has  spent  abroad
         the greater the risk. However, the evidence does not  show  a  real
         risk to a returnee in Baghdad on this ground alone.


      Sectarian violence has  increased  since  the  withdrawal  of  US-led
         coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the levels  seen  in  2006-
         2007. A Shia dominated government is supported by Shia militias  in
         Baghdad. The evidence indicates that Sunni men are more  likely  to
         be targeted as suspected supporters of Sunni extremist groups  such
         as ISIL. However, Sunni identity alone is not  sufficient  to  give
         rise to a real risk of serious harm.


      In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and in the case of
         Sunni  complainants,  are  likely  to  be  unwilling   to   provide
         sufficient protection.


19. The conclusions in BA are mirrored by (and in some instances are  drawn
    from) the material in the bundle before me.  The June 2017 CPIN notes:


         2.2.7 A Sunni may be able to demonstrate a real risk of persecution
         or serious harm from a Shia militia, but this will depend on  their
         personal profile, including their  family  connections,  profession
         and origin.


    And this evidence must be read in light of the following:


         4.2.3 Several sources  indicated  that,  since  2003,  Baghdad  has
         become more segregated and Shia-dominated. The Finnish  Immigration
         Service's  report,  'Security  situation  in  Baghdad  -  the  Shia
         militias' ('the FIS report'), dated  29  April  2015,  which  cited
         various sources, summarised the  situation:  'Following  the  Iraqi
         civil war (2006-2007), the previously peaceful coexistence of Sunni
         and Shia communities came to an  end,  and  Baghdad  was  gradually
         split into more clearly defined Sunni or Shia districts.  Thousands
         of people died during the civil war, with Shia and  Sunni  militias
         killing each other. Shiites took over several  parts  of  the  city
         that had been occupied by  Sunnis  and  other  minorities,  turning
         Baghdad into a predominantly Shia city.'


20. One of  the  primary  fears  of  the  Sunni  community  in  Baghdad  is
    kidnapping (again from the June 2017 CPIN):

         7.3.1  The  FIS  report  noted:  'Men  identified  as  AAH  members
         kidnapped Sunni men in the districts of Sha'ab, Baya'a, Za'franiyya
         and Ghazaliyya. The kidnappers were dressed  in  civilian  clothing
         and drove an army vehicle with no number plates. In both cases, the
         kidnapped men were found a few days later, shot in the head. AAH is
         also claimed to be kidnapping Sunnis  in  the  Sunni  districts  of
         Ma'alif,  Ameriyya, Khadraa, Dora and Saidiyya. In July  2014,  AAH
         kidnapped Sunni civilians on Palestine street in the al-Mohandeseen
         region. AAH  is  suspected  of  kidnapping  local  business  men...
         'Sometimes, the militias release the Sunnis they have taken if they
         manage  to  convince  their  kidnappers  that  they  are   Shiites.
         Similarly, Sunnis may pose as Shiites in Shia-dominated residential
         areas. Many Sunnis say that their Shia neighbours saved their lives
         by falsely identifying them as Shiites. Sunnis are forced  to  pose
         as Shiites in certain areas to avoid problems and being driven away
         from their homes. In conclusion, it seems  that  religious  beliefs
         are  not  making  ordinary  Shiites  violent  towards  their  Sunni
         neighbours...'

21. Dr Fatah's report was prepared at a time when  the  Appellant's  family
    connections were in dispute. As they are now accepted I  need  not  set
    out his evidence on this point. In terms of  risk  arising  from  those
    connections Dr Fatah notes that the number of former Ba'athists  killed
    in Iraq in recent years is relatively, perhaps surprisingly,  low.  The
    exact number of those  targeted  is  however  unknown.  The  chaos  and
    insecurity that has prevailed since 2003 has meant that many deaths and
    injuries have gone unreported; such was the scale and frequency of such
    deaths that the press and human rights observers have  been  unable  to
    identify the cause of each individual attack.  Dr Fatah points out  for
    instance  that  the  huge  wave  of  attacks  against   academics   was
    consistently reported in that terminology: in fact  such  attacks  were
    fuelled  by  the  fact  that  in  order  to  attain  a  high  level  of
    professional advancement under the former regime, one had to  join  the
    Ba'ath party.  These  individuals  were  not  therefore  killed  simply
    because they were lawyers, professors, scientists etc; they were killed
    because they must have been allied to the government.   It is also true
    to say that a great number of those associated with the  former  regime
    have already fled the country. Dr Fatah did however manage to identify,
    in a trawl through the evidence recorded  on  the  website  'Iraq  Body
    Count' 19  examples  of  Ba'athists,  and  by  extension  their  family
    members, being attacked in the past five years.  The  attacks  included
    bombs placed on the road outside homes,  shootings,  and  magnetic  car
    bombs.  The victims included Ba'ath party members,  former  members  of
    Saddam's armed forces, policemen and a judge; in one instance  the  son
    of a Ba'athist was killed by a bomb, and in another a  man  was  killed
    for 'suspected' Ba'athist links.


22. Of the  Appellant's  specific  circumstances  Dr  Fatah  considers  the
    following matters to be relevant to the assessment of personal risk:

         . His father worked in Saddam's  personal  office  for  23  years,
           indicating a high level of loyalty and  that  Saddam  must  have
           been fond of him


         . His position was such that he would have acted as  link  between
           the President and his Ministers and as such may be  regarded  as
           complicit in the various campaigns of  repression  against,  for
           instance, the Kurds and Shi'as,  and  as  a  "particularly  high
           ranking" Ba'athist

         . The fact that he is identifiable as a Sunni,  formerly  resident
           in Fallujah, brings its  own  risks.  There  have  been  serious
           abuses against Sunni civilians there  since  it  was  recaptured
           from ISIS in June 2016, and this is consistent with the  pattern
           of violence seen across all areas liberated from ISIS



    Discussion and Findings

23. As I note above Ms Bayati accepted that the Appellant cannot today make
    out a real risk of harm from ISIS.   She submitted that it  is  instead
    the confluence of the factors she has identified which would place  the
    Appellant in danger in Baghdad today.     The  Appellant  is  not  just
    identifiable as a 'Sunni' Muslim, he is a Sunni whose father  played  a
    significant role in the regime of Saddam Hussain, a regime vilified and
    loathed by the Shi'a who continue to  live  in  the  city.    His  non-
    Islamic behaviour, including a failure to pray  and  drinking  alcohol,
    may be relevant in a number of ways.  It serves to underline that he is
    someone who is 'westernised', and has in fact spent a number  of  years
    in the 'west'. It may incur the wrath of Sunni extremists of  the  sort
    who affiliated themselves with  ISIS;  similarly  it  may  attract  the
    attention of Shi'a groups, who would further  associate  that  kind  of
    secularism with the family's support for the Ba'ath  party.     I  must
    also take into account the Appellant's evidence that his entire  family
    have now fled Iraq and that as such, upon return to Baghdad,  he  would
    be on his own.

24. For the Respondent Mr Diwnycz agreed with  Ms  Bayati's  concession  in
    respect of ISIS. That group has lost whatever influence it  might  have
    had in Fallujah: Mr Diwnycz referred  me  to  a  map  produced  by  the
    Institute of War in October 2018 and reproduced in  the  November  2018
    CPIN. Although they did appear to have considerable influence  in  that
    area in 2014 they were defeated militarily by mid-2016.   In respect of
    the submissions on current risk in Baghdad Mr Diwnycz accepted that the
    Appellant's personal characteristics are as they are  described  by  Ms
    Bayati, but submitted that applying the guidance in  BA  the  Appellant
    had not  demonstrated  that  the  threat  to  his  person  reached  the
    requisite, albeit it low, standard.

25. I begin by  considering  the  historical  narrative  presented  by  the
    Appellant, and summarised at my �3 above. As I note above the Appellant
    has  retold  his  story  on  several  occasions.  He  was   extensively
    interviewed by the Home Office in November 2014. He has given  detailed
    witness statements to his solicitor on three occasions, in 2015,  2016,
    and 2017. He has twice been cross-examined on his account, in  separate
    hearings in December 2016 and April 2018. As Mr Diwnycz  accepted,  the
    Appellant has consistently maintained his account, and  the  Respondent
    has been unable to  identify  any  material  discrepancies  therein.  I
    attach  some  weight  to  the  fact  that  the  account  has   remained
    consistent.


26.  The  Appellant  has  produced  a  number  of  documents   capable   of
    corroborating parts of his account. It is now accepted, as a result  of
    those documents,  that  his  father  was  a  senior  figure  in  Saddam
    Hussain's regime.  I have further had regard to the documents  relating
    to the residence of his family in Turkey, and to the documents relating
    to the alleged abduction of the Appellant's brother in  2008  (which  I
    deal with in greater detail below). Having examined those  documents  I
    can find no internal inconsistencies within them. Nor do I  find  there
    to be any discrepancy between the documents  and  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence. I attach some weight to this factor, weighing  the  documents
    in the round with the remaining evidence.

27. In respect of the plausibility of  the  account  I  find  there  to  be
    nothing particularly startling in the  Appellant's  narrative.   It  is
    wholly plausible that his father, a high ranking Ba'athist, would  have
    fled the country shortly after the fall  of  the  regime.  It  is  also
    plausible that his family would at that stage continue to live  in  the
    affluent suburb of al-Mansour, where many senior government figures had
    their homes.   The claim that the family home was raided in early  2008
    is again consonant with the country background evidence: the  city  was
    at that time in the grip of extremely serious "tit for  tat"  sectarian
    violence and I am satisfied that it is reasonably likely that  security
    officials would at  that  time  have  still  had  an  interest  in  the
    Appellant's father.   As  to  the  move  to  Fallujah,  this  again  is
    credible, given the large Sunni population in that city. The claim that
    a close friend of the Appellant's was kidnapped and killed in  2009  is
    in no way inconsistent  with  the  breakdown  of  law  and  order  that
    occurred in post-Saddam Iraq.  I find the claim to  this  point  to  be
    entirely plausible within the context of what is known  about  Iraq  at
    that time.


28. The crux of the Respondent's case relates however to the claimed events
    between early 2014 and 2016.

29. The Appellant claims that whilst living in Fallujah in  early  2014  he
    received a telephone call from  someone  purporting  to  represent  the
    Sharia court and demanding that he present himself to answer to charges
    of "unIslamic" behaviour.   I note, and indeed it does not appear to be
    disputed, Dr Fatah's evidence that ISIS did indeed have  a  substantial
    presence in the Fallujah area at that  time.   The  Respondent  however
    says of this evidence:

         "ISIS are well known for their  aggressive  and  barbaric  acts  of
         violence, your claim  that  ISIS  called  your  phone  is  entirely
         inconsistent with any information relating to ISIS"


30. I have given careful consideration to this submission. ISIS were indeed
    well known internationally for acts of senseless barbarism  but  it  is
    important to note that many members of that group  regarded  themselves
    not as a rampaging gang (as we might perceive them) but as guardians of
    the "true" Islamic  faith.  They  regarded  themselves  as  laying  the
    foundation for a Caliphate. In those circumstances it cannot be said to
    be inherently implausible that they  operated  what  they  regarded  as
    Sharia courts, or  that  they  would  summons  perceived  transgressors
    before them. I find the account given to be wholly  plausible,  in  the
    context of the individual members of ISIS  defining  themselves  as  an
    Islamic "state".   Similarly I can find nothing inherently  implausible
    in the claim that tribesmen assisted ISIS prisoners escape from a  bomb
    damaged building.


31. Applying the lower standard of proof I am prepared to accept that these
    events did occur as they are described by the Appellant.


32. The final element of the account concerns the  events  surrounding  the
    Appellant's brother in Baghdad in 2016. I am mindful that the Appellant
    himself had already left Iraq at that stage, and that  this  matter  is
    only relied upon insofar as it is material to any future  risk  to  the
    Appellant.  What I lack here in direct evidence from the  Appellant  is
    made up for in that I have a statement from his brother,  supported  by
    several items of documentary evidence.

33.  First  there  is  the  gentleman's  own  statement,   which   although
    straightforward and fairly detailed is of  course  untested:  there  is
    therefore a limit to the weight that I can place on that.

34. Second is a report filed at al-Doura police station on the  3rd  August
    2016 by the Appellant's brother  A.    The  record  shows  that  he  is
    reporting his brother S as missing.  He  had  left  home  as  usual  to
    attend university but did not return home. Several  attempts  had  been
    made to contact him by telephone but his mobile was switched  off.    A
    had been to all the places where he could think that S  might  be,  but
    had not been able to find him.

35. The third document is another report from al-Doura, this time dated the
    9th August 2016.   It is short and to the point. It  serves  to  record
    that on that date the Appellant's brother A came into  the  station  to
    report that he had secured the release  of  their  brother  S  from  an
    "unidentified group", by paying  a  ransom  of  $50,000.   The  officer
    making the report, Captain Mohamed O. Dowaij, notes that the victim had
    to be taken  to  Al-  Yarmouk  hospital  for  treatment  following  his
    release.  The  document  gives  six  directions  in  respect   of   the
    investigation: that the statement of the  kidnapping  victim  be  taken
    after his recovery, that  the  description  of  the  car  used  in  the
    abduction be circulated, that  a  medical  report  is  requested,  that
    efforts are made to identify the perpetrators, that the case is brought
    before the public prosecutor and that the decision is to be recorded.

36. I can see from the original Arabic version that both of these documents
    have been stamped by three officials, and  from  the  translation  that
    these are Captain  Dowaij,  Judge  Munzer  Ibrahim  Hussain  and  Judge
    Mohamed Abdul Ghafor  Aziz,  Deputy  Prosecutor.  Looking  at  the  two
    'receipt' documents I consider it likely that these stamps  are  placed
    on the document because it is being given over to the family  at  their
    request, to certify that these are genuine copies from the police file.



37. The report from the hospital is issued pursuant to a request  from  al-
    Doura police station. It states that S entered the hospital on the  9th
    August 2016 "in full awareness" with an injury to his scalp and bruises
    on his face, back and leg. The Deputy Hospital manager who provided the
    report, Mr Abdulmalek Mohammed Amin, records the doctor's opinion  that
    these injuries were caused by "external violence".

38. As I note above I have considered these documents in the round with the
    remaining evidence. I find that I am able to attach significant  weight
    to them for the following reasons. First, the documents themselves  are
    internally consistent and fit with the narrative S  has  given  in  his
    statement. Second, having examined the documents I can find nothing  in
    them which might indicate that they have been produced simply  for  the
    purpose of supporting this  claim.  The  initial  report  from  A  says
    nothing, for instance, about a possible kidnap. He has simply given the
    officers a report that S is missing and asked them to investigate.  The
    reports from the 9th August 2016 are similarly restrained. On that date
    S was taken first to hospital for a check-up, and then  to  the  police
    station to give his statement. The remarks of the officer  as  to  what
    should now be done, reproduced from the file, appear  to  be  plausible
    and consistent with what might  be  expected  in  these  circumstances.
    Third, it is clear from the country background evidence, in  particular
    the findings of the Tribunal in BA, that kidnappings were rife  in  the
    city at that time. The Appellant's brother  fitted  the  profile  of  a
    potential victim: a Sunni male from an  affluent  family,  with  family
    living abroad. The additional matter of his Ba'athist heritage would no
    doubt be further incentive for a quasi-sectarian  criminal  gang.   The
    narrative is also consistent with the evidence of Dr  George,  recorded
    at paragraph 70 of BA, that families will often negotiate directly with
    kidnappers rather than relying on the police to do so.


39. Having considered all of the evidence in the round I  am  satisfied  to
    the appropriate  standard  that  the  Appellant's  brother  was  indeed
    kidnapped in Baghdad in August 2016 in the manner described.  This  led
    him and any remaining  family  members  to  leave  the  country.  I  am
    satisfied that the Appellant's family are all now outside of Iraq.

40. I therefore turn to the forward-looking risk assessment. The  Appellant
    has the following personal characteristics.   He is from  Baghdad,  but
    has not lived there himself since 2008  when  he  was  assaulted  under
    questioning by security officials who were looking for his father.   He
    has no family members remaining in the  city.   He  has  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2014.  Although he is not particularly  observant,
    he is identifiably Sunni.  He is the son of a high  ranking  Ba'athist.
    On at least two  occasions  the  Appellant  and/or  his  brothers  have
    encountered instances of serious harm with some causal  nexus  to  that
    family history. In 2008 the Appellant and another brother were  dragged
    out of their home in al-Mansour and  beaten  by  officers  looking  for
    their father. In 2016 the Appellant's brother was kidnapped by men  who
    taunted him about his father's role in the former regime.

41. I note in that in BA the evidence about the 'epidemic' of kidnapping in
    Baghdad was that it was driven by various motives. Citing a  report  by
    the  US  Army  War  College's  Strategic   Studies   Institute   called
    'Criminals, Militias, and Insurgents:  Organized  Crime  in  Iraq'  the
    Tribunal found the reason behind  such  abductions  is  often  hard  to
    determine [at 76]:

         "Kidnapping in Iraq  has  several  distinct  dimensions.  First  is
         motivation. Different kinds of kidnapping are determined largely by
         the motivations of the perpetrators. Although  the  main  focus  in
         this chapter is  economic  or  for-profit  kidnapping  rather  than
         political kidnapping, the distinction between the  two  is  not  as
         clear as it  initially  appears.  Sometimes  it  is  impossible  to
         determine whether a kidnapping is primarily about  money  or  about
         politics. Indeed, it is often apparent only  in  retrospect  -  and
         sometimes not even then - as to which category of kidnapping  is  a
         particular abduction belongs. As one commentary noted,  "abductions
         are sometimes  lucrative  criminal  enterprises,  sometimes  brutal
         aspects of sectarian violence, and sometimes a tangled mix  of  the
         two."


42. This evidence fits very well with the statement of  S,  to  the  effect
    that  his  kidnappers  appeared  on   the   one   hand   motivated   by
    political/religious enmity ("they insulted my religion"/"they  insulted
    my father and called him dirty names...they were trying to  figure  out
    where my father is, or his  address"),  and  on  the  other  hand  were
    clearly in the business of making money, S being  immediately  released
    upon payment of a $50,000 ransom.


43. I bear in mind that the kidnapping of S occurred fairly  recently.   It
    is difficult to see how the Appellant would be any less at risk  today.
    Unlike S at the time, he has no family in the city,  and  he  would  be
    returning there after a long absence, most recently  in  the  west.  He
    would be isolated, and as I have said, identifiably Sunni.    There  is
    no evidence before me to  indicate  that  the  security  situation  for
    Sunnis, or returnees from the west, has improved in the city since  the
    Tribunal promulgated the decision in BA.   Nor have  I  any  reason  to
    find that the family's Ba'athist connection would  have  diminished  in
    the minds of potential persecutors over the past two years.  Whilst  it
    may be unlikely that the Appellant would be targeted simply because  of
    his father, that was  clearly  some  part  of  the  motivation  in  the
    kidnapping of S; quite possibly because the criminals involved  assumed
    that the family would be reluctant to seek the help of the  authorities
    as a result.

44. I have considered whether there is anywhere in Iraq where the Appellant
    might be reasonably expected to relocate to avoid the risk of  harm  in
    Baghdad. Mr Diwnycz accepted that given his personal profile  he  could
    not be expected to go to either  the  Shi'a  dominated  south,  or  the
    Kurdish dominated north. There remains the possibility  of  moving,  as
    the Appellant already once did, to town in the Sunni triangle north  of
    Baghdad. Although I have accepted that the Appellant was  subjected  to
    past persecution by ISIS in Fallujah that particular risk  is  accepted
    by Ms Bayati to have diminished. Unfortunately for the Appellant it has
    been replaced by the potential threat of  ill-treatment  by  the  Sh'ia
    forces who displaced ISIS: see paragraph 17 above. I do not  regard  it
    as reasonable to expect a Sunni male on his own,  with  past  Ba'athist
    association, and who remained in Fallujah  through  much  of  the  ISIS
    occupation of Anbar, to  expose  himself  to  the  risk  of  harm  from
    vengeful Shi'a militias.  Having considered all of the  evidence  I  am
    satisfied that the Appellant has discharged the  burden  of  proof  and
    shown himself to face a current risk of harm in Iraq.




    Anonymity


45. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders, we consider it appropriate to make an order  in  the  following
    terms:


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Decisions


46. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and for the reasons identified by Mr Justice Lane it is set aside.


47. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:

    "the appeal is allowed on refugee convention and human rights  grounds.
    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he  is
    a refugee".

48. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          28th February 2019
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Written decision sent to parties on the 7th September 2018

