
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08220/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 February 2016                   |On 27 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                    [A D]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Counsel
For the Respondent:    Senior Presenting Officer


                            Decision and Reasons

 1. The appellant claims that he is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  [  ]
    1999. He appealed against the decision of the respondent dated  21  May
    2015 to refuse to grant him asylum and on  humanitarian  protection  in
    the United Kingdom. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  D  Ross  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on 10 November 2015.

 2. Permission to appeal granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler  on  8
    December 2015 who found that it is arguable that the Judge's failure to
    consider s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 was a
    material error of law as the appellant was a child  aged  16.  He  also
    stated that the Judge gave two principal  reasons  for  placing  little
    weight on the report as to the appellant's nationality. The  first  was
    that the report was not been signed by either expert. This  mistake  of
    fact and his placing little weight on the  report,  was  a  significant
    factor in his assessment of the appellant's nationality.

    The First-tier Tribunal's findings

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made the following findings in dismissing
    the appellant's appeal which I set out in summary.

 4. The appellant travelled by road to the United Kingdom  arriving  on  17
    September 2014. At his screening interview for children on 24 September
    2014, the appellant indicated that he would be harmed  if  returned  to
    Afghanistan. He said that he lived at home with his father  and  mother
    and two brothers, and that he had left about three or four months  ago.
    He said that he was handed to a man, by his mother, who put him in  the
    vehicle. He did not know what countries he has passed through.  He  was
    told he was being taken to the United Kingdom.

 5. The appellant claims he is 15 years old and of  Pashtun  ethnicity.  He
    was born in Jalalabad. His older brother Hammza is dead. He  was  taken
    by four or five Taliban in the car into the hills. They told him he has
    to fight with the Taliban. His father has also disappeared. He  managed
    to escape from the camp at  night  and  walk  through  the  forest  and
    arrived back home at about midday. His mother took him to a  relative's
    house to hide after a  couple  of  days.  They  lived  in  a  different
    village. The Taliban came to his house and took his father and told him
    that he was responsible for his escape. After a while his  mother  told
    him that his father had probably been killed and decided  that  it  was
    too dangerous for him and handed him over to an agent.  About  a  month
    later, he left Afghanistan because he could not live there.

 6. Rather unusually, the appellant's nationality has not been accepted  by
    the respondent in this case. The first consideration is whether  he  is
    actually an Afghan. In analysing what he said about his  home,  I  must
    bear in mind that he was only 15 years old and lived in the village all
    his life. He attended school for a few years and then gave up and could
    not read or write. So far as his  languages  are  concerned  he  speaks
    Pashto which does not help much because that is  a  language  which  is
    also spoken in Pakistan.

 7. Looking at his answers about his village, I considered that  these  are
    very inconsistent beginning with  the  name  of  the  village.  At  his
    screening interview, he said he came from "Jalalabad Khwyghai  District
    Village." He was asked what he remembers of his village and he said  it
    had a hospital. In his  statement  he  gave  his  address  as  Khugiani
    district in Jalalabad which is in the Nanaghar  Province.  The  village
    therefore was not mentioned. In his  interview  he  gave  the  name  of
    village as Quqhyana and later he said his village was  called  Khogyani
    and then at question hundred and 14 he said that his village was called
    Sherzadu and in his statement at paragraph 7 he said that he said  that
    Sherzado is his village that he had not  understood  the  question.  He
    said Sherzad is the name of the district  and  his  village  is  called
    Kodikhail.

 8. There were also other gaps in the appellant knowledge  and  there  were
    also inconsistencies. He indicated  in  his  screening  interview  that
    there was a hospital in his village, but in his interview  he  said  he
    could not remember much about his village only that there were  fields,
    trees and a square. He could not remember any buildings  or  landmarks.
    He said that the hospital was not close but it was very  far  away.  He
    was asked what was the name of the shop in the village and the name  of
    the man running the shop. He claimed that as he did not go out much, he
    does not know. He was asked about the mosque and said that although  it
    had a name, he could not remember what it was. Similarly, he could  not
    remember the name of his  school,  and  when  asked  whether  he  could
    remember any teachers, he remembered only one teacher.

 9. The Judge,  consider  that  bearing  in  mind  that  according  to  the
    appellant he had spent his whole life in the village,  he  should  have
    had no difficulty in remembering the name of the village, whether there
    was a hospital in the village, and what the  village  looked  like.  In
    addition, he was asked where the police station was and he said he  did
    not  know.  Making  every  allowance  for  cultural   differences   and
    misspellings, it is clear that the appellant has changed  his  evidence
    about the name of his village on a number of occasions,  and  does  not
    seem to know in which district the village is.

10. Bearing in mind the appellant, would have only been nine years  old  at
    the time of the alleged earthquake, and it is  difficult  to  know  how
    much effect this had on this particular village, I do not  feel  I  can
    place much weight on this particular part of the evidence.

11. The appellant relies on some expert evidence about his nationality. Two
    Afghan experts were instructed  and  the  conclusion  which  they  both
    reached was that the appellant was from Afghanistan and that  he  spoke
    both Dari and Pushto and that Pashtu is his mother tongue and Dari  his
    language of habitual use. However, the report was not signed by  either
    of the experts, but was  compiled  by  an  organisation  called  Ariana
    Expert Research and Consultancy. In addition, there were  a  number  of
    inconsistencies in the report, for example the  author  of  the  report
    stated that the appellant was fluent in  both  Dari  and  Pushto,  when
    asked where he had learnt Dari he replied "I learnt it here in  the  UK
    and on my way to the UK." He was asked where exactly did he learn  Dari
    and he replied that he had heard it from some people in his village. He
    gave the name of his village as Kutikhel. It was  later  recorded  that
    the appellant was fluent in reading the Koran in Dari.  The  conclusion
    of the experts was that he could not have learnt the level  of  fluency
    in Afghan Pushto or Afghan Dari in Pakistan,  Iran  or  in  the  United
    Kingdom. It was obvious  that  both  Dari  and  Pushtu  were  both  the
    languages of habitual use for the appellant, and they  considered  that
    his use of language was consistent with an Afghan.

12. I cannot give these opinions much weight because they are not signed by
    the experts, this is an important point because if the report  has  not
    been compiled by the experts, it has not signed and it is  stated  that
    he agrees with the content, I cannot be sure  that  the  report  is  in
    accordance with his views. In addition, the experts do not explain  the
    inconsistencies in the interview about  the  appellant's  knowledge  of
    Dari. They seem to have dismissed his original answers that  he  learnt
    Dari in the UK and on the way to the UK, and prefer to consider that he
    learned how to speak Dari in Afghanistan, and that this shows  that  he
    is an Afghani.

13. Although his age is taken into account at the time  of  the  interview,
    his lack of knowledge about his village when he claims he has lived all
    his life indicates that he has not been truthful  about  where  he  has
    come from. There is a noteworthy contrast between his answers  when  he
    is interviewed, and what he said in his statement. But the timing  when
    he made his statement, he has obviously been told  or  has  worked  out
    properly his address  because  he  says  that  his  village  is  called
    Kodikhail, in the Sherzad district, province of Jalalabad. This address
    does not make sense having regard to the background material, but bears
    little relation to the answers which he gave to the  questions.  Taking
    into consideration the other inconsistencies, I am not  satisfied  that
    the appellant comes from Afghanistan.

14. I am also not satisfied that the appellant's account of  his  detention
    by the Taliban and subsequent escape is correct and true. He  does  not
    appear to know where he was taken, but it  was  clearly  some  distance
    because he was taken in the car and then walked for about an  hour.  He
    claims that he simply walked out of the  camp  in  the  middle  of  the
    night, and that he was not really being guarded properly.  He  did  not
    know the way back but still managed to leave the camp  walking  in  the
    right direction in the dark and  asked  directions  best  to  where  he
    lives. It does not seem credible that the appellant would have  managed
    to escape in the correct direction, so that he was able to find his way
    back to his village. It also seems unlikely that having escaped back to
    his home, the Taliban would not seek to recapture him. According to him
    he remained at home for two days, before being transferred  to  another
    address.

15. It is also no explanation as to how his mother was able to pay for  his
    trip to the United Kingdom. I do not believe his account  that  he  has
    had no contact with his mother. He claims that he has lost his mother's
    phone number, which would seem an act of extraordinary carelessness.  I
    consider that it is highly improbable that having paid a large  sum  of
    money to get the appellant to the United Kingdom, the family would have
    no means of contacting him once he arrived here. I  consider  that  the
    appellant and his family are aware that it is more difficult to  return
    somebody to his home country if there is nobody there to  receive  him,
    and so they have claimed they have lost contact. As was stated  in  the
    country guidance case of HK and others (miners indiscriminate violence-
    forced recruitment by Taliban-contact with family members)  Afghanistan
    CG 2010 UKUT 378 where a child has close relatives in Afghanistan  have
    assisted him in leaving the country, any  assertion  that  such  family
    members are not contactable and unable to meet the child in  Kabul  and
    should be supported by credible evidence  of  efforts  to  contact  the
    family members and their inability to meet and care for  the  appellant
    in the event of return.

16. The unreliability of the appellant's evidence is  such  that  I  cannot
    accept any aspect of this claim including the claim that his father and
    brother have been  killed.  It  is  not  therefore  accepted  that  the
    appellant has no family remaining, and I consider he can return to live
    with them. Even if they live in Afghanistan, which I do not accept  has
    been satisfactorily proved the country guidance case in AA  (unattended
    children) Afghanistan CG 2012 UKUT 00016 indicates that  a  distinction
    has to be drawn between children who were living with their family  and
    those who were not. Whilst it is recognised that there are  some  risks
    to the children  who  will  have  the  protection  of  the  family  are
    nevertheless subject, in particular the risks of being trafficked, they
    are not at such a level as to lead to the conclusion that all  children
    would  qualify  for  international  protection.  In  arriving  at  this
    conclusion account has been taken of the necessity to  have  regard  to
    the best interests of children.

17. "For these reasons, I do not accept that the appellant  has  proved  to
    the standard which I have set out above that he  will  be  at  risk  on
    return. His asylum claim, his claim for vegetarian protection, and  his
    human rights claim under article 2 and 3 must therefore fail".

18. In respect of article 8, the appellant cannot succeed  in  relation  to
    family life because he does not have a parent or child  in  the  United
    Kingdom he does not succeed under paragraph 276 ADE because he has  not
    lived in the United Kingdom for 20 years and although he is  under  the
    age of 18 years he has not lived continuously in the United Kingdom for
    at least seven years. Furthermore, I do not consider  that  it  can  be
    sensibly argued having regard to my finding that there are  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into the country to  which  he
    would have to go if required to leave the United  Kingdom.  I  consider
    that he has a family in his home country who can look after him.

19. Due regard has to be given to the need for immigration  control  and  a
    balancing exercise between on the one hand  the  need  for  immigration
    control any other and the private life of  the  appellant.  I  have  no
    doubt that the appellant said about his  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom is that he goes to school here and he  lives  with  his  foster
    parents. I therefore accept he has established  some  private  life  in
    this country. As against this asset out  the  sections  117A-d  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  which  includes  the  fact
    that the public  interest  consideration  include  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control. There are no compelling  or  exceptional
    circumstances in this case in relation to the appellant's private life.
    He is with his foster parents but this is a temporary  arrangement.  He
    is in school but that is at the expense of the taxpayer. It is clear to
    me that the respondent has proved on the balance of probabilities  that
    the decision is proportionate, and his appeal under  Article  8  it  is
    also dismissed.

20. The Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection grounds of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights for the same reasons.




    Grounds of appeal

21. The grounds of appeal state the following which I summarise. The  first
    ground is that the judge made a material error of  fact  when  he  said
    that the expert report is not signed when there is clearly  the  expert
    signature. At its highest the export demonstrates that the appellant is
    a fluent Dari speaker and, to the lower standard of  proof,  an  Afghan
    National. Judge Ross mistaken belief that the report was not signed was
    a significant reason for attaching little weight to it. If this  ground
    of appeal is correct, the  remainder  of  the  findings  cannot  safely
    stand. The appellant's nationality goes to the core of his claimed fear
    on  return,  and  Judge  Ross's  erroneous  approached  the  issue   of
    nationality must necessarily infect the rest of the decision  regarding
    issues such as risk at the hands of the Taliban and the availability of
    family support.

22. The second ground  is  failure  to  give  reasons  for  dismissing  the
    appellant's  claim  for  humanitarian  protection.  It  is  clear  from
    paragraph  22  the  Judge  considers  the  appellant's  entitlement  to
    humanitarian protection to stand and fall with his  claim  for  asylum.
    Nowhere does he appreciate that the claim for  humanitarian  protection
    and article Article 15 (c) of the qualification directive  is  distinct
    from a claim for asylum under the  refugee  Convention,  and  therefore
    nowhere does he provide reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim and
    entitlement to the former.

23. The third ground is the  Judge's  failure  to  consider  s  55  of  the
    Boarders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 or the appellant's  best
    interest. The Judge did not consider at all whether  the  decision  and
    the challenge breached the respondent's duty is under s55  despite  the
    appellant being 16 years old.

24.  Notwithstanding  the  refusal  of  his  claim  pursuant  to   national
    protection, the respondent granted appellant limited  leave  to  remain
    until 8  April  2017  according  to  her  published  policy  concerning
    unaccompanied minors. Under the pre-Immigration Act 2014, the  tribunal
    would not have had jurisdiction  to  consider  an  individual's  rights
    under Article 8 in the so-called "upgrade"  appeal  under  s83  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The relevance of the best
    interests of a child and s55 therefore is confined  to  the  extent  to
    which it illuminated a claim for international  protection.  ST  (child
    asylum seekers) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 292 (IAC) applies.

25. In the post-Immigration Act 2014 world there is no such  statutory  bar
    to the appellant relying upon Article 8 in the way that used  to  exist
    under s83 of the 2002 Act. Indeed, the Judge went on  to  substantively
    consider the appellant's claim under Article 8 at paragraphs  23-27  of
    his decision. However, he failed to ask himself  whether  removal  from
    the United Kingdom would be  in  the  appellant's  best  interest,  and
    focused instead upon factors such as the  temporary  nature  of  foster
    care and the cost to the taxpayer over schooling. This failure  amounts
    of material error of law.

    Findings as to whether there is an error of law

26. The first ground of appeal states that the judge made a material  error
    of fact when he stated that the report was not signed when in  fact  it
    was. It is argued that  this  material  error  of  fact  has  not  only
    infected his entire decision and by placing little weight on the report
    is a material error of law such as the decision should be set aside.

27. I did not accept this argument. The Judge at paragraph 16  gives  other
    reasons for placing  very  little  weight  on  the  expert  report.  He
    observed that the report stated that the appellant was fluent  in  both
    Dari and Pushto. However, the appellant's answer to the question as  to
    where he learnt these languages, he said "I learnt it here  in  the  UK
    and on my way to the UK". The conclusion of the experts that  he  would
    not have learned the level of fluency in Afghan Pushtu or  Afghan  Dari
    in Pakistan, Iran or in the UK. It  was  obvious  that  both  Dari  and
    Pushtu were the languages of habitual use for  the  appellant  and  the
    Judge stated at paragraph 17  that  the  experts  do  not  explain  the
    appellant's inconsistencies in  his  interview  about  the  appellant's
    knowledge of Dari. They seem to have dismissed the appellant's original
    answer that he learned Dari in the UK and on the way  to  the  UK,  and
    therefore preferred to consider that he learnt how  to  speak  Dari  in
    Afghanistan, and that  this  somehow  shows  that  he  is  an  Afghani.
    Therefore, the Judge gave clear and cogent reasons for why he  did  not
    place weight on the expert report.  Even  if  he  was  mistaken  as  to
    whether the expert report was signed, this  is  not  a  material  error
    because the judge went on to rely on the inconsistencies in the  report
    itself for not believing the appellant.

28. The Judge in a careful and detailed  determination  made  many  adverse
    credibility findings against the appellant and took  into  account  all
    the  evidence  in  the  appeal.  The  Judge   found   the   appellant's
    inconsistencies about the village that he  comes  from  in  Afghanistan
    goes to his credibility into the credibility  of  this  claim  that  he
    comes from Afghanistan. The judge was entitled  to  find  that  even  a
    young child should not have given so many inconsistent answers  of  the
    name of  the  village,  if  he  was  genuinely  from  Afghanistan.  The
    appellant also had very inconsistent  answers  about  the  mosque,  the
    school and read the police station was. He could not remember the  name
    of any teachers bar one. The Judge's findings on  the  evidence  before
    him, is not perverse and on the contrary is entirely reasonable. If the
    appellant had lived in Afghanistan, he would have been able to give the
    name of his village and describe it, even if the appellant was a child.



29. The Judge also considered the fact that the appellant managed to escape
    from a Taliban camp and walk home in the middle of the night and in the
    dark, does not accord with the appellant's  lack  of  knowledge  as  to
    where he lived. The Judge therefore  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant's evidence does not accord with his claim  that  he  is  from
    Afghanistan.

30. The Judge also found the appellant's account of his detention  for  the
    Taliban and subsequent escape is not true as it is not credible. It was
    open to the judge to find that given that the appellant's evidence  who
    claims that the camp where he was taken was some distance  away  as  he
    was first taken in a car and then walked for about an hour.  The  Judge
    found it was simply not credible that the appellant was  able  to  walk
    out of the camp in the middle of the night and find his way home in the
    dark. The Judge also relied on the fact that the appellant stayed  home
    for two days before he was transferred  to  another  address  and  this
    demonstrated to him that if the Taliban wanted to find him  they  would
    have gone to his house and at home that the appellant  would  not  have
    remained even for an hour in his home, if he thought the Taliban  would
    find him there.

31. Given the incredible evidence given by  the  appellant  the  Judge  was
    entitled not to accept that the appellant's  father  and  brother  have
    been killed. He referred  to  the  case  of  AA  which  indicates  that
    distinction has to be drawn between children who were living with their
    families and those who were not. The Judge found that  the  appellant's
    mother sent him to the United Kingdom and this shows that he was living
    with her before he was given to an agent to be brought  to  the  United
    Kingdom. This demonstrated to the judge that the appellant  has  family
    in the country where he lives.

32. The Judge was aware that according  to  the  Home  Office  policy,  the
    appellant would not be removed from this country until he is an  adult.
    The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant has  family  wherever
    he came from and that he will return to his family. The Judge  did  not
    accept the appellant's evidence that  he  has  lost  contact  with  his
    mother and found it absurd that a mother would  send  her  son  to  the
    United Kingdom would not have any means of communicating with him  when
    he reaches the United Kingdom. These are perfectly proper findings  and
    there is no perversity in them whatsoever. The appeal is no more than a
    quarrel with the Judges findings of fact and the  conclusions  that  he
    drew from them.

33. I find that there is no material error of law made by the Judge in  the
    determination and therefore it stands.

    Decision

    Appeal Dismissed

    I make no anonymity order

    I make no fee order


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the upper Tribunal    Dated 26th day of April 2016
Mrs S Chana

