
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08606/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th May 2014                                |On 6th June 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                  mr H D B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rory O'Ryan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Neville Smart (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Frankish promulgated on 9th January 2014 following the hearing at
    Bennett House on 18th December 2013.  In the determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of  the  Appellant  on  human  rights  grounds,  but
    dismissed  it  on  asylum  grounds  and  on  grounds  of   humanitarian
    protection under the Immigration Rules.  Both  the  Appellant  and  the
    Respondent Secretary of State  thereafter  applied  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The Respondent Secretary of State did so
    on the basis that the appeal had been allowed on human rights  grounds.
    The Appellant himself did so on the basis that the judge had  erred  in
    law in refusing the appeal on asylum grounds.  The Respondent's  appeal
    was allowed (although the  Respondent  then  subsequently  granted  the
    Appellant  discretionary  leave  to  remain  until   2016),   but   the
    Appellant's  appeal  remains  undetermined  in  this  application   for
    permission  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    It   is   in   these
    circumstances that the matter arises before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Vietnam,  who  was  born  on  9th
    September 1994.  He appeals against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State refusing him asylum dated 21st August 2013.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he would face mistreatment in Vietnam  if
    returned there on account of his race and membership  of  a  particular
    social group, namely, that he was trafficked from Vietnam to the United
    Kingdom by gang members in his local area.  The  Appellant's  claim  is
    that shortly after his father died, when he  was  aged  8,  his  mother
    remarried, and placed  the  Appellant  in  the  care  of  his  paternal
    grandparents who were in their 80s.  The Appellant and his family  were
    all poor paddy farmers.  The grandparents gave  him  accommodation  but
    the Appellant had to beg or do scraps of work for a living.  After  two
    months of this, six gangsters coerced him into a  criminal  life.   The
    grandparents reported this to the police but  the  police  did  nothing
    about this.  The gangsters found out and threatened  the  grandparents.
    At the age of 11, the Appellant suffered the first of some half a dozen
    arrests for theft.  The police did not believe the Appellant's  defence
    of coercion and tortured him to secure a retraction.  They also  sought
    a bribe from the grandparents.  Eventually the Appellant was trafficked
    from Vietnam to the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed  how  the  Appellant  had  been  criticised  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State for giving an  unsubstantial  account  in
    respect of the trafficking by the gang to the UK.  The judge  observed,
    however, that "he does  give  detailed  particulars  of  the  names  of
    several of the gang members."

 5. Secondly, the judge observed how the medical report  was  characterised
    by  two  features.   First,  the  omission  of  any   exaggeration   by
    attributing all his marks of injury to the account on which he  relies;
    and second, the finding that the marks he attributes to his experiences
    are consistent (for example, the stab  marks  and  the  electric  baton
    marks).

 6. Third, the Appellant was challenged in cross-examination as to why  his
    experiences have not made their way into the account he put forward  in
    his age assessments, but the Appellant had  explained  that  the  first
    assessment was very soon after he arrived, and that he  has  learnt  to
    fear authority, and was never believed by the police at home about  the
    subject to criminal coercion from about the age of 10.

 7. The judge observed, fourthly, that "a lot of red  herrings  have  crept
    into this case" one of which was the question about his age  assessment
    (paragraph 23).

 8. Fifth, the judge had regard to  Professor  Mark  Sidel's  report  which
    stated that the Appellant was at risk  through  collusion  between  the
    corrupt police and the criminal gangs.  Furthermore, the expert  report
    also observes that "it is very difficult to subsist in the  absence  of
    any network of social or family connections" (paragraph 24).

 9. Finally, the judge held  that  the  Appellant  "will  simply  face  the
    difficult future of being a scantily - educated young  man  needing  to
    achieve economic self-sufficiency" which "might be a hard life  but  it
    does not amount to asylum status" (paragraph 25).

10. The judge however, allowed the appeal on human rights grounds observing
    that,  since  his  arrival  in  the  UK,  the  Appellant  "has  clearly
    established a very sound private life and there will be a  very  severe
    wrench" if the  Appellant  was  now  removed,  such  that  it  will  be
    disproportionate, given  that  he  came  to  the  UK  seven  years  ago
    (paragraph 26).

Grounds of Application

11.  On 21st January 2014,  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State  made  an
    application for permission to appeal, on the basis that the  judge  had
    allowed the appeal because he had expressed sympathy and admiration for
    the fact that the Appellant had done very well his arrival in  the  UK,
    but sympathy and admiration alone were not enough,  to  secure  success
    under Article 8 ECHR grounds.  On  27th  February  2014  permission  to
    appeal was granted to the Secretary of  State's  application.   In  the
    meantime, however, on 24th January 2014, the Appellant himself had made
    an application for permission to appeal as well on the basis  that  the
    judge had erred in failing to determine whether the  Appellant  was  at
    real risk of serious harm  in  Vietnam  by  being  subject  to  further
    enforced labour by a  gang  other  than  the  original  gang  that  had
    targeted him in Vietnam prior to his departure.   This  application  by
    the Appellant was acknowledged  in  a  notice  of  receipt  dated  27th
    January 2014.  However, it was never determined.  To make matters  even
    more complex, by a decision dated 21st January 2014, the Appellant  was
    granted by the Respondent Secretary of State  "discretionary  leave  to
    remain up until 8th July 2016."

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 16th May 2014, Mr Neville Smart,  appearing
    on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that the only
    appeal before this Tribunal was the appeal of the Respondent  Secretary
    of State as permission had  only  been  granted  with  respect  to  the
    Respondent's application.  However, since the Respondent  had  on  21st
    January 2014 granted discretionary leave to  remain  to  the  Appellant
    until 2016, he would make an application under Rule 17 for  the  appeal
    of the Respondent Secretary of State to be withdrawn.  I indicated that
    I will have no reason to refuse this application.  Mr Rory O'Ryan,  who
    appeared for the Appellant, did not object to this course of action.

13. However, what Mr Rory O'Ryan did submit, was that this Tribunal  should
    determine the Appellant's  application  for  permission  to  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.  This is because the Appellant had provided a notice to
    the First-tier Tribunal dated 6th February 2014 under  Section  104(4A)
    and Section 104(4B) of the 2002 Act, and under Rule 18  of  the  Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, giving notice that the
    Appellant had been granted leave to  remain,  and  that  the  Appellant
    wished to pursue his appeal nonetheless on  the  grounds  specified  in
    Section 84(1)(g)  of  the  2008  Act,  which  related  to  the  Refugee
    Convention.

14. Applying Section 104 of the 2002 Act, I find  that  an  appeal  brought
    under Section 82(1) is not abandoned in this case, notwithstanding  the
    fact that the Appellant has been granted discretionary leave to remain,
    because his appeal is one that relates to the Refugee  Convention  (see
    Section 104(4B)).  If the application for permission was not determined
    by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  despite  having  been  acknowledged  as
    received by the administrative authority, then the Upper  Tribunal  can
    under Section  4  of  the  2007  Act,  determine  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  I so determine it and I grant permission.

15. I do so on the basis that the judge below, in what was otherwise a very
    careful and comprehensive determination, did not consider  whether  the
    Appellant upon return to Vietnam would be subjected  to  forced  labour
    from the gang other than the  original  gang  which  had  targeted  the
    Appellant and trafficked him to the UK.   This  issue  is  particularly
    important not least in the light of the  report  from  Professor  Sidel
    (referred to a paragraph 24 of the determination)  that  the  Appellant
    remains at risk through collusion between a corrupt  police  force  and
    criminal gangs, and that this risk is enhanced by the  failure  of  the
    Appellant to fall back on a network of social  or  family  connections.
    Given that "anxious scrutiny" must be applied in an asylum  claim,  the
    facts of this case are sufficiently as serious to require a proper  and
    thorough consideration of these issues.  Thus, whilst I allow Mr  Smart
    to withdraw the appeal of the Respondent Secretary of State before  me,
    given that the Appellant has been given  leave  to  remain  here  until
    2016, I do at the same time also allow the application of the Appellant
    to have his asylum claim reheard  again  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Under Practice Statement 7.2, therefore, I direct that this  matter  is
    reconsidered again by the First-tier Tribunal specifically in  relation
    to the risk that attaches to the Appellant from other gangs, he  having
    been the victim of human  trafficking  already,  if  he  goes  back  to
    Vietnam.  All findings in favour of the Appellant are to be  preserved.
    I direct that the appeal be heard by a judge other than Judge Frankish.



Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  The  appeal  is
    allowed on behalf of the Appellant  insofar  as  his  asylum  claim  is
    concerned and this is to be heard by a judge other than Judge Frankish,
    with  all  favourable  findings  preserved,  but  the  appeal  of   the
    Respondent Secretary of State is hereby dismissed.

17. Anonymity order is made.

Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 5th June 2014
