
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA086622015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 May 2016                            |On 8 June 2016                    |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                GP (ALBANIA)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:                    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr A Burrett, Counsel, instructed by
                           Wimbledon Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  claimant's  appeal  against  a
    decision by the Secretary of State to refuse  to  recognise  him  as  a
    refugee.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction
    in favour of the claimant, but I consider that it is  appropriate  that
    the claimant is accorded anonymity for these proceedings in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On  22  April  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidge  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         1.   The Respondent appeals a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
             Majid promulgated on 19th March 2016 in which  he  allows  the
             appeal of an Albanian national born on 2nd October 1997.

         2.   I find  it  is  arguable  that  a  number  of  factual  errors
             including that the Appellant was under the age of eighteen  at
             the date of hearing when he was not, that the  Upper  Tribunal
             at paragraph 44 of EH (blood feuds) [2012] UKUT 348 found that
             Mr Gjin Marku's evidence was impressive when it was held  that
             it was unimpressive, having  affected  the  reasoning  of  the
             judge.  Further whilst the judge was entitled to  believe  the
             Appellant as to the existence of the claimed  blood  feud  and
             his having been tracked to another  town,  he  has  failed  to
             explain to the Respondent why he found  him  credible  in  the
             context of the reasons for refusal or to  provide  a  detailed
             assessment as required by EH.

Relevant Background

 3. The claimant says he arrived in the UK concealed in the back of a lorry
    on 8 October 2014.   He  is  recorded  as  having  claimed  asylum  the
    following day.  Up until he left Albania, he had lived in  Tirana  with
    his maternal grandparents, his mother and his maternal uncle.   He  had
    attended school up until 7 June 2014.

 4. In November 2013 "H" had accused his uncle of harassing  his  wife.   H
    had taken a gun to a meeting with his uncle.  During that meeting,  his
    uncle had defended himself, and as a result had killed H.   His  mother
    had told him that a blood feud had been declared at that  time  by  H's
    family.  There was no police investigation into the killing of  H,  and
    the appellant did not know why that was the case.

 5. On 2 January 2014 he was at home with the rest of his family when  they
    heard a gunshot.  His maternal  uncle  had  been  shot  whilst  he  was
    standing on the balcony in another room of the house.  His  uncle  died
    on the way to the hospital.  Nobody  informed  the  police  about  this
    killing, and again the claimant did not know why  this  was  the  case.
    Nobody saw the person who shot his uncle, and he did not know  who  had
    carried out this crime.

 6. On 5 June 2014 his maternal grandfather had spoken to  two  members  of
    H's family in an attempt at reconciliation.  An altercation then  broke
    out which led to his maternal grandfather and the  two  of  H's  family
    members being killed.  The claimant did not know  how  his  grandfather
    was killed.  The following day a village elder came to  the  house  and
    told the claimant that H's family  intended  to  seek  revenge  on  his
    family, as three members of their family had now been  killed,  whereas
    only two members of his family had been killed.   At  this  point,  the
    claimant's mother went to the police for assistance.   But  the  police
    were unwilling to interfere in a blood feud.

 7. On 7 June 2014 he left the  family  house.   His  mother  and  maternal
    grandmother decided he should relocate  away  from  the  area  as  they
    feared the potential repercussions from H's family.  He went  to  Diber
    to live with his maternal uncle's friend, who  was  called  Argon.   He
    lived with Argon until he left Albania on either 13  or  14  September.
    During this period, he did not suffer any further problems and he lived
    a normal life, including leaving the house.  The reason for leaving the
    country was that one day a girl named Rabi from the village told  Argon
    that people were looking for his house, and were questioning how to get
    to his house.  Argon became suspicious and scared that members  of  H's
    family were looking for his house, and so the claimant decided to leave
    Albania.

 8. On 20 May 2015 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing  to
    recognise the claimant as a refugee.  It  was  not  accepted  that  his
    family was involved in a blood feud with H's family due to a number  of
    discrepancies in his account.

 9. The claimant said that he did not have any brothers or sisters,  but  a
    response from the British Embassy in Tirana noted that he had a sibling
    in Albania, who lived with his parents.  The  fact  that  he  concealed
    such basic family information undermined his general credibility.

10. After the alleged murder of his uncle and his mother informing  him  of
    the blood feud, he continued life  as  normal  and  he  encountered  no
    problems from H's family or anyone else.  So his claim that H's  family
    were  interested  in  killing  him  due  to  the  blood  feud  appeared
    inconsistent with his claim that he was able to safely go  out  in  the
    local community.  Despite claiming to have relocated to Diber,  he  did
    not go into self-confinement and continued to live as  normal.   Again,
    his claim that H's family wished to kill him appeared inconsistent with
    his behaviour in Diber.  He had  admitted  in  interview  that  he  was
    speculating as to whether H's family  were  trying  to  locate  him  in
    Diber, as he did not know the identity of those questioning Rabi.

11. On the issue of risk on return, the Secretary of State  considered  the
    guidance given in EH.  The claimant stated he did not know any  of  the
    names of H's family members, nor did he know what  line  of  work  they
    were involved with.  He had therefore failed to show  that  H's  family
    had the ability  or  influence  to  locate  him  in  Albania.   It  was
    therefore considered internal relocation was a viable option to him  on
    return to Albania.

12. The Secretary of State went on to cite background evidence  in  support
    of the proposition that there as an effective police service in Albania
    which was willing to assist its citizens and thus he would be  free  to
    seek police protection and  assistance  of  the  courts  on  return  to
    Albania.  He had failed to demonstrate the authorities of Albania would
    be unable or unwilling to offer him protection from the  alleged  blood
    feud, if he sought protection.

13. Overall, his claim to be a genuine refugee  in  need  of  international
    protection was considered to be unfounded.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

14. Both parties were legally  represented  before  Judge  Majid.   In  his
    subsequent decision, the judge said at paragraph [15] that for the Home
    Office to say that the blood feud was not a major problem was  contrary
    to his review of the objective evidence on this issue.  He was left  in
    no doubt that even though the authorities were making every  effort  to
    obviate blood feuds in Albania, the blood feud was a serious problem in
    Albania and those who found themselves subjected  to  this  traditional
    malady could encounter lethal consequences, including the loss of life.
    He continued:

         "I am willing to accept the story of this young appellant  that  he
         was targeted due to a blood feud in Tirana (the capital of Albania)
         but could not get rid of his persecutors despite  moving  from  the
         city to the town of Diber which I was told is three to  four  hours
         drive from Tirana."

The Application for Permission to Appeal

15. A member of the Specialist Appeals  Team  settled  an  application  for
    permission to appeal which I set out below verbatim:

         Making a mistake as to a material fact

           .  It  is  respectfully  submitted  that  FTJ  Majid  had   been
             misdirected in his conclusion at 6(a) that the appellant  was,
             'even at the date of the hearing under the age of 18.'  It  is
             an  accepted  fact  that  the  appellants  Date  of  Birth  is
             02/10/1997 and as such at the date of hearing (22/03/2016)  he
             was almost 18 years and six months old.  It is  asserted  that
             this  misdirection  has  influenced  the  Immigration   Judges
             conclusions to such an extent  that  they  are  ultimately  in
             error.

           . This error is further compounded at paragraphs 10-12  in  that
             FTJ Majid wrongly accepts the  submission  of  the  appellants
             Representative that the 'Home Office' had not  recognised  the
             appellants age in their reasons for  refusal  letter.   It  is
             clear that this fact was very much in the mind of  the  author
             as can be seen at paragraphs 11-16 (attached).  The appellants
             age was accepted from the outset of  his  application  and  as
             such all appropriate steps were taken in order to ensure  both
             his safety, in that he  was  placed  in  the  care  of  Social
             Services and afford him the  opportunity  to  have  his  claim
             fairly and thoroughly examined.

           . There is additional material error in that FTJ Majid has  been
             misdirected in his application of EH (Blood Feuds) [2012] UKUT
             348.  At paragraph 14  he  states  "In  paragraph  44  of  its
             judgement the UT said about Mr. Gjin Marku's evidence that  it
             was 'impressive' and that his position was that the blood feud
             problem was widespread and serious."  The UT in fact the  hold
             the opposite of that position at paragraph 44 of EH,  in  that
             they find the evidence of Mr Gjin Marku to be  'unimpressive.'



           . It is asserted that these mistakes as to material  facts  have
             infected the reasoning applied by the FTTJ  and  as  such  his
             determination as a whole is in error.

         Failing to  give  reasons  or  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
         material matters

           . It is additionally submitted that the FTJ has failed  to  give
             any reasons for allowing the instant appeal,  concluding  only
             that the appellants age dictates that he be given the  benefit
             of  discretion.   The  determination  does  not   reveal   any
             examination of the evidence nor have reasons been  articulated
             for why the appellant has been found  to  be  credible  or  at
             risk.   It  is  further  asserted  that  there  has  been   no
             examination of whether in fact a blood feud is in existence or
             if so, given  the  alleged  connection  is  maternal  and  not
             paternal whether the appellant would in fact be at risk  as  a
             result, particularly in light of the fact  the  appellant  has
             never been forced into  self  confinement,  yet  has  remained
             unmolested by any alleged aggressors.  Reliance in this regard
             is placed on the case of MK (duty to  give  reasons)  Pakistan
             [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC).

         Making a material misdirection of law

           . It is finally submitted that there has been no  indication  by
             FTJ Majid as to why the appellant has been successful  in  his
             appeal.  It is  incumbent  upon  him  to  resolve  key  issues
             surrounding  both  credibility  and  potential  risk,  it   is
             asserted that he has failed to do this and as such reliance is
             place on the case of Budhathoki (reasons for decision)  [2014]
             UKUT 00341 (IAC) which finds:

             "It is necessary  for  judges  to  identify  and  resolve  key
             conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and brief terms
             their reasons, so that the parties  can  understand  why  they
             have won or lost.

Discussion

16. The judge did not materially err in saying that the claimant was  under
    the age of 18 at the date of the hearing, as the claimant was under the
    age of 18 when he presented his asylum claim, and he  was  still  under
    the age of 18 at the date of decision.   So  the  need  for  a  liberal
    application of the benefit of the doubt still applied.

17. The judge's error in respect of the Upper Tribunal's assessment  of  Mr
    Gjin Marku's evidence was more significant.  The judge treated Mr  Gjin
    Marku as being a reliable source for the proposition that  blood  feuds
    continued to be widespread and serious in Albania,  when  in  fact  the
    Upper Tribunal had found Mr Marku to have given unimpressive  evidence.
    Thus, Mr Marku was not a reliable source for the proposition relied  on
    by the Judge.

18. However, the main reason for finding that an error of law is  made  out
    is the judge's failure to engage with the detailed reasons given in the
    refusal letter for disbelieving the core claim; and the judge's failure
    to address the questions of sufficiency of protection and the viability
    of internal relocation in the context of a discussion  about  the  risk
    which   the   claimant   would   face    on    return    to    Albania.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the decision is set aside in its entirety.

Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a  de
novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge Majid.

None of the findings  of  fact  made  by  the  previous  Tribunal  shall  be
preserved.

The agreed time estimate for the de novo hearing is two hours.

An Albanian interpreter will be required.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 8th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
