
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08639/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27th May 2016                           |On 04th July 2016                |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              Mr NAZAMUL ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Barrett, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant claims to be a citizen of Burma (Myanmar) and is believed
    by the Secretary of State to be a Bangladesh  national.   His  date  of
    birth is 1st January 1985.  The Appellant arrived in the UK in February
    2008 on a false passport and claimed asylum on 18th December 2014.  The
    basis of the Appellant's asylum application was that he claimed to have
    a well-founded fear of persecution in Burma (Myanmar) on the  basis  of
    his ethnicity as a Rohingya.  The Appellant's  application  for  asylum
    was refused by asylum decision dated 20th May 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Dean sitting at Taylor House on 2nd  March  2016.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 10th  March  2016  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on asylum grounds.  On 16th March  2016  Grounds  of
    Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    maintained two grounds.  Firstly, the Secretary of State notes that the
    Appellant claims he lived in Burma for the first  seven  years  of  his
    life with his parents and family and allegedly spoke Rohingya.  He also
    claims he spent the next seven years in  a  camp  with  other  Rohingya
    refugees in Bangladesh.  It is noted that the Appellant claims  at  the
    age of 14 he finally left the camp and survived in Bangladesh  for  the
    next nine years at a camp before coming to the UK.   The  Secretary  of
    State contends that the judge had  failed  to  take  into  account  and
    resolve the fact that the Appellant allegedly spent therefore the first
    fourteen years of his life with his immediate family members and  other
    members of the Rohingya, all of whom would have spoken  Rohingya,  i.e.
    the claim he only speaks a little bit and has  forgotten  the  language
    lacks all credibility and is a very important issue that the judge  had
    failed to consider and deal with in his determination.

 3. Secondly,  the  Secretary  of  State  notes  at  paragraph  18  of  the
    determination the judge deals with the Appellant's alleged  nationality
    and deals with some of the answers the Appellant  gave  in  his  asylum
    interview and finds that it does not undermine the core of his claim to
    be Rohingya because of  the  age  he  left  Burma  and  his  subsequent
    immersion in life in Bangladesh.  The Secretary of State  submits  that
    the judge failed to take into account and resolve  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant allegedly spent seven years (between the ages of 7 years  and
    14 years) at a  refugee  camp  with  his  immediate  family  and  other
    Rohingyas, i.e. the judge had failed to take this very  important  fact
    into account and  his  determination  gives  the  impression  that  the
    Appellant immersed himself in  Bangladeshi  life  from  the  moment  he
    arrived there at the age of 7 which is certainly not the case.

 4. On 18th April 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted  permission
    to appeal.  The grounds are lengthy and  Judge  Holmes  notes  that  at
    first sight the grounds appear to be no more than a  disagreement  with
    the judge's assessment of the  weight  to  give  to  the  evidence  but
    arguably the judge's approach to the weight to give to the  Appellant's
    evidence means that he reversed  the  burden  of  proof  in  two  ways.
    Firstly, he considered the approach that the possession of the  "family
    book" in which the Appellant claims his name was  listed  arguably  did
    not follow the Tanveer Ahmed  guidance  as  explained  in  CJ  (on  the
    application of  R)  v  Cardiff  County  Council  [2011]  EWHC  23.   He
    considered that arguably the  objective  evidence  clearly  established
    that very little weight could be given to  such  a  document  and  that
    should have been the judge's starting point,  and  arguably  he  should
    then have considered the weight that could be given to the  Appellant's
    claim to have come into its possession by  stealing  it  from  his  own
    father only then  to  carry  it  for  nine  years  while  destitute  in
    Bangladesh before contriving to travel to the UK  and  again  bring  it
    with him.  Secondly, he considered  that  the  approach  taken  to  the
    Appellant's admission that he could speak little  or  no  Rohingya  was
    arguably similarly flawed.  Thus the  real  issue  for  the  judge  was
    whether a child of 14, fluent in  the  language  of  his  birth,  would
    genuinely have forgotten so much of that language in the following nine
    years that he could demonstrate so little knowledge when interviewed in
    the UK.  Judge Holmes considered that arguably these points were rather
    more than a simple disagreement with the judge's assessment  of  weight
    although the grounds could have been better drafted.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the purpose  of  continuity  throughout
    the appeal process, albeit that this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of
    State, the Secretary of State is referred to herein as  the  Respondent
    and Mr Islam as the Appellant.  No Rule 24  response  appears  to  have
    been filed or served by Mr Islam's  legal  representatives.   Mr  Islam
    appears by his instructed Counsel Mr Barrett.  The Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Wilding.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. There is unanimity in the view of both legal representatives  that  the
    grant of permission is not written in the clearest of terms  and  to  a
    certain extent is a  rambling  monologue  by  the  judge.   Mr  Wilding
    however submits that the language issue which effectively is the  first
    point in the Grounds of Appeal, i.e.  that  the  Appellant  would  have
    spoken  Rohingya,  addresses  the  views  expressed  by  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 17 to 20 of his determination.  In particular he  refers  me
    to paragraph 17 pointing out that the finding by the judge that  it  is
    credible that he would now only remember a  "little"  Rohingya  and  is
    more proficient at Bengali, ignores the fact that the Appellant spent a
    further seven years in a refugee camp speaking Rohingya  and  that  the
    judge fails to consider this.  Therefore he submits that  the  starting
    point for credibility is immediately undermined and that that therefore
    taints the findings at paragraphs 18 to 20.

 7. Secondly, he addresses the issue of  how  the  Appellant  obtained  the
    refugee family book and submits that  as  a  result  the  analysis  and
    findings made by the judge at paragraphs 22 to  24  are  infected.   He
    thinks that the judge granting permission  was  correct  in  submitting
    that little weight  should  be  given  to  the  presence  of  the  book
    considering the background material and submits that there is a failure
    to take into account both the  above  factors  in  making  the  judge's
    findings on credibility thus constituting an error of law.

 8. Mr Barrett submits that what is being  advanced  is  little  more  than
    disagreement and that there is no error of law.  He  submits  that  the
    Secretary of State's argument is mere supposition and that there is  no
    merit in the contention  that  the  judge  has  purportedly  failed  to
    grapple with the case.  He indicates this applies to both  issues.   He
    asked me to find that there is no material error of law and to  dismiss
    the appeal of the Secretary of State.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. The proper approach  to  credibility  requires  an  assessment  of  the
    evidence and of the general claim.  In asylum claims, relevant  factors
    are firstly the  internal  consistency  of  the  claim;  secondly,  the
    inherent plausibility of the claim, and thirdly, the consistency of the
    claim with external factors of the  sort  typically  found  in  country
    guidance.  It is theoretically correct that a claimant needs to  do  no
    more than state his claim but that claim still needs to be examined for
    consistency and inherent plausibility.

12. It is against this general background that I consider the  issues  that
    are before me.  The challenges are to  the  assessment  of  credibility
    made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  contentions  of  the
    Secretary of State turn very largely on a submission firstly  that  the
    judge has failed to give due and proper consideration to the fact  that
    the Appellant spent a further seven years in a  refugee  camp  speaking
    Rohingya and making his assessment as  to  his  ability  to  speak  the
    Rohingya language and, secondly, as to the weight that should be  given
    as to how the Appellant obtained the refugee family  book.   The  issue
    before me is whether or not there is a material error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I am not  rehearing  this  matter
    and it is necessary to distance myself as to whether I would have  come
    to the same decision myself.  Judge Dean heard the  evidence.   He  has
    analysed the evidence in considerable detail and has made  findings  of
    fact between paragraphs 17 and 28 that he  was  entitled  to.   He  has
    actually thoroughly looked at the issues.  As to the assessment  as  to
    whether the Appellant should or should have not  spoken  Rohingya,  the
    judge has given this considerable thought and  addressed  it  fully  at
    paragraphs 17 to  20.   The  challenge  amounts  to  little  more  than
    disagreement.

13. Secondly, the judge has looked at the issue of the refugee hand book at
    paragraph 13 and has gone on in subsequent  paragraphs,  in  particular
    paragraphs 22 to 24,  to  analyse  the  position  and  to  say  why  he
    considers the Appellant's  account  is  credible  with  regard  to  the
    refugee book.  Further, so far as the language point is concerned,  the
    Appellant's evidence was that the Appellant sought to learn Bengali and
    that the judge has accepted this.

14. In such circumstances it is not for the  Upper  Tribunal  to  interfere
    with the judge's finding of credibility based on  the  documentary  and
    oral evidence that was before  him  and  his  analysis  unless  he  has
    materially erred in his approach.  He has not done so.   He  has  heard
    the evidence and made findings which  he  was  entitled  to.   In  such
    circumstances the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  discloses  no
    material error of law and the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
    maintained.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of
    law and the appeal is dismissed

16. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date: 4th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris











TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.





Signed                              Date: 4th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
