
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08787/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 April 2015                              |On 30 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                              PATIENCE HARWISI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, claims to be Patience Harwisi and to have been  born  on
    15 May 1996, is a citizen of  Zimbabwe.   The  appellant  has  appealed
    against the decision of the  respondent  dated  25  September  2014  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom, having refused her application  for
    asylum.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Birrell)  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 13 January 2015 dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the hearing at Manchester on 14 April 2015, the  appellant  appeared
    in person.  I was careful to explain the procedures of the Tribunal  to
    the appellant through the Shona interpreter and I told the appellant to
    notify me if there was any part of the proceedings which  she  did  not
    understand.   I  am  satisfied  the  appellant   did   understand   the
    proceedings and that she was given every opportunity to put her case to
    the Tribunal.

 3. The grounds of appeal appear to have been  drafted  by  a  professional
    representative and the appellant confirmed  that  this  was  the  case.
    There are four grounds of appeal.  First, it is asserted that the judge
    failed properly to consider risk on return to Zimbabwe.  Secondly,  the
    grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge relied  on  an  email
    correspondence between a social worker and the Home  Office  which  led
    the judge to find that the appellant had not  given  truthful  evidence
    regarding her identity.  The grounds complain that the  author  of  the
    email did not appear at the hearing to give oral evidence and that  the
    appellant had not seen the email before it was produced at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.  Thirdly, the  grounds  assert  that  the  judge
    failed to consider a  birth  certificate  produced  by  the  appellant.
    Finally,  it  is  asserted  that  the  judge  made  "improper   adverse
    credibility findings".

 4. Judge Birrell noted [30]  that  a  social  worker  working  for  Slough
    Borough Council  (Mr  Machingauta)  had  been  "so  concerned  about  a
    conversation which he stated he overheard between the appellant  and  a
    person in Zimbabwe  that  he  contacted  the  Home  Office  information
    services for advice."  The judge recorded [32] that the appellant had a
    contact number in Zimbabwe which she said was for her  mother  and  she
    had given this to Mr Machingauta who, in turn, contacted the  telephone
    number on two occasions to ask about a birth  certificate  produced  by
    the appellant in the name Patience Harwisi but  "the  person  answering
    claimed that she did not know who he was talking about and she was  not
    Patience Harwisi's mother".  The judge considered  that  this  evidence
    suggested  very  strongly  that  "the  appellant  has  lied  about  her
    identity".  At [32], the judge also recorded that  Mr  Machingauta  had
    arranged a further call to Zimbabwe this time between the appellant and
    the individual to whom he had spoken previously.   Mr  Machingauta  had
    written an email to the Home Office which, whilst not giving a verbatim
    account  of  the  conversation,  deals  with  it  in  some  detail;  Mr
    Machingauta had listened in to this conference call, apparently without
    the knowledge of the appellant.  Mr  Machingauta's  evidence  indicated
    that the appellant had identified herself as Charlotte daughter of  one
    Amos and not Patience Harwisi as stated on her birth  certificate.   It
    appeared that the person to whom the appellant was speaking in Zimbabwe
    was her grandmother and not her mother.  During the  conversation,  the
    appellant had explained to the woman in Zimbabwe that Patience  Harwisi
    was the "name she is using here".  The appellant told the individual in
    Zimbabwe to "say that she was Patience's mother."  She  also  told  the
    woman that, if she was  asked  anything  by  officials  of  the  United
    Kingdom government, that she should "hang up."  It  also  appears  from
    the telephone call that the appellant had not told the truth about  her
    family, certain members of which are living in the United Kingdom.

 5. I am satisfied that  the  email  did  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    appellant notwithstanding her protestations to the contrary.  The email
    is in the respondent's bundle of documents, the contents of  which  are
    considered in the appellant's own witness statement  produced  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.  Secondly, I can identify  no  reason  why
    the judge should not have considered this evidence and attached  weight
    to it.  There is  no  requirement  for  the  author  of  the  email  Mr
    Machingauta, to have attended and given oral evidence, although, if  he
    had done so, the judge may  have  attached  even  more  weight  to  his
    evidence.  There was also legal difficulty in the  judge  accepting  Mr
    Machingauta's  evidence  in  the  form  of  an  email,  rather  than  a
    statement.  The judge was certainly entitled to conclude from the email
    that there was a strong indication that the appellant  had  lied  about
    her identity.  Further, the judge did not reject  the  authenticity  of
    the birth certificate; rather, he found that it was not the appellant's
    birth certificate because the appellant is not called Patience Harwisi.
     Moreover, having found that the  appellant  had  lied  about  her  own
    identity and that of her family members, it was entirely  open  to  the
    judge to reject the credibility of the  appellant  entirely,  including
    her account of having been forced  into  a  marriage  and  having  fled
    Zimbabwe to seek protection as a refugee abroad.   I  can  identify  no
    error in the judge's conclusion that  "[the  appellant]  left  Zimbabwe
    legally and has no profile that would put her at risk on return."  That
    finding disposes of the first ground of  appeal;  having  rejected  the
    entirety of the appellant's credibility it clearly  followed  that  the
    appellant failed to establish that she was  at  risk  in  Zimbabwe  and
    there was no need for the judge to consider that aspect of  the  matter
    any further.  In consequence, I dismiss this appeal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 28 April 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





