
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number AA/08092/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20th July 2016                    |On 30th August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                              GELANE EFA BULITI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant arrived in the UK on the 11th of June  2013  and  claimed
    asylum in December 2013. Her claim was first considered by Judge Pooler
    on the 2nd of June 2014. The Appellant's claim to be at risk as a known
    supporter of the OLF was rejected for the reasons given in the decision
    at paragraphs 17 to 26. That decision was not challenged and  so  would
    form the basis for the consideration  of  any  further  claims  by  the
    Appellant subject to new available justifying a different decision.

 2. The Appellant renewed her claim. This was refused by the  Secretary  of
    State in a Refusal Letter of the 7th of May 2015 in which reliance  was
    placed on the previous decision. Her appeal against that  decision  was
    heard by Judge Rose on  the  9th  of  September  2015.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on the 18th of September 2015 the appeal was dismissed with
    Judge Rose rejecting the Appellant's claim that her attendance  at  one
    demonstration would place her at risk on return.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    grounds of application of the 2nd of October 2015. It was argued in the
    application that the Judge had not applied the case of  MB  (Ethiopia),
    referred to in the grounds  and  the  country  guidance  case.  It  the
    Appellant is registered as an OLF sympathiser and  recognised  as  such
    that would be sufficient to bring her within MB.

 4. Permission was refused by Judge Pooler on the 4th of October 2015 on as
    the Judge had properly taken the earlier decision as his starting point
    and  was  entitled  to  have  regard  to  the  inconsistencies  in  the
    Appellant's accounts as to how she had left Ethiopia. The weight to  be
    attached to the written evidence  was  for  the  Judge.  However  on  a
    renewed application to the Upper Tribunal  permission  was  granted  by
    Judge Bruce on the basis that the real issue was whether the  Appellant
    was an OLF sympathiser and so at risk.

 5. The rule 24 response from the Respondent submitted  that  the  historic
    discrepancies in the Appellant's evidence were relevant to the question
    of whether she was an OLF sympathiser. Having been disbelieved  in  the
    past the Judge was right to  be  slow  to  accept  her  credibility  on
    present issues. The evidence of Mr Berri had  been  considered  by  the
    Judge and her sur place activities were limited. Having  had  her  case
    dismissed in 2014 the further submissions had taken the case no further
    forward.

 6. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the Appellant was assisted  by
    a McKenzie friend. The Upper Tribunal procedure and the limits  on  the
    nature of the hearing were explained. The submissions are  set  out  in
    full in the Record of Proceedings.

 7. The Appellant relied on the case of MB and went  on  to  say  that  she
    could not be expected to change her ways in order to  survive,  relying
    on HJ (Iran). Mr Mills accepted that if a person was found to be an OLF
    sympathiser they would be at  risk  on  return.  The  problem  for  the
    Appellant was that her account had  been  rejected  in  201.  Mr  Mills
    accepted that if a person was found to be an OLF sympathiser they would
    be at risk on return. The  problem  for  the  Appellant  was  that  her
    account had been rejected  in  2014  and  the  only  change  since  the
    decision had been her attendance at one demonstration. In his  decision
    the Judge had expressly dealt with the new evidence and the letter.

 8. As Judge Rose noted the decision of Judge Pooler was the starting point
    for his consideration of the facts of the appeal in front of him and in
    those circumstances evidence would be  required  to  justify  departing
    from the findings previously made. To succeed the Appellant would  have
    to show that the adverse credibility findings were wrong in  law,  i.e.
    not open to the Judge on the evidence presented. I also note  that  the
    findings of Judge Pooler had not been challenged, or  not  successfully
    so.

 9. At paragraph 14 Judge Pooler expressly  declined  to  depart  from  the
    decision of Judge Pooler noting that the Appellant  had  not  addressed
    the findings that Judge Pooler had made and the reasons he  had  given.
    In addition the account the Appellant now gave about leaving  Ethiopia,
    set in paragraph 13, was different  from  the  account  she  had  given
    before Judge Pooler and that would undermine her credibility further.

10. The letter and email from Mr Berri were considered at paragraphs 16 and
    17. The reasons given, including the lack  of  supporting  information,
    were sufficient for the findings  that  he  made  and  Judge  Rose  was
    entitled to attach no  weight  to  the  letter.  The  evidence  of  her
    involvement in sur place activity was limited and post-dated the  first
    decision, the Judge was entitled to find that it did  not  advance  her
    case or create a risk for her on return.

11. The grant of permission and the grounds appear to proceed on  a  flawed
    basis. The credibility of the Appellant  was  central  to  the  Judge's
    consideration of her future risk and that had already been rejected  by
    Judge Pooler for reasons that had not  been  challenged.  Judge  Rose's
    task was to analyse the evidence that arose after the initial  decision
    and decide  whether  that  justified  a  departure  from  the  original
    findings. His decision was that the evidence presented did not  add  to
    the Appellant's case and that there was no basis for  finding,  to  the
    lower standard, that the Appellant was to be seen as a  sympathiser  of
    the OLF. The finding that the Appellant's evidence did  not  show  that
    she was a sympathiser of the OLF and that the Appellant's case did  not
    justify a finding that the original decision of Judge Pooler  could  be
    departed from were open to Judge Rose for the reasons given.

12. The basis of the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  on  the
    basis that she is a sympathiser of the OLF  but  it  was  made  without
    challenging the original decision  or  the  reasons  for  Judge  Rose's
    conclusions. In short the grounds disclose no  error  of  law  and  the
    decision of Judge Rose stands  as  the  decision  in  this  Appellant's
    appeal.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
Dated: 22nd August 2016
