
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08078/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9 July 2015                       |On 14 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McGINTY


                                   Between

                               madalo chintali
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, Counsel instructed by Coventry Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Following a hearing on 18  November  2014  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gurung-Thapa the appellant's appeal against a decision to  remove
    her was dismissed.  The decision to remove her dated 30 September  2014
    followed an asylum claim which was refused.

 2. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    came before the Upper Tribunal on 25  February  2015.   Following  that
    hearing, Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek concluded that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law in its decision concerning Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision was set aside, to be  re-made
    in the Upper Tribunal.  Thus, the appeal came before us.

 3. The error of law decision which gives the  further  background  to  the
    appeal and the basis on which the re-making was to take  place  is  set
    out as follows:

                          "DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

          1. The appellant is a citizen of Malawi born on 21  August  1981.
             She made an asylum claim on 26 September 2012.  The claim  was
             refused and a decision made on 30  September  2014  to  remove
             her.

          2. The appellant's appeal against that decision came before First-
             tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa at a hearing on  18  November
             2014.  Following the hearing, in a  determination  promulgated
             on 9 December 2014, the appeal was dismissed on  all  grounds,
             that is to say asylum, humanitarian protection,  human  rights
             (Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR) and  under  the  Immigration
             Rules.  Permission to appeal was granted by  a  Judge  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal and thus the appeal comes before me.

          3. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal on behalf  of  the
             appellant raise various issues including, but not limited  to,
             the question of whether the First-tier Judge should have  made
             a finding in terms of the paternity of the  appellant's  child
             who was born on 17 December 2013.  The father  of  that  child
             has indefinite leave to remain, apparently having been granted
             on 14  December  2004.   It  is  asserted  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant that by operation of law, that  is  to  say  Section
             1(1) of the British Nationality Act 1981, the  child,  whom  I
             shall call 'J', is a British citizen.  One of the  contentions
             on behalf of the appellant is that the judge did not deal with
             the issue of J's paternity, simply confining herself to asking
             whether an application had been made for his registration as a
             British citizen and finding  that  there  was  no  documentary
             evidence to suggest that the  father  had  submitted  such  an
             application.

          4.  On  behalf  of  the  appellant  reliance  is  placed  on  the
             Immigration Rules, in particular paragraph EX.1, which is  not
             a freestanding paragraph but in  conjunction  with  the  other
             provisions of what I can describe as  the  parent  route,  and
             having regard to Section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration
             and Asylum Act 2002, would entitle the appellant to  leave  to
             remain, or at least the right not to be  removed,  because  of
             her relationship with a British citizen child.

          5. Judge Gurung-Thapa made a number of findings  although  in  my
             judgement her findings were incomplete.  No criticism is  made
             of her decision in relation to the asylum grounds.  The  issue
             before me solely  relates  to  her  decision  in  relation  to
             Article 8 of the ECHR.

          6. There was evidence before the First-tier Judge  from  Mr  Gurl
             Anderson Thompson, who is said to be J's father,  but  he  did
             not attend to give evidence.

          7.  Judge  Gurung-Thapa  concluded  that  given  the  appellant's
             overall credibility she did not accept that the appellant  was
             currently in a relationship with Mr  Thompson.   There  was  a
             birth certificate on which Mr Thompson's name is  recorded  as
             the father but it was submitted on behalf  of  the  respondent
             that the birth certificate does not prove  paternity  and  the
             respondent did not accept that  the  appellant's  child  is  a
             British citizen or settled in the UK.

          8. At [70] of the determination Judge  Gurung-Thapa  stated  that
             she did not accept that the appellant's  child  is  a  British
             citizen or is settled in the UK as claimed.  She noted,  as  I
             have already indicated, that there was no documentary evidence
             before her to suggest that the child's  father  had  submitted
             the application for a British  passport,  notwithstanding  the
             assertion that he was in the process of doing so.

          9. Mr Smart relied on the respondent's 'rule 24' response to  the
             grounds of appeal. It was submitted that  the  judge  did  not
             need to make a finding on paternity, only  to  decide  if  the
             child was a British citizen. It  was  accepted  that  to  some
             degree the judge had perhaps "missed crossing a't' or  dotting
             an 'i'" but it was noted by the judge that the father was  not
             living with the child. It was submitted  that  the  judge  was
             entitled to  conclude  at  [70]  that  the  evidence  did  not
             establish that J is a British citizen or settled in the UK.

             My assessment

         10. It seems to  me  to  be  clear  from  the  determination  that
             although the judge found that there  was  no  relationship  or
             family life between the appellant and Mr Thompson,  there  was
             no actual finding in relation to paternity.

         11. In my judgement a finding on paternity  was  crucial  for  two
             reasons. Firstly, because it has a bearing on the  citizenship
             of J. Secondly, it has a bearing on the  extent  to  which  it
             could be said to be proportionate  to  remove  the  appellant,
             whose child would probably necessarily go with  her,  and  the
             extent to which that would affect any relationship between  Mr
             Thompson and the child.  Thus, I am satisfied that the  First-
             tier judge erred in  law  in  that  there  is  no  finding  in
             relation to paternity.

         12. I also take the view that [71] and [77] are inconsistent.   At
             [71] the First-tier Judge stated that she did  not  find  that
             the appellant's child will be required to leave  the  UK  with
             the appellant if it were to be accepted that the  child  is  a
             British citizen.  She said that there was no  evidence  before
             her to suggest that J's father cannot and will  not  care  for
             him and that it was the appellant's evidence that both of them
             parent well together.  She concluded then, that  she  was  not
             satisfied that J would be compelled to leave the UK to  follow
             the appellant.

         13. However, at [77] it is stated that J is almost 1 year old  and
             the appellant claimed that she is J's carer.  She went  on  to
             state that:

             "If this were to be accepted then  I  find  it  reasonable  to
             conclude that it is in the child's best interests to  be  with
             the mother and that it would be reasonable to expect the child
             to leave the UK with the appellant".

         14. As I say, in my judgement the findings in these  respects,  at
             [71] and [77], are inconsistent. Either of those errors of law
             is sufficient to require the decision to be set aside.

         15. The decision will have to be re-made.   I  indicated,  without
             dissent from either party, that the re-making will take  place
             in the Upper Tribunal and a further hearing will therefore  be
             arranged.

         16. The following Directions reflect those  given  orally  to  the
             parties at the hearing, with the addition of that at 3.

                                 DIRECTIONS

         1.   Any further evidence to be relied on by either party is to  be
             filed and served no later than 14 days before the next date of
             hearing.

         2.   If it is proposed to rely on any further evidence,  the  party
             concerned is to make an application under rule 15(2A)  of  the
             Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

         3.   Except in so far as infected by error of law, the findings  of
             fact made by the First-tier Tribunal are to stand. The parties
             must be in a position at the next hearing to make  submissions
             as to what findings are to be preserved."

 4. Mr Pipe indicated that there was no  oral  evidence  to  be  called  on
    behalf of the appellant although there was further evidence in the form
    of DNA test results.  We summarise the submissions below.

    Submissions

 5. On behalf of the respondent Mr Mills accepted  that  the  DNA  evidence
    established that the appellant's child, J, born on 17 December 2013, is
    the son of Mr Gurl Anderson Thompson, who was granted indefinite  leave
    to remain on 14 December 2004.

 6. Mr Mills submitted that the question to be answered with  reference  to
    paragraph EX.1 of the Immigration Rules  and  Section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  ("the  2002  Act")  is
    whether it would be reasonable to expect J to leave  the  UK  with  the
    appellant.

 7.  Taking  into  account  Home  Office  guidance,  the  appellant's  poor
    immigration history is relevant.  Furthermore, the finding at  [71]  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's determination that there was no evidence that
    J's father could not or would not care for the child is a finding  that
    is to stand.

 8. Although the appellant's skeleton argument relies on  the  decision  in
    Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano -  Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT
    00048 (IAC) in support of the proposition that the Secretary  of  State
    could not require the appellant's child to leave the UK, here the child
    is not required to leave because he can stay with his  father.   It  is
    the parents' choice as to whether or not the  child  leaves.   Although
    there was a concession on behalf of the respondent in  Sanade  on  this
    issue, that is not  now  the  respondent's  position.   The  rules  now
    envisage circumstances where it would be reasonable to expect  a  child
    to leave the UK, and EX.1 expressly includes such a situation.

 9. With reference to paragraph 11.2.3  of  the  guidance,  the  relatively
    small window the respondent can rely on is the  appellant's  very  poor
    immigration history.

10. So far as that is concerned, in brief, she arrived in the UK in 2003 as
    a visitor.  In 2011 she made applications for  leave  to  remain  which
    were rejected.  She had therefore overstayed  by  several  years.   The
    asylum claim that  she  made  in  September  2012  was  rejected  as  a
    fabrication by the First-tier  Tribunal.   She  had  therefore,  sought
    leave to remain by deception.

11. Her child is very young and has no particular ties outside the home and
    her mother.  It is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

12. On behalf of the appellant it was submitted  that  paragraphs  E-LTRPT.
    2.3. and 2.4., the eligibility criteria, are met.  Thus, one is able to
    move straight to EX.1.  This was accepted on behalf of the  respondent.



13. So far as [71] of the  First-tier's  determination  is  concerned,  the
    findings in that paragraph are in fact infected by  the  error  of  law
    since the error of law decision itself concluded that [71] and [77]  of
    the determination were inconsistent.  Mr Pipe submitted that  it  would
    not be reasonable for the child's father to take care of him.  They  do
    not live together.  He is a coach driver and works away from  home  for
    long hours.  The child is 18 months old.

14. So far as Sanade is concerned, the  respondent's  own  policy  document
    underlines the concession that was made in Sanade,  demonstrating  that
    the concession was correct.  On page 55 of the guidance,  the  examples
    of circumstances in which it may not be appropriate to grant  leave  to
    the  primary  carer  or  the  parent  relate  to  circumstances   where
    separation may be justified.  It does not indicate  that  it  would  be
    appropriate for the child to be required  to  leave  the  EU.   In  any
    event, the child in this case is  British  by  birth  and  has  regular
    contact with his father.  We were referred to the evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in relation to Mr Thompson's  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

15. The decision in Zoumbas v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] UKSC 74 indicates that the issue in relation to the child should
    not be determined by his mother's immigration history.  It is true that
    the appellant had overstayed and had made a claim for asylum  based  on
    being trafficked  and  ill-treated.   However,  what  is  said  in  the
    guidance about circumstances  which  could  permit  separation  from  a
    parent, are merely examples, such as the very poor immigration history.
     Furthermore, as was explained  in  Mahad  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    [2009] UKSC 16, the guidance could not be used as a way of interpreting
    EX.1.

16. It was then submitted that a failure to follow the  guidance,  being  a
    policy, would mean that the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the
    law.  That would allow for the possibility for the appeal to be allowed
    outright where the respondent's policy had not been followed.  However,
    we were not invited to take that course of action, it  being  submitted
    that the true basis of the argument in favour of the appellant  related
    to EX.1 and S.117B(6).

    Our assessment

17. It is as well to set out the legislative  framework  within  which  our
    decision must be made.  This involves, principally,  Section  EX.1.  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  It provides as follows:

         "EX.1. This paragraph applies if -

         (a)  (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
                relationship with a child who -

                (aa)   is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of
                   18 years when the applicant was first granted leave on
                   the basis that this paragraph applied;

                (bb)   is in the UK;

                (cc)   is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
                   continuously for at least the 7 years immediately
                   preceding the date of application; and

            (ii)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                the UK; or

         (b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
                partner who is in the UK and is a British  Citizen,  settled
                in the UK or in the UK with refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
                protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles to family
                life with that partner."

18. The relevant provisions of the 2002 Act are ss.117A-B.  They provide as
    follows:

         "117A: Application of this Part

             (1)  This part applies where a court or Tribunal is required
                  to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
                  Act -

                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                      family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under Section 6 of the
                      Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2)  In considering the public interest question the court or
                  Tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in Section
                      117B, and

                  (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                      criminals, to the considerations listed in Section
                      117C.

             (3)  In sub-Section (2), "the public interest question" means
                  the question of whether an interference with a person's
                  right to respect for private and family life is justified
                  under Article 8(2).

         117B: Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons
                  who can speak English -

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent,  because  such
                  persons -

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to -

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                  That is established by a person at a time when the  person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom."

19. It is accepted between the parties that the appellant has a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with a child who comes within the provisions of
    EX.1.1.  J is under the age of 18 years, is in the UK, and is a British
    citizen.  Aside from his father having indefinite leave to  remain,  it
    is said on behalf of the appellant that on 3 March 2015  J  was  issued
    with a British passport.  That is not disputed.

20. It was similarly agreed between the parties that  the  question  to  be
    determined is whether it would be reasonable to expect J to  leave  the
    UK.

21. In considering whether it would be reasonable to expect J to leave  the
    UK, on behalf of the appellant the decision in  Sanade  is  relied  on.
    Although we were not  referred  to  the  specific  paragraphs  of  that
    decision, we understand the  following  paragraphs  to  be  those  from
    which, on the appellant's behalf, assistance can be derived.  They  are
    [93]-[95].  We set them out as follows:

         "93. Finally, we note that a further question on which we asked for
             the respondent's assistance was in these terms:

                  'Does the respondent agree that in a  case  where  a  non-
                  national parent is  being  removed  and  claims  it  is  a
                  violation of that person's human rights  to  be  separated
                  from a child with whom he presently enjoys family life  as
                  an engaged  parent,  that  a  consequence  of  the  CJEU's
                  judgment is that it is  not  open  to  the  respondent  to
                  submit that an interference can be avoided because  it  is
                  reasonable to expect the child (and presumably  any  other
                  parent/carer who is  not  facing  deportation/removal)  to
                  join the appellant in the country of origin?  If  not  why
                  not?'

         94.  To this Mr Devereux replied on 24 November 2011:

                  'We do accept, however, that  in  a  case  where  a  third
                  country national is unable to claim a right to  reside  on
                  the basis set out above it will not logically be possible,
                  when assessing  the  compatibility  of  their  removal  or
                  deportation with the ECHR to argue that  any  interference
                  with Article 8 rights could be avoided by the family  unit
                  moving to a country  which  is  outside  of  the  European
                  Convention on Human Rights'.

         95.  We shall take this helpful submission  into  account  when  we
             consider the application of  Article  8  to  each  appellant's
             case. We agree with it.  This means that where  the  child  or
             indeed the remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore
             a citizen of the European Union, it is not possible to require
             them to relocate outside of the European Union  or  to  submit
             that it would be reasonable for them to do so. The case serves
             to emphasise the importance of nationality already  identified
             in the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  ZH  (Tanzania).  If
             interference with the family life is to be justified,  it  can
             only be on the basis that the conduct  of  the  person  to  be
             removed gives rise to considerations  of  such  weight  as  to
             justify separation."

22. Mr Mills submitted that whatever may have been said in Sanade by way of
    apparent concession on behalf of the respondent, no longer reflects the
    Secretary of State's position, as reflected in  the  Immigration  Rules
    and s.117B(6).  Mr Pipe however, relies on the guidance in relation  to
    Appendix  FM  entitled  "Immigration  Directorate  Instruction   Family
    Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0(b) Family  Life  (as  a  Partner  or
    Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes" dated April 2015, an  extract
    from which was provided to us.  We set out paragraph 11.2.3 as follows:

         "11.2.3. Would it be unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child
         to leave the UK?

         Save in cases involving criminality, the decision  maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in
         Zambrano.

         ...

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer."

23. It was submitted that contrary to the submissions made on behalf of the
    respondent before us, the respondent's own guidance mirrors exactly the
    concession made on behalf of the respondent in Sanade at [94].

24. Notwithstanding the reliance on behalf of the appellant on the case  of
    Sanade we are not inclined to accept  as  a  general  proposition  that
    there cannot be circumstances in which it would be reasonable to expect
    a British citizen child to leave the UK.  In the first place, that such
    an eventuality can  be  contemplated  is  evident  not  only  from  the
    Immigration Rules (EX.1) but also in primary  legislation  (s.117B(6)).
    In the second place, the proposition that it  would  or  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect a  British  citizen  child  to  leave  the  UK  is
    different from a requirement for the child to  leave,  which  would  be
    contrary to domestic and European law.

25. It seems to us that this  is  an  issue  that  should  properly  to  be
    determined within a wider consideration of  Article  8,  if  necessary,
    once consideration has been given to the Article 8 Immigration Rules.

26. In any event, in the context of this appeal,  we  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to resolve any apparent conflict between the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules in EX.1., s.117B(6) and the decision  in  Sanade,
    for reasons that will become apparent in our conclusions.

27. The assessment under EX.1 of whether it would be reasonable  to  expect
    the appellant's child to leave the UK involves an assessment of various
    factors, including the public interest.  Before  any  consideration  of
    the public interest, or other factors,  it  is  necessary  to  make  an
    assessment of what is in the J's best interests.  That  best  interests
    consideration is to be divorced from any consideration  of  the  public
    interest.  It must be a self-contained assessment of where  those  best
    interests lie.

28. We consider it uncontroversial to conclude that J's best interests  lie
    with being with the appellant.  The appellant is J's primary  carer,  a
    matter not disputed by the respondent.  J is just 18 months old.

29. The evidence from J's father is summarised at [39]  of  the  First-tier
    Judge's determination.  The evidence is that he works as a coach driver
    and is often away for a week or more at  a  time,  otherwise  seeing  J
    almost every day.  The evidence from Mr Thompson's witness statement is
    that they are very close and that he buys things for J such as clothes,
    shoes, food and so forth.  His  evidence  was  that  his  job  made  it
    impossible for him to be a sole parent for J.  He and the appellant are
    in a relationship but not ready fully to commit to each other. This  is
    in the appellant's witness statement.

30. We note that at  [67]  of  Judge  Gurung-Thapa's  determination  it  is
    recorded  that  the  appellant's  representative  accepted   that   her
    relationship with her partner is "sketchy".  In the same paragraph  the
    judge said that in the light  of  the  appellant's  overall  (lack  of)
    credibility she did not accept that she was then in a relationship with
    J's father.  That finding is not infected by the error of law and there
    is no evidence before us which indicates that the position is  now  any
    different.

31. Mr Pipe, correctly in our view, suggested that  the  findings  made  at
    [71] could no longer stand.  There Judge  Gurung-Thapa  concluded  that
    there was no evidence to suggest that J's father could  not  and  would
    not care for J.  The conclusion was that in those circumstances J would
    not be compelled to leave the UK with the appellant.

32. No submissions were made to us on behalf of the respondent in terms  of
    suggesting that J  does  not  have  a  relationship  with  his  father.
    Although there was no oral evidence from Mr Thompson before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, there was a letter from him referring to  the  closeness
    of his relationship with J, as well as with the appellant.

33. It is difficult on the basis of the  evidence  before  us  to  make  an
    assessment of the extent to which Mr Thompson is involved in J's  life.
    His claim that he is in a relationship with the appellant was  rejected
    by the First-tier Tribunal and even the appellant's  representative  at
    that hearing  conceded  that  the  evidence  of  the  relationship  was
    "sketchy", by which we infer that it was accepted that the evidence was
    not strong.  Nevertheless, we must make the assessment on the basis  of
    the evidence before us.

34.  Since  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  J  has  been
    registered as a British citizen.  We were not informed of  the  process
    involved in such registration but it is reasonable to conclude that co-
    operation from J's father would have been necessary.   Although  claims
    by the appellant and Mr Thompson that they are in a  relationship  were
    not accepted, there  is  nothing  in  the  evidence  to  indicate,  for
    example, absence of contact between Mr Thompson and J or an  abdication
    of any responsibility by him for J.

35. We are satisfied that the  evidence  is  sufficient  to  enable  us  to
    conclude that J's best interests lie in maintaining  contact  with  his
    father,  and  the  opportunity  to   strengthen   and   develop   their
    relationship.

36. Having concluded therefore, that it is in J's best interests to be with
    his  mother  (see  [27]  above,  and  to  maintain  and   develop   his
    relationship with his father,  this  inevitably  means  that  J's  best
    interests are to remain in the UK.  That is of course, aside  from  the
    very important consideration of his British citizenship, with all  that
    that entails.

37. Having identified where J's best interests lie, we move on to  consider
    whether it could be said to be reasonable to expect him  to  leave  the
    UK.  It seems  to  us  that  that  question  can  be  answered  without
    reference to the respondent's guidance.   The  guidance  does  however,
    reinforce our view that it would not be reasonable to expect J to leave
    the UK.

38. Although J's best interests are a primary consideration,  they  are  of
    course not the only consideration.  British citizenship is not a "trump
    card".  It is true that the appellant has  had  no  lawful  immigration
    status for many years.  It is also true  to  say  that  the  First-tier
    Judge found, in effect, that her  asylum  claim  had  been  fabricated.
    There was no challenge to her conclusions in this respect.

39. We do consider that the appellant's immigration history is a poor  one,
    consisting of overstaying and making a false asylum claim.  As  against
    that, her child is a British citizen who has a  relationship  with  his
    father.  It is not suggested  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  Mr
    Thompson would be able to leave the UK and  live  in  Malawi  with  the
    appellant.  Apart from anything else, the First-tier Judge  found  that
    the appellant and Mr Thompson were not in a relationship.  Secondly, Mr
    Thompson has employment in the UK.  The appellant's evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal recorded at [66] is that Mr Thompson  has  a  child
    aged three or four from a previous relationship, although there  is  no
    evidence that he is involved with that child's life.  Nevertheless,  in
    order for the assessment to be made that it would be reasonable  for  J
    to leave the UK with the appellant, the conclusion  would  have  to  be
    reached that it would be reasonable for him to forego  the  opportunity
    of maintaining and developing a relationship with his father.  It would
    also involve the conclusion that it would be right to  deprive  him  of
    the rights and advantages of British citizenship until be was of an age
    when he would be able to exercise  his  own  judgement  or  freedom  to
    return to the UK.  We do not consider that either of those propositions
    is tenable.

40. Although we come to that view without  reference  to  the  respondent's
    guidance on Appendix FM, at 11.2.3 which we have quoted  above,  as  we
    have said it does reinforce our conclusion.

41. The guidance goes on to refer to cases where it may be  appropriate  to
    refuse to grant leave where the conduct of the parent or primary  carer
    gives rise to considerations of such weight as to  justify  separation,
    if the child could otherwise stay with another  parent  or  alternative
    primary carer in the UK or in the EU.   It  states  that  circumstances
    envisaged "could cover amongst others", criminality falling  below  the
    threshold set out in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules or  a  very
    poor immigration history, such as where the person has  repeatedly  and
    deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

42. Clearly therefore, the guidance itself is predicated on the basis  that
    it should in principle be unreasonable  to  expect  a  British  citizen
    child to leave the EU with the primary carer.

43. However, we do not consider that the guidance represents  any  sort  of
    policy, which a failure to follow may result in a decision being  found
    to be not in accordance with the law.

44. The essential question arising in this case requires an assessment only
    of whether it would be reasonable to expect J to leave the UK.  For the
    reasons we have  given  it  would  not.   That  does  not  involve  any
    assessment of whether J's father would be able to care for him.

45. However, in case it could be said that because Mr Thompson  could  care
    for J there is no expectation within EX.1 that J should leave  the  UK,
    we have considered whether the evidence establishes that he could  care
    for J.

46. As  we  have  already  indicated,  there  was  no  dispute  as  to  the
    appellant's evidence that Mr Thompson's employment requires him to work
    away from home for periods of days at a time.   That  in  itself  would
    seem to us to rule out his potential as a full-time carer for J.  There
    is nothing to indicate that there is any other person who could  assist
    with J's care whilst Mr Thompson does his  job.   There  is  simply  no
    basis for suggesting that he could be J's full-time carer.

47. Apart from anything else, there would have to be some basis from  which
    to conclude that it would be appropriate and lawful to separate J  from
    his mother.  Even on the basis of the  respondent's  own  guidance,  we
    cannot see that that is a sustainable proposition.   Mr  Mills  himself
    described the respondent's case in  this  respect  as  the  "relatively
    small window" of the appellant's very poor immigration history.  In our
    judgement  the  case  for  separation  between  J  and  his  mother  is
    vanishingly small.

48. In these  circumstances,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    established that EX.1 does apply and that  the  appeal  therefore  must
    succeed under the Immigration Rules  with  reference  to  Appendix  FM.
    Thus, we do not need to go on  to  consider  Article  8  in  its  wider
    context.

49. It was accepted on behalf of the respondent before us that the  outcome
    of the appeal under EX.1 and within a consideration of s.117A-B of  the
    2002 Act would be the same.

    Decision

50. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  That decision having been set aside, we re-make the
    decision, allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  7/09/15
