
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09940/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                        |     Decision & Reasons       |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 13 October 2015                           |     On 5 November 2015       |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                     N B
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1.  Given  the  nature  of  the  appeal  and   the   appellant's   claimed
    circumstances,  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  anonymity  in   these
    proceedings and I make a direction accordingly.

 2. The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan  born  on  11  May  1981.  She
    appealed against a decision of the respondent dated 4 November 2014  to
    refuse to grant her asylum. Her appeal was dismissed by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Chohan ("the FTTJ") in a decision promulgated on 12
    February 2015.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  It was granted by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Simpson on 6 March 2015 who noted that the FTTJ
    was in error in stating that she had taken "judicial notice of the fact
    that in registering the birth of a child in this country  there  is  no
    requirement that both parents had to be present".  Arguable  errors  of
    law were also noted with regard to the credibility findings.  Thus  the
    appeal came before me.

Submissions

 4. Both parties' representatives agreed that the FTTJ  had  not  addressed
    the best interests and welfare of  the  children,  and  that  this  was
    contrary  to  s55,  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.
    Furthermore, both agreed  that  the  FTTJ  had  not  assessed  or  even
    mentioned the evidence of  the  appellant's  cousin  who  attended  the
    hearing and gave evidence with regard to the  appellant's  relationship
    with the father of her two children.

 5. For the appellant, Mr Khan accepted  there  was  little  evidence  with
    regard to the father of the  appellant's  two  children.  However,  the
    appellant's cousin had given oral evidence of his  first  hand  contact
    with the father. Despite this there was no analysis of  that  evidence.
    Instead the FTTJ had ignored it, neither making  positive  or  negative
    findings on the issue. If the evidence had been rejected, the appellant
    was entitled to know why.  If inconsistencies had  been  identified  in
    the evidence, the FTTJ should have taken into account  the  appellant's
    explanation for them (such as her explanation for failing  to  register
    the name of the father  of  her  children)  before  making  an  adverse
    credibility finding.

 6. Ms Brocklesby-Weller, for the respondent, submitted that  the  analysis
    of the evidence, notwithstanding the lack of reference to the  evidence
    of the appellant's cousin, was sufficient for the  adverse  credibility
    finding. The cousin would merely have  confirmed  the  appellant's  own
    evidence.

Discussion

 7. The FTTJ made adverse credibility findings, going so  far  as  to  find
    that "the evidence suggests that it is possible that the appellant  was
    and still is married to [the father of her  children]".   This  finding
    was directly contrary to the appellant's  claim  and  in  the  face  of
    contrary oral evidence given by the appellant's cousin  to  the  effect
    that the appellant  had  never  been  married  to  the  father  of  her
    children; nor was she still in a relationship with him.  Despite  this,
    the FTTJ makes no mention of the cousin's evidence in her decision.

 8. I bear in mind the guidance in  Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set
    aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) that reasons need not be extensive  if  the
    decision as a whole makes sense. However, in this case the fact-finding
    process is faulty.  The findings of the FTTJ are directly  contrary  to
    the evidence of the appellant's cousin and there is no suggestion  that
    that evidence had been rejected for any reason. Indeed  the  fact  that
    the FTTJ has failed to refer to it at all leads me to conclude that  it
    was not considered or taken into account.

 9. The appellant's cousin's evidence  goes  to  the  nub  of  the  appeal,
    addressing as it does the appellant's status as a single parent and the
    risk for her on return.  The failure to refer to it  in  the  decision-
    making process renders the findings of the FTTJ unsustainable. They are
    unsafe.

10. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  an
    error of law in the assessment of the evidence and the FTTJ's  decision
    must be set aside in its entirety.  The parties' representatives agreed
    that, in such circumstances, it was appropriate for the  appeal  to  be
    decided afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

11. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before  any  judge  aside  from
    FTTJ Chohan.

12. The anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.



A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


