
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09401/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th July 2016                    |On 13th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   ms e a
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Braganza of Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant a citizen of Ghana born on 26th June  1961  appeals  with
    permission against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rahman
    made on 15th April 2016 dismissing the appellant's  claim  for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and protection under the European Convention.

 2. The appellant claimed to be a victim of trafficking having  worked  for
    an employer who was himself an employee  of  the  Office  of  the  High
    Commission for Ghana.  She claimed to have worked for him between  28th
    November 2003 and 2008 and when his diplomatic status ended and he left
    the UK for Ghana.  In the intervening  period  in  2007  the  appellant
    returned to Ghana for a short holiday and subsequently returned to  his
    employment.  He assisted her in obtaining  further  employment  because
    her salary in the UK was so low.

 3. Her immigration history was such that she made an application for leave
    to remain as a overseas domestic worker on 31st March  2004  which  was
    granted.  A further application was made on 11th  May  2005  which  was
    also granted.  She was granted further extensions of  leave  ultimately
    until 4th June 2009.  On 2nd June 2009  she  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain as a domestic worker but was refused  indefinite  leave
    to remain with a right of appeal.  She did lodge an appeal but  it  was
    ruled out of time and she became  appeal  rights  exhausted.   On  10th
    March 2010 she made a further application for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    domestic worker but indefinite leave was again refused with no right of
    appeal.

 4. On 19th October 2013 she was arrested whilst working illegally and  was
    served with an IS151A.  On 24th October 2013 she made a  human  rights,
    Article 3 application,  and  on  10th  September  2014  she  sought  an
    appointment to claim asylum which she did formally  on  16th  September
    2014.

 5. Her case was referred to the national referral mechanism on 19th August
    2013 and it would appear that she was referred by the Salvation Army on
    17th August 2014 as a possible victim of trafficking.  On  22nd  August
    2014 UKVI made a positive 'reasonable grounds'  decision  on  the  case
    affording her a recovery and reflection period until 5th October  2014.
    She was again assessed on 29th May 2015 and  the  caseworker  concluded
    that on the balance of probabilities she had not been trafficked.

 6. A decision was thus issued by the Secretary of State on 11th June  2015
    refusing her asylum, humanitarian protection and protection  under  the
    European Convention and it was that decision  which  was  appealed  and
    determined by Judge Rahman.

 7. The application for permission to appeal sets out four separate grounds
    in relation to the treatment of the evidence:

      i) the judge failed to provide a rational basis and/or cogent  reasons
         for rejecting recent medical evidence of  the  appellant's  suicide
         risk and mental illness.

     ii) misdirected himself in law in rejecting  the  medical  evidence  as
         independent evidence of the appellant's claim to have been raped, R
         (AM) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  EWCA  Civ
         521.

    iii) in rejecting the appellant's account of  rape,  took  into  account
         irrelevant considerations and/or unlawfully relied  on  prejudicial
         assumptions as to how rape victims should be  expected  to  behave;
         and

     iv) in assessing the appellant's  account  of  trafficking,  failed  to
         consider relevant guidance or conduct on  analysis  independent  of
         the respondent.

 8. In relation to ground (i)  it  was  asserted  that  the  appellant  had
    adduced recent medical evidence in the form of  a  medico-legal  report
    dated 4th March 2016  by  clinical  psychologist  Dr  Chisholm  and  Dr
    Whittikar-Howe (specialists in  mental  health  difficulties  following
    traumatic events, asylum  seeker  and  refugee  mental  health).   This
    report  diagnosed  post-traumatic  stress   disorder   with   psychotic
    symptoms.  The judge compared this with discharge  summary  dated  27th
    July 2015 completed by  a  community  mental  health  nurse  at  Barnet
    Enfield and Haringey Hospital and at paragraph 113 stated

         "I find no reasonable explanation  for  the  deterioration  in  the
         appellant's mental state and the  increased  suicide  risk  between
         July 2015 and the consultation in 2016."

 9. It was asserted this did not  provide  a  rational  basis  or  adequate
    reasoning for rejecting the evidence as the cause  or  explanation  for
    the appellant's mental state, reasonable or otherwise was not a  matter
    for the Tribunal but the clinical  expertise  of  the  authors  of  the
    report.  Second the role of the report was to provide evidence  of  the
    appellant's current symptoms of a subjective fear of return and it  was
    immaterial whether such fear was well-founded or whether  the  symptoms
    permitted a reasonable explanation.  Third, the analysis  was  at  odds
    with the Court of Appeal in R (AM) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 521.  Albeit that the report  was  based  on
    the appellant's testimony that  did  not  undermine  its  value  as  an
    independent evidence of  the  appellant's  symptoms.   At  the  hearing
    before me Ms Braganza  also  stated  that  the  judge  had  not  placed
    emphasis on the qualifications of the expert.  I  would  disagree  with
    that as the judge clearly set out the nature of the  qualifications  of
    the experts at paragraph 69 of the decision referring to them  both  as
    chartered clinical psychologists.

10. There are some difficulties with the treatment of the medical  evidence
    in this case and it would appear that the  judge  rejected  the  report
    from Dr Chisholm and Dr Whittikar-Howe on the basis  that  it  did  not
    accord with the evidence that the  appellant  had  given.    The  judge
    notes at paragraph 115,  116  and  117  that  in  the  appellant's  own
    evidence there were conflicting accounts.  The judge also rejected  the
    evidence on the basis that there were significant  differences  in  the
    reports  from  the  clinical  psychologist  and  the  hospital   report
    concerning the severity of the appellant's mental health and the degree
    of suicide risk.  He makes reference to the fact that the  report  from
    Dr Chisholm was in response to  a  refusal  of  the  appellant's  claim
    albeit that it is only  implicit  that  that  is  a  criticism  of  the
    evidence but he states that he finds "no reasonable explanation for the
    deterioration".  On a careful reading of the  report  from  the  mental
    health nurse, which the judge does note the appellant states  that  she
    has been "relatively healthy".  The hospital report  also  states  that
    the Appellant in the past has had thoughts to kill herself however  due
    to her faith she would not act on these thoughts".  At the same time it
    states "at the moment she does not have  any  plans  to  kill  or  harm
    herself".

11. What, however, is identified in the report dated 29th  July  2015  from
    the mental health nurse is  the  line  "current  cluster  five  -  non-
    psychotic disorders (very severe) (six months)".

12. The judge had identified a  lack  of  reasonable  explanation  for  the
    deterioration  but  failed  to  identify  why  the  second  report  was
    effectively rejected save for the fact that there was a 'deterioration'
    in her health and relied on her own discrepant evidence.

13. As pointed out in the grounds of appeal the appellant was described  as
    a highly vulnerable witness.  Any assessment  of  the  medical  reports
    should also have been assessed in the light of the  vulnerable  witness
    guidelines and that does not appear to  have  occurred.       That  was
    obliquely referred to in the grounds for appeal  and  not  surprisingly
    expanded upon by Ms Braganza.  At paragraph 119 the judge states:

         "Having considered all the evidence, applying the lower standard of
         proof, and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  do  not  find  the
         appellant's  account  credible.   I  am  not  satisfied  that   the
         appellant was trafficked or that she had been mistreated in any way
         whatsoever by her previous employer."

14. Ms Braganza did  point  out  that  the  judge  had  not  addressed  the
    guidelines in relation to trafficking (ground iv)  and I can understand
    that the judge would  resist  following  those  guidelines  because  he
    concluded that she had not been trafficked but in order to  assess  the
    appellant's evidence particularly as the judge at paragraph 123 stated:
    "I accept that the appellant has a degree of  mental  illness"  it  was
    important that he did make reference to those  Presidential  guidelines
    on vulnerable witnesses which he did not.

15. IY Turkey [2012] EWCA Civ 1560 makes it clear that  it  is  open  to  a
    judge to reject a medical report although any judge must  proceed  with
    caution and require to have  particular  justifiable  reasons  for  not
    accepting the evidence but as set out in IY:

         "43. Mr Bazini, for his part, rightly accepted that  the  FTTJ  was
             not bound to accept Professor Katona's report, even  where  it
             had not been challenged  in  cross-examination.  But  in  such
             circumstances I do accept his submission that, to  reject  it,
             the FTTJ was required to proceed with caution and was required
             to have, and articulate, justifiable reasons for not accepting
             the evidence. The general position is summarised, in  my  view
             accurately, by Stanley Burnton LJ  in  the  case  of  SS  (Sri
             Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2012]
             EWCA Civ 155 at paragraph 21 of his judgment:

                  '21. Generally speaking, the weight, if any, to  be  given
                      to expert (or indeed any) evidence is  a  matter  for
                      the  trial  judge  (here  Senior  Immigration   Judge
                      Spencer). A judge's decision  not  to  accept  expert
                      evidence does not involve an  error  of  law  on  his
                      part,  provided  he  approaches  that  evidence  with
                      appropriate care  and  gives  good  reasons  for  his
                      decision. Ultimately, therefore, there are  only  two
                      issues as to the Senior Immigration Judge's treatment
                      of the medical evidence: did he address that evidence
                      with appropriate care and did he  give  good  reasons
                      for  his  conclusion?   Those   two   questions   are
                      interrelated. It is difficult to conceive of  a  case
                      in which a  judge  gives  adequate  reasons  for  his
                      conclusions on expert evidence yet he is held to have
                      exercised insufficient care. His reasons  demonstrate
                      his care.'"

16. In relation to ground (iii) it is open to a judge to take into  account
    how the appellant had proved himself able at the  Tribunal  hearing  in
    answering questions in cross-examination  but the judge approached  the
    evidence on the basis that 'she was not  and  did  not  look  upset  or
    distressed and engaged well with the  tribunal'.   [114]  That  is  not
    necessarily  an  indicator  of  previous  experience   and   no   doubt
    individuals will vary greatly as to the degree  of  emotion  they  show
    when describing events.

17. The question of whether an appellant's account of the underlying events
    is or is not credible is a question for the  judge  but  that  evidence
    must be approached carefully and owing to the approach identified above
    and the absence of any reference to the vulnerable witness  guidelines,
    which I note were produced to the judge  as  they  are  in  the  bundle
    produced by the appellant to the First-tier Tribunal, the findings  are
    therefore undermined.

18. Any credibility findings would also be relevant  to  an  assessment  in
    relation to suicide risk which I also note the judge did  not  address.
    At paragraph 123 the judge approached the case on  the  basis  of  N  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 31  and  whether
    the appellant's illness had reached a critical stage and  proceeded  to
    assess the evidence in relation to Ghana  but  that  is  not  the  only
    ground of appeal that was taken in relation to this case.

The credibility findings are key  in  this  matter  and  the  assessment  of
medical evidence will underpin those findings  and,  in  turn,  relevant  in
relation to the assessment on risk on return.  It is  the  appellant's  case
that she is  at  risk  from  an  ex-government  official  and  as  such  any
assessment of her mental health is relevant  to  her  findings  of  risk  on
return.  For the reasons identified above I find an  error  of  law  in  the
decision.

Notice of Decision

19. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington  13th September 2016
