
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09655/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Issued          |
|On 16th May 2016                              |On 19th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     B M
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr A Devlin, Advocate; Latta & Co., Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda, aged 44.  He  appeals  against  a
    decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Morrison,  promulgated  on  12th
    January 2016, dismissing his appeal against refusal of recognition as a
    refugee.

 2. The case which Mr Devlin advanced in the  grounds  of  appeal,  written
    note of argument and oral submissions is in outline  as  follows.   The
    judge failed to explain  adequately  why  parts  of  an  expert  report
    produced by the appellant which  were  detrimental  to  his  case  were
    accepted, but other parts of the report which were  favourable  to  his
    case were rejected.  The judge gave four  reasons  for  his  rejection,
    none of which stood up to scrutiny, and which applied also to the parts
    accepted.  The decision should be set aside and remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 3. The position of the respondent was that apart from one minor point  the
    grounds disclosed no inadequacy of reasoning, and the  decision  should
    stand.

 4. Judge Morrison found that the appellant would be  returned  as  someone
    who was a supporter and latterly a member of the LRA (Lord's Resistance
    Army) but that in  accordance  with  country  guidance  and  background
    evidence, and notwithstanding the expert report, he would  qualify  for
    an amnesty, which has been in place since 2004.  These are the  crucial
    paragraphs of the decision:

         "64. Finally Mr Devlin asked me to take into account Dr Verheoven's
             opinion as to the  risk  on  return,  set  out  in  the  final
             paragraph of his report...  After  stating  that  the  Ugandan
             Government does not have a policy of  general  harassment  and
             punishment of returning failed asylum seekers he  goes  on  to
             suggest that the appellant, if he  was  an  LRA  combatant  or
             perceived   as   such,   'would   potentially   face   serious
             repercussions in  the  form  of  extensive  interrogation  and
             possibly torture'.  He goes on to refer  to  the  amnesty  but
             says that 'Its impact on the conflict has largely fizzled  out
             and  harassment  of  and  discrimination  against  former  LRA
             fighting is widespread.  There  is  a  significant  difference
             between what the law states and what the reality on the ground
             in Northern Uganda looks like.  Particularly  in  those  cases
             where continued ties with Joseph Koni and his organisation are
             suspected, the CMI does not shy away from using force  against
             presumed accomplices'.  Dr Verheoven concludes ...  'It  would
             not necessarily be so much the alleged attack on Kilak but  Mr
             M's general profile and presumed pro-LRA  sympathies  or  even
             membership that would constitute a... risk...'

           65.    As I  indicated  earlier  Dr  Verheoven's  report  is  not
             sourced but in relation to events which took place  in  Uganda
             from 2004 onwards he  does  have  personal  experience  having
             spent a year at one of the IDP camps and has visited Uganda on
             various occasions since.  There is nothing  in  his  CV...  to
             suggest that he has any expert  knowledge...  in  relation  to
             returnees.  His suggestion that the effect of the amnesty  has
             'fizzled out' does not sit easily with  the  other  background
             information...  I also have concerns in that Dr Verheoven does
             not appear to be aware of  the  country  guidance  system  and
             makes  no  reference  to  any  of   the   background   country
             information which suggests that a large number of  individuals
             have been granted amnesty and that the amnesty was renewed  as
             recently  as  2015...   I  cannot  place  any  weight  on   Dr
             Verheoven's report insofar as it relates  to  risk  on  return
             and...   I  regard  the  other  items  of  background  country
             information... as carrying greater weight."

 5. The appellant's argument is that the judge justified his  rejection  of
    the favourable parts of the report by reference to:

      i) the lack of sourcing;

     ii) the expert's lack of relevant expertise;

    iii)  the  inconsistency  of  his  opinion   with   country   background
         information; and

     iv)  the  report's  lack  of  reference  to  the   country   background
         information.

 6. Justification (i) is said to be illogical, since none of  the  rest  of
    the expert report was sourced either, in  the  sense  of  referring  to
    specific publications and the like.  Mr Matthews argued that there  was
    nothing irrational about accepting parts of an expert  report  and  not
    others, and that the  points  the  judge  declined  to  accept  without
    sourcing were contraindicated by other evidence.  Mr Devlin  said  that
    lack of sourcing could have been a sensible reason only to  reject  the
    whole of the report.

 7. I am not persuaded by point (i).  To accept some parts  of  the  report
    which did not cite particular sources did not bind the judge to  accept
    others. He was plainly influenced by the fact  that  there  were  clear
    contrary sources of information on the critical issue of the amnesty.

 8. Mr Matthews conceded that point (ii) perhaps  not  well  taken  by  the
    judge.  He said that it was unimportant, while Mr Devlin submitted that
    the report either stood up as a whole or  it  did  not,  and  that  the
    expert plainly had appropriate credentials.

 9. The expert was suitably qualified, indeed highly  qualified.   However,
    it remained for the judge's duty to decide which parts  of  his  report
    and conclusions carried weight, and in my view he explained why.

10.  On  point  (iii),  Mr  Devlin  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  judge
    misunderstood what the expert meant by saying that the  effect  of  the
    amnesty fizzled out, through quoting the passage in full  at  paragraph
    64 but only in part and to misleading effect at paragraph 65.

11. In my opinion Mr Devlin was trying to draw a non-existent  distinction.
    Contrary to the argument I think the expert was indeed saying that  the
    effect of the amnesty had fizzled out, at least to  some  extent.   The
    judge was entitled to find the other evidence at  odds  with  that,  to
    prefer that other evidence, and to  hold  that  the  amnesty  would  be
    available to the appellant.  While Mr Devlin sought to persuade me that
    the judge misunderstood the report in this respect,  I  was  unable  to
    follow this analysis.  There does appear to me to  be  a  contradiction
    between the report and other sources, which the judge had  to  resolve,
    and I see no inadequacy of reasoning in his coming  down  on  the  side
    which he did.

12. Mr Devlin's argument concedes that the expert report did not  refer  to
    country guidance or country background information,  but  submits  that
    the undoubted  expertise  of  the  author  is  a  good  basis  for  his
    conclusions, and that the background evidence does not  contradict  his
    position nor bear to be comprehensive.

13. In my view the judge was entitled to conclude, for the reasons he gave,
    that the country guidance and  background  information  show  that  the
    amnesty is effective in broad terms and for many thousands  of  people,
    the only likely exceptions being high ranking commanders accused of war
    crimes, a category which does not include the appellant.

14. Mr Devlin submitted that the rape of the appellant's wife in  2004,  an
    incident which the judge accepted, showed that he  had  no  benefit  of
    amnesty.  This in my opinion was  validly  countered  by  Mr  Matthew's
    submission that in 2004 the appellant was not in  the  category  of  an
    applicant for amnesty.

15. Mr Devlin made an argument in his reply that paragraph 3.16.10  of  the
    respondent's Operational Guidance Note 8.0 December 2013 should be read
    to the effect that even those perceived as low ranking members  of  the
    LRA might be responsible for serious human rights  abuses  and  thereby
    excluded from refugee protection, which implied that they  were  to  be
    treated as liable to a risk of persecution in the first  place.   I  do
    not accept that analysis either of the policy in  the  OGN  or  of  the
    underlying background evidence.  I accept the  respondent's  submission
    that exclusion is considered where the circumstances  suggest  it,  not
    only where the respondent accepts that there is a risk of persecution.

16. In my opinion, paragraphs 64 and 65 of the decision, read together  and
    in the context of the background evidence and country guidance to which
    they refer, adequately explanation to the appellant why the opinion  of
    Dr Verheoven on risk to a perceived LRA combatant is not  accepted  and
    why the contrary conclusion is reached.

17. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. An anonymity direction was  made  in  the  FtT.   The  matter  was  not
    addressed in the UT.  The direction remains in force.


                           [pic]


                           18 May 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
