
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09953/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 26 June 2014                               |On 7 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                                   MR G B
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Bradshaw, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania and a minor having been born on 5
    April 1998.

 2. He claims to have left Albania for France on a lorry; he  was  arrested
    by French police and released, and  then  travelled  by  lorry  to  the
    United Kingdom where he arrived on 31 July 2013 and went  to  a  police
    station  to  claim  asylum.   On  17  October  2013   the   appellant's
    application for asylum  was  refused  by  the  respondent  and  on  the
    following day the respondent issued a letter to the  appellant  stating
    that although the asylum claim had  been  rejected  the  appellant  was
    granted limited  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  until  30
    September 2015.  That leave was on the basis that the appellant was  an
    unaccompanied minor for whom adequate reception arrangements in Albania
    had not yet been established.

 3. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision pursuant to Section 83
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The basis of the appellant's claim was by reason of his membership of a
    particular social group based on his age and his resulting  entitlement
    to asylum.

 5. The appellant's credibility was not disputed by the respondent.  It was
    not challenged within the respondent's refusal  letter  or  at  a  Case
    Management Review hearing held on 3 December 2013 where the appellant's
    historic account was agreed between the parties.  The  only  issue  for
    the appeal was said to be the sufficiency of protection  available  for
    the appellant and the issue of internal relocation was  agreed  between
    the parties to not be available.

 6. The appellant's witness statement of 19 August 2013 indicated  that  he
    grew up and lived in Peshkopi all his life.  He attended  local  school
    until he was 15 years of age but his attendance was not good due to his
    circumstances.  His mother was a housewife and his father had no proper
    stable job.  He did odd jobs for other people.  Normally he would  work
    for construction companies.  The family was a poor one and lived  in  a
    small house with one room with a separate kitchen and  bathroom.   They
    struggled to get by and barely survived due to the appellant's father's
    unstable work.  His father had mental health issues.  The appellant  is
    unaware of the exact nature of them but he was mentally  unstable.   He
    was also a "heavy alcoholic".  This is why the  family's  problems  got
    worse.  From being 13 years of age the  appellant's  father  beat  him.
    This included being grabbed  and  punched  in  the  face,  slapped  and
    kicked.  He would do this as he had no money and would then  force  the
    appellant to steal.  The appellant was forced to steal from  shops  and
    to take money.  When he refused he was beaten badly.  As he  got  older
    the abuse got worse.  The appellant's mother would be  present  at  the
    time but was  helpless  and  stood  by  and  cried.   Increasingly  the
    appellant became so afraid of his father that he  began  to  live  away
    from home.  There was another close village  and  the  appellant  found
    there an abandoned house where  he  lived  for  some  two  months.   He
    returned home only when he knew his father was not around.  It was as a
    consequence  of  this  abuse  that  the  appellant  left  Albania.   He
    considers internal relocation is unavailable  to  him.   He  has  tried
    telling the police about the abuse  but  no  notice  is  taken  of  him
    because he is a child.  He maintains  that  wherever  he  relocated  he
    would be found by his father who will  kill  him.   He  has  no  family
    members in Albania to care for him and protect him.  His own mother  is
    the victim of his father's abuse as is his  younger  brother.   Neither
    are able to live alone or move away from the  appellant's  father.   It
    was only by fleeing that the appellant managed to escape him.

 7. It was because he had no one to look after him and protect him that the
    appellant fled Albania.  He did so hidden in a  lorry.   Eventually  he
    was apprehended in France but on telling the police that he was only 15
    years of age he was released.  He  was  not  fingerprinted  there.   He
    managed to board another lorry and travelled to the United Kingdom.  He
    immediately attended at a  police  station  and  was  taken  to  Social
    Services.

 8. The appellant's asylum claim was brought by virtue of his membership of
    a particular social group based on his age.

 9. The appellant's appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  P
    J Clarke who in a determination promulgated on 5 March  2014  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds but allowed it on Humanitarian
    Protection grounds.  The judge found that the appellant qualified under
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

10. Both parties sought permission to appeal the judge's  decision.   Those
    applications were  considered  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cruthers on 20 March 2014.  He gave permission  to  the  respondent  to
    appeal and he refused permission  to  the  appellant  to  appeal.   His
    reasons were as follows:-

         "1.  By a determination promulgated on  5  March  2014,  First-tier
             Tribunal  Judge  P  J   Clarke   addressed   the   15-year-old
             appellant's 'upgrade appeal' pursuant to  section  83  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (paragraph  1  of
             the determination).  Having assessed the evidence,  the  judge
             concluded that the  appeal  did  not  succeed  on  asylum  law
             principles  but  did  succeed   on   humanitarian   protection
             principles.

         2.   Both parties seek to appeal against the  conclusions  referred
             to above.

         3.   The  crux  of  the  grounds  on  which  the  respondent  seeks
             permission  to  appeal  are  that  the  judge  did  not   deal
             adequately with the possibilities of sufficiency of protection
             and  internal  relocation  (paragraphs  2(a)  -  (c)  of   the
             grounds).  And, in any event,  any  harm  that  the  appellant
             faces  on  return  to  Albania  would  not  fall  within   the
             definitions  in  Article  15  of  the  relevant  qualification
             directive and, therefore, the judge should  not  have  allowed
             the appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds  (paragraphs
             1(a) - (d) of the grounds).

         4.   The respondent's grounds are arguable."

         "1.  By a determination promulgated on  5  March  2014,  First-tier
             Tribunal  Judge  P  J   Clarke   addressed   the   15-year-old
             appellant's 'upgrade appeal' pursuant to  section  83  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (paragraph  1  of
             the determination).  Having assessed the evidence,  the  judge
             concluded that the  appeal  did  not  succeed  on  asylum  law
             principles  but  did  succeed   on   humanitarian   protection
             principles.

         2.   Both parties seek to appeal against the  conclusions  referred
             to above.

         3.   As far as the appellant's appeal is concerned,  it  is  argued
             that the asylum appeal should have been allowed on  the  basis
             that the appellant is a member of a particular social group 'a
             child' (paragraph 14 of the grounds).  But even  if  there  is
             such a particular social group as 'children', in my assessment
             the judge was right  to  hold  that  any  harm  faced  by  the
             appellant in Albania did not in any sense arise on account  of
             his membership of a particular social group.  It is noteworthy
             that the author of the grounds was asked at the  hearing  what
             particular social group he contended for but he was unable  to
             advance one (paragraph 64 of the determination).

         4.   The grounds do not identify any arguable  error  of  law  that
             might have acted to the detriment of the appellant's case."

11. The appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal which was subsequently granted on 8 April 2014 by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Freeman.

12. Thus the appeal came before me today.

13. Mr Tarlow resisted the appellant's argument that the judge's  error  in
    allowing the appeal under Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive
    was not material and that in essence the material error  of  the  judge
    was to provide inadequate reasoning as to why the expert  evidence  was
    preferred to that of the respondent's own Country of Origin Information
    Service Report.   He  summarised  his  submissions  by  describing  the
    respondent's position as a "reasons challenge".

14. Mr Bradshaw resisted the arguments of Mr  Tarlow  in  relation  to  the
    judge's reasoning.  He submitted that proper account had been taken not
    only of the background material and  expert  report  submitted  by  the
    appellant but also that too of the respondent which is detailed  within
    the determination.  There is clear reasoning to be  gleaned  from,  for
    example, paragraphs 69 and 71 of the judge's  determination  where  the
    judge describes being impressed by the  expert  report  of  Ms  Vickers
    which he finds to show knowledge not only of the  legal  and  political
    situation in Albania but also information  gleaned  from  comparatively
    recent discussions with local officials.  The judge accepts Ms Vickers'
    report and finds her "reasoning convincing" as to any expectation  that
    the appellant can relocate and also, given that the appellant would  be
    expected to return to northern Albania the absence of a sufficiency  of
    protection consequent upon an unwillingness to provide there protection
    against domestic violence.

15. As to the Humanitarian Protection aspect of the  appeal  being  allowed
    under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive Mr Bradshaw  submits
    that this is an error but not a material one.  The  judge  should  have
    allowed it under Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive.   It  is
    though clear from the determination and the judge's findings  that  the
    appellant would succeed under this Article.  The reference therefore to
    Article 15(c) is an error but not one I find to be material.

16. Mr Bradshaw submitted that the judge  made  a  material  error  in  not
    finding the appellant a member of a particular social group whereby  he
    would be entitled to the grant of asylum.  He submitted  that  being  a
    child is not  "far  too  wide  a  class"  and  is  indeed  the  correct
    definition of a particular social group in this  appeal.   To  seek  to
    narrow it further carries the  risk  of  defining  a  social  group  by
    reference to the persecution which was one of the submissions  made  on
    behalf of the appellant at the hearing before Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Clarke.  The judge finds at paragraph 71 of his  determination
    that although matters are improving to a degree "There is  unlikely  to
    be a satisfactory response" in a rural area in the  north  of  Albania,
    where the appellant is from, despite the existence of a legal  duty  on
    the police.  As the failure of state protection is  due  (at  least  in
    part) to attitudes towards children who  report  such  matters,  it  is
    submitted by Mr Bradshaw that the judge fell into  material  error  and
    that the appellant is entitled to succeed in  his  asylum  claim  as  a
    member of a particular social group - a child.

17. I do not find that the judge erred as submitted by the respondent by an
    absence of reasoning.  There is plainly an error  in  relation  to  the
    reliance upon Article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive  but  when
    looking at the  totality  of  the  findings  made  by  the  judge,  and
    particularly in light of the agreed factual matrix, I  find  that  such
    error is not a material one in all the circumstances.  As to the  issue
    of the judge's reasoning, or lack of it, I find  that  not  to  be  the
    case.  The judge has given cogent and sustainable  reasons  which  were
    fully open to him on the evidence for preferring the  analysis  of  the
    current background situation in Albania provided by Ms Vickers to  that
    within the Country of Origin Information Service Report.  He has  taken
    proper account of the background material and  provided  relevant  case
    law.  He has set the appellant's circumstances and the  agreed  factual
    matrix into the background material and  has  taken  into  account  and
    given reasons as to why he prefers the evidence of Ms Vickers  to  that
    provided by the respondent.  It includes an acceptance of material from
    her of a comparatively recent nature.

18. That leaves the appellant's contention that  the  judge  erred  in  not
    granting him asylum.

19. "Membership of a particular social group"  is  the  Refugee  Convention
    reason whose constitution is the most opaque and is  often  subject  to
    debate and argument.  Various groups have been  recognised  under  this
    category including, for example, women as a  particular  social  group,
    homosexuals as a particular social group and  family  as  a  particular
    social group.

20. In SSHD v K  and  Fornah  [2006]  UKHL  46  Lord  Bingham  derived  the
    following  principles  from  the  legal   authorities   including   the
    Qualification Directive.   Firstly,  the  Refugee  Convention  was  not
    concerned with all cases of discrimination, only with persecution based
    on discrimination, the  making  of  distinctions  which  principles  of
    fundamental human rights regarded as inconsistent  with  the  right  of
    every human being.  Secondly, to identify a social group the society of
    which it formed part had to be first identified;  a  particular  social
    group might be recognisable as such in one country but not in  another.
    Thirdly, a social group need not be cohesive to be recognised as  such.
    Fourthly, there could only be a particular social group if  it  existed
    independently of the persecution to which it was subject.

21. Lord Bingham indicated that a particular social  group  may  be  formed
    either because its members  share  a  characteristic  which  cannot  or
    should not be  changed  (the  protected  characteristics  approach)  or
    because they are  perceived  as  having  a  distinct  identity  by  the
    surrounding society (the social  perception  approach).   Lord  Bingham
    noted EU Council Directive 2004/83/EC Article 10(d)(i) and  (ii)  which
    were effectively reproduced at  Regulation  6(d)(i)  and  (ii)  of  the
    Qualification Regulations but said that if  (i)  and  (ii)  had  to  be
    satisfied then the test in the Regulations was more stringent than  was
    warranted by international authority.  He said that  the  Qualification
    Directive should not be read as requiring both features to  be  present
    in order for there to be a social group for the purposes of the Refugee
    Convention.  Either will do.  It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  the
    decision goes beyond what the House of Lords said in Shah and Islam and
    Others v SSHD HL [1999] INLR 144.  Lord Bingham  also  noted  that  the
    UNHCR's view that, whilst social group could  not  be  defined  by  the
    persecution, persecutory action towards a group  might  be  a  relevant
    factor in determining the visibility  of  the  group  in  a  particular
    society.  Lord Rodger of Earlsferry in the same case felt  that  it  is
    not necessary that all the members of  a  social  group  be  persecuted
    before one could say that people are being persecuted  for  reasons  of
    their membership of that group but it is generally necessary  that  all
    members of the group should be susceptible to persecution.

22. In Shah and Islam (above) Steyn LJ said:

         "A particular social group consisted of  a  group  of  persons  who
         share a common immutable characteristic that either was beyond  the
         power of an individual to  change  or  was  so  fundamental  to  an
         individual's identity  or  conscience  that  it  ought  not  to  be
         required to be changed."

    The group must exist independently of the persecution.

23. Mr Bradshaw has assisted me in reminding me  of  the  authority  of  ST
    (Child asylum seekers) Sri Lanka  [2013]  UKUT  00292  (IAC)  where  at
    paragraph 22 the Tribunal stated:

         "22. We have no doubt that if a real risk of harm to S on return is
             made out in this case, either because of risk arising from the
             conduct of his parents or because  S,  or  any  child  without
             family or friends to turn to, was highly vulnerable to  sexual
             abuse in one form or another, an asylum claim or  a  claim  to
             humanitarian protection could be made  out.   We  accept  that
             children can be a  social  group  and  face  a  real  risk  of
             persecution as such: children under  one  year  old  in  King
             Herod's Bethlehem being an obvious case in point.   That  does
             not mean that any risk of serious harm that might happen to  a
             child in his or her country of origin necessarily  makes  that
             child a refugee."





24. Also paragraph 68 where the Tribunal continues:

         "68. In assessing social group persecution, we remind ourselves  of
              Lord Hoffman's observations in Shah and Islam that questions
             of particular social group and  persecution for  a  convention
             reason need to  be  assessed  against  the  particular  social
             context  and  the  question  of   discriminatory   denial   of
             protection:

                  'To what social group, if any, did the appellants  belong?
                  To identify a social group, one must  first  identify  the
                  society of which it forms  a  part.   In  this  case,  the
                  society is plainly that of Pakistan.  Within that society,
                  it seems to me that women form a social group of the  kind
                  contemplated by the  Convention.   Discrimination  against
                  women in matters of fundamental human rights on the ground
                  that they are women  is  plainly  in  pari  materiae  with
                  discrimination on grounds of  race.   It  offends  against
                  their rights  as  human  beings  to  equal  treatment  and
                  respect'

             and

                  'What  is  the  reason  for  the  persecution  which   the
                  appellants fear?  Here it is important to notice  that  it
                  is made up of two elements.  First, there is the threat of
                  violence to Mrs Islam by her  husband  and  his  political
                  friends and to  Mrs  Shah  by  her  husband.   This  is  a
                  personal affair, directed  against  them  as  individuals.
                  Secondly, there is the inability or unwillingness  of  the
                  State to do anything to protect them.   There  is  nothing
                  personal about this.  The  evidence  was  that  the  State
                  would not assist them because they were women.  It  denied
                  them a protection against violence  which  it  would  have
                  given to men.  These two elements have to be  combined  to
                  constitute  persecution  within   the   meaning   of   the
                  Convention.    As   the   Gender   Guidelines   for    the
                  Determination of Asylum Claims in the UK (published by the
                  Refugee Women's Legal Group in July 1988) succinctly  puts
                  it (at p. 5): 'Persecution = Serious Harm + The Failure of
                  State Protection.'"

25. The question which therefore arises is whether Judge  Clarke  erred  in
    defining the class to which this particular  appellant  belonged  as  a
    child alone cannot constitute a particular social group because  it  is
    "far too wide" a class of persons.  Is it an error?  I find that it is.

26. This is an appellant  whose  persecution  comprises  not  only  of  the
    violence and threat of violence from his father (which  is  a  personal
    matter) but also the inability or unwillingness of the  Albanian  state
    to do anything to protect him (which is not a  personal  matter).   The
    judge found as a fact that the appellant had approached the police  and
    they failed to respond to his plight because he was a child.  This  was
    accepted  by  the  judge.   The  inactivity  of  the  police  in   such
    circumstances  was  supported  by  the  background  material   and   in
    particular the expert evidence of Ms Vickers which is recorded  by  the
    judge at paragraph 45 of his determination where he accepted the expert
    evidence that it was doubtful if  the  police  would  have  helped  the
    appellant.  In poor, remote areas such as Peshkopi,  domestic  violence
    was still a taboo subject

         "something which remains strictly within the family  walls  and  is
         considered a very private matter.  Indeed in a community where sons
         and often mothers and  daughters  are  regularly  beaten  by  their
         fathers/husbands, the appellant's appeal to the  local  police  for
         help would almost certainly have fallen on deaf ears.  The Peshkopi
         police are very provincial and would  have  not  have  thought  the
         matter of a son being  beaten  by  his  father  as  something  that
         concerned them."

27. As the judge found that although matters may be improving to  a  degree
    within  the  appellant's  home  country  there  is  unlikely  to  be  a
    satisfactory response in the rural area of the north of Albania to  his
    plight despite the legal duty on the police coupled with the failure of
    state protection being due to attitudes  towards  children  who  report
    such matters, I find that the judge has erred and that the appellant is
    a member of a particular social group (children) entitled to the  grant
    of asylum.

Summary

28. For the reasons detailed above the judge did not err either  materially
    or otherwise as asserted by the respondent.

29. For the reasons detailed above the judge did err  as  asserted  by  the
    appellant.

30. I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

31. I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it on asylum grounds.

32. As the appellant is granted asylum he is not entitled  to  Humanitarian
    Protection.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 2 July 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
