
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09071/2015
     AA/09072/2015
     AA/09074/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 March 2016                               |On 13 April 2016              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON



                                   Between

                          MS K P (FIRST appellant)
                          Mr A A (SECOND appellant)
                         MISS S A (THIRD appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Wells, Counsel, instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Nature of Appeal

 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan, born on [ ] 1969, [ ] 1995 and
    [ ] 1996  respectively.   The  second  and  third  appellants  are  the
    children of the first appellant.  The appellants appealed  against  the
    decisions of 7 July 2014 to remove the appellants from the UK and  also
    appealed against the decisions of 3 June 2015 refusing their protection
    claims.

 2. The appeals were heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Anthony  on
    10 December 2015.  On 30 December  2015  Judge  Anthony  dismissed  the
    appellants' appeals on all grounds.

 3. The appellants appealed against the dismissal  of  their  appeals  with
    permission.  The appeals came before me.



Ground 1

 4. The appellants' first ground of appeal was on the basis that the  judge
    had misdirected herself in relation to Section 8 of the Immigration and
    Asylum (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 at [20]  to  [23]  of  the
    decision. The judge considered section 8 of the  Asylum  &  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 and it was contended by Mr  Wells
    that the judge gave a separate consideration to Section 8  rather  than
    applying the correct approach as set out in JT (Cameroon)  [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 878.  In  addition  it  was  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in
    concluding that the appellants' behaviour engaged Section 8 as  it  was
    contended that the factual basis of their claim had been advanced in  a
    human rights claim made in 2013, well before the  immigration  decision
    had been taken and therefore section 8(5) did not apply; it was further
    contended that even if it did, the judge erred in concluding  that  the
    appellants' behaviour damaged their credibility as they had not  sought
    to mislead as the  factual  basis  of  their  claim  had  already  been
    asserted.

 5. I find no merit in this ground.  The judge made clear findings at  [21]
    of the  Decision  and  Reasons  as  to  why  she  did  not  accept  the
    submissions that the basis of the claim had been made earlier, in their
    2013 applications.  The judge made clear findings that  the  appellants
    did not present their claim as such and had legal advice when doing  so
    and that there was no explanation as to why they did  not claim  asylum
    at that time.  The judge was entitled to make  the  findings  that  she
    did.

 6. I am further not satisfied that the  judge  erred  in  relation  to  JT
    (Cameroon) as it is clear, looking at the  decision  in  its  entirety,
    that the findings of fact addressed all the evidence in the round.  The
    judge also reminded herself at  [23]  that  despite  credibility  being
    undermined this does  not  mean  the  account  is  untrue.   I  am  not
    satisfied that there is any error in ground 1.



Ground 2

 7. This related to the standard of proof applied; the  grounds  of  appeal
    and the  oral  submissions  from  Mr  Wells  referred  to  the  judge's
    references at [30] to matters being "unlikely" and  at  [35]  to  being
    "not probable".  It was submitted  that  the  judge  had  confused  the
    standard of proof.

 8. However, I am satisfied at [30]  that  the  judge's  use  of  the  word
    "unlikely"  related  to  the  plausibility  of  the  first  appellant's
    statements rather than to the standard of  proof  applied.   The  judge
    clearly directed himself as to the correct legal  provisions  including
    at [16] that the appellants had to establish that  they  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution or that they face a real  risk  of  serious
    harm.  The judge also set out at [19] that the appellants had to show a
    "real risk or reasonable likelihood".

 9. The judge also at [34] and [46] directed  herself  as  to  the  correct
    standard of proof and reminded herself at [46] that  she  had  "already
    rejected the appellants' accounts of past harassment  and  threats  and
    risks on return.  In so doing I apply the lower standard of proof." The
    fact that the judge referred to the events being unlikely and again  at
    [35] to something not being "probable" is not determinative.   Although
    it might have been clearer had the judge not used these phrases,  on  a
    reading of the entirety of the  judge's  Decision  and  Reasons  it  is
    evident that she had the correct standard of proof in mind, in relation
    to both past events and future risk,  when  assessing  the  appellants'
    claim.  There is no error of law disclosed in this ground.



Ground 3

10. This was the main thrust of the appellants' argument before me in  oral
    submissions from Mr Wells.  It was submitted that at [32] Judge Anthony
    expressed her conclusion that the appellants'  account  was  unreliable
    and therefore she could not attach any evidential weight to the written
    statements of Mr Nasar and Mr Jahangir or Mr Jahangir's oral  evidence.



11. At [33] the judge found:

         "Because I find the  appellants'  accounts  are  unreliable,  I  am
         unable to ascribe any evidential weight to the Bedfordshire  police
         compliment slip and letter or to the oral  evidence  given  by  the
         appellants' brother Mr Jihangir and  the  written  evidence  of  Mr
         Nasar."

12. It was submitted that the judge had misdirected herself in  the  manner
    described in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367;  [2005]  INLR  377.   It  was
    submitted  that  the   first   appellant's   brother's   evidence   was
    corroborative of the account and should have  been  considered  in  the
    round with the remaining evidence  including  the  Bedfordshire  police
    compliment slip and letter.

13. However, it is clear, including from the witness statements,  that  the
    evidence from Mr Nasar and  Mr  Jahangir  related  to  what  the  first
    appellant had told her brothers, Mr Jahangir and Mr Nasar.   (Mr  Nasar
    was not present at the hearing, being in Turkey).

14. However, both of the first appellant's brothers were providing evidence
    as to what their sister, the appellant, had told them  in  relation  to
    her clamed difficulties in Pakistan.  Both the appellants' brothers are
    resident in the UK and it was not argued that they were not resident in
    the UK at the relevant time  that  the  first  appellant  claims  these
    events occurred in Pakistan.

15. In this context, I am not satisfied that there  is  any  error  in  the
    judge's consideration of the  evidence.   The  judge  found  the  first
    appellant not to be credible and was entitled not to attach any  weight
    to what her brothers' stated that she had told them.

16. Mibanga reminds that all the evidence must be considered in the  round.
    Although this issue might  have  been  expressed  more  clearly,  I  am
    satisfied that the correct approach was followed. There is no error  in
    the judge's findings in their entirety.

Notice of Decision

17. The appellants' appeal is dismissed.  The decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand. No error of law is disclosed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
