
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09104/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th July 2016                      |On 8th August 2016                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [T M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwncyz, Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Soltani of Iris Law Firm


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Holmes made following a hearing at North Shields on 1st February  2016.



Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe  born  on  [  ]  1985.   He  was
    arrested on 30th December 2014 at  Belfast  Airport  in  possession  of
    identity documents to which he was not entitled on suspicion of  having
    entered the UK illegally.  He claimed asylum and  his  application  was
    refused on 12th May 2015.

 3. The claimant said that he was a refugee from Zimbabwe  because  he  was
    perceived  in  that  country  to  be  a  homosexual  and  had  suffered
    persecution in the past at the hands of both  members  of  the  general
    population and the state authorities.  He was  an  actively  homosexual
    man and would wish to live openly as such.  He also  claimed  to  be  a
    family member of an MDC activist who has been granted refugee status in
    the UK and would be identified as a person of interest to the CIO  upon
    return to the airport.

 4. The judge had considerable doubts about much of  the  claimant's  story
    but he was satisfied that he was in an active sexual relationship  with
    a UK national and that his current sexual preference was for  sex  with
    other men.  He allowed the appeal on the basis that it was realistic to
    infer either that the claimant would feel unable to pursue  his  sexual
    interests through fear or that if he did so he  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecutory ill-treatment.

 5. He also allowed the appeal because he was satisfied that  there  was  a
    real risk of persecutory ill-treatment at the  airport.   He  wrote  as
    follows

         "It is argued before me that the appellant is without a  Zimbabwean
         passport and thus the authorities would  have  to  issue  a  travel
         document to him before he could be returned.  Whether by way  of  a
         replacement passport or  by  way  of  an  ETD  it  is  argued  that
         inquiries into the appellant's identity would disclose  the  family
         link between the appellant and his mother and thus lead him  to  be
         perceived as MDC.  There is  merit  in  that  argument,  given  the
         Tribunal's acceptance of his mother's account, even if there is  no
         merit in the claim that the appellant is already perceived  by  the
         CIO to be homosexual.  Thus I accept that there is a real risk that
         he would be identified by the CIO as of interest to them  from  the
         passenger  manifest  in  advance  of  arrival,  based  upon   their
         intelligence activities.  Thus there is a real risk of second stage
         questioning by the CIO, and thus I am satisfied that he would  face
         a real risk of ill-treatment amounting to persecution, or a  breach
         of their Article 3 rights, as a result of,  or  in  the  course  of
         inquiries at the airport by, or on behalf of the CIO."

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had materially erred in law by  departing  from  the  country
    guidance case of LZ (homosexuals) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT  00487  which
    concluded that there was  no  general  risk  to  gays  or  lesbians  in
    Zimbabwe.

 7. It was also argued that the judge had  departed  from  CM  (EM  country
    guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 in holding that the
    claimant would be at risk on return on account of his  links  with  the
    MDC.  He had no MDC profile and would not be at risk; the fact that his
    mother was granted asylum in 2007 did not establish that  the  claimant
    would be in difficulty now.

Submissions

 8. Mr Diwncyz relied on his grounds  in  relation  to  the  LZ  point  but
    accepted that, in reality, his grounds had not engaged with  the  basis
    upon which the judge had allowed the appeal in relation to his mother's
    political profile.

Findings and Conclusions

 9. As Mr Diwncyz properly acknowledged, the judge did not allow the appeal
    because of the claimant's own MDC profile.  It was his  case,  and  the
    judge was entitled to accept it, that the risk  to  him  arose  at  the
    point of return when he would be likely to be identified as the son  of
    a refugee.  Ms Soltani reminded me that the  claimant's  mother  had  a
    reasonably significant profile in Zimbabwe,  it  having  been  accepted
    that she was of interest to the then Vice President, Simon Muzenda  who
    had in fact visited her farm shortly before she was  evicted  and  then
    severely assaulted by war  veterans  there.   The  Vice  President  had
    subsequently taken over the farm.

10. The grounds simply fail to  engage  with  the  core  of  the  decision.
    Accordingly whether or not his conclusions  with  respect  to  risk  on
    return as a gay man were or were not adequately reasoned is  immaterial
    to the decision.

Notice of Decision

11. The original judge did not err in law and  his  decision  stands.   The
    Secretary of State's appeal fails.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 7 August 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
