
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09682/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2015                      |On 31 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              AHMED ABDO MAREY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Rai, Counsel instructed by Freemans Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the respondent's appeal.  The appellant or the claimant  as  he
    will be called in the determination is a Syrian national although  this
    was disputed.  He claimed asylum on the basis of political opinion.  In
    a decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Aziz  he  allowed  the  asylum
    appeal on the basis that he found the claimant was at risk as a  failed
    asylum seeker.  That determination was promulgated on 20 February 2015.



2.   In grounds of appeal or  rather  application  the  Secretary  of  State
    contended that the First-tier Tribunal had made contradictory  findings
    that could not be reconciled.  Firstly, that the claimant was a  Syrian
    national and yet the First-tier Tribunal found his account for  leaving
    Syria to be untrue.  It was further submitted that too much weight  had
    been placed on  the  witness  who  gave  evidence  in  support  of  the
    claimant's claim and insufficient evidence on the language and analysis
    report.

3.   Permission was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  who
    identified AB (witness corroboration in asylum appeals) Somalia  [2004]
    UKIAT 00125 as being helpful.  In his decision the First-tier  Tribunal
    set out in detail the reasons for  refusal,  the  claimant's  interview
    responses showing poor knowledge  of  Syria  and  he  referred  to  the
    linguistic report in which he  found  some  consistency  with  Egyptian
    Arabic and he further considered that there were inconsistencies in the
    claimant's asylum interview and also identified matters  under  Section
    8.

4.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  nationality  and  referred   to
    relevant case law including MA as to disputed nationality and  also  RB
    (linguistic evidence) Somalia [2010] UKUT 329 (IAC) and finally  to  MN
    (Somalia) as to the weight and approach to linguistic analysis reports.
     Against that background the First-tier Tribunal conducted  a  detailed
    and focused analysis of the evidence as regards nationality.  Weight is
    attached to the linguistic report but the Tribunal critically  examines
    that in the light of all of the evidence before the Tribunal.

5.   The Tribunal goes on to look at  the  claimant's  asylum  interview  as
    regards his knowledge of Syria and takes the view that it  is  a  mixed
    picture.  He finds however that his responses are consistent  with  his
    educational background.  He hears oral evidence from the  claimant  and
    also evidence from a witness which he finds consistent.  I am satisfied
    that  the  Tribunal  had  clearly  considered   evidence   as   regards
    nationality and separately considered the evidence as to the claimant's
    fears in Syria.  The Tribunal placed no weight on the hearsay  evidence
    of the witness as regards the circumstances of the claimant's departure
    from Syria.

6.   In conclusion the Tribunal  makes  specific  findings  and  reasons  in
    support of his decision and highlights the contradictory nature of  the
    evidence that was before the Tribunal.  The final decision is based  on
    a risk on return as a failed asylum seeker and reliance on KB.

5.   I have heard submissions this morning from both representatives  and  I
    have decided that there is no material error of law in the decision.  I
    am satisfied that the Tribunal did consider other evidence, not  simply
    that as of the witness as corroboration of the claimant's  account  and
    the witness's identity was accepted by the Secretary of State  and  the
    fact that he was from Aleppo.  In a carefully considered  decision  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  has  explained  how  and  why  it   reached   the
    conclusions it did  in  the  face  of  contradictory  evidence.   I  am
    satisfied that the two sets of findings are reconcilable.

6.   As to the issue raised at the hearing this  morning  on  the  risks  of
    return for asylum seekers this was not a matter that was  raised  as  a
    ground in the application relied on by the respondent.

Notice of Decision

7.   I am satisfied therefore that the Tribunal judge  correctly  considered
    all of the issues, applied the relevant law and, in particular,  relied
    on the up to date  country  guidance  case  of  KB.   Accordingly,  the
    determination shall stand and the appeal by the Secretary of  State  is
    dismissed.

8.   No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

