
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09111/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent:          |
|On 2nd June 2014                              |On 2nd July 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                   MR K N
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Seehra, instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 18th July 1988  and  he
    appeals against a decision to remove him as an illegal entrant from the
    UK by way of directions under paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2  to  the
    Immigration Act 1971 following a decision to refuse  him  asylum  under
    paragraph 336  of  HC  395  as  amended,  humanitarian  protection  and
    protection under the European Convention.  The  decision  was  made  on
    19th June 2013.

The Immigration History

 2. The appellant left Sri Lanka on 1st October 2009 and flew direct to the
    UK arriving at Heathrow Airport the same day.  He travelled on his  own
    national passport and entered the UK on a Tier 4 visa valid  from  15th
    September 2009 to 17th April 2011.  This was initially  extended  until
    28th June 2013 but curtailed on 3rd  October  2012  with  no  right  of
    appeal.  On 4th June 2013 he requested an appointment with  the  Asylum
    Screening Unit in Croydon and attended as required on 10th  June  2013.
    His asylum claim was formally lodged on 19th June 2013.

 3. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ross heard the appellant's  appeal  on
    30th October 2013 and dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 4. An application for permission to appeal was lodged by the appellant  on
    the basis that the judge failed to engage properly with the evidence in
    GJ and Others [2013] UKUT 00319.  Paragraph 170 of GJ.   This  referred
    to the evidence of Mr Anton Punethanayagam to the effect that given the
    prevalence of bribery and corruption in Sri Lanka having left Sri Lanka
    without difficulty  was  probative  lack  of  adverse  interest  in  an
    individual.

 5. It was further submitted by the  appellant's  representative  that  the
    judge found there was no reason to believe that the  appellant  was  of
    continuing interest to the authorities but failed to make  findings  or
    engage with the evidence from Wellawatte police station (page 18 of the
    appellant's bundle).  The judge failed to engage with the evidence that
    the appellant was accused of providing bomb making  powder  to  another
    LTTE member and he confessed his membership during detention.

 6. With regard to the sur place activity there was no suggestion that  the
    appellant's sur place activities were contrived to bolster  his  asylum
    claim either in cross-examination or in submissions.

 7. In oral evidence the appellant explained he had been  up  to  seven  or
    eight demonstrations since 2012 and therefore the  assumption  that  he
    attended only after his curtailment was misconceived and speculative.

 8. Further the judge confined his assessment of GJ by failing to  consider
    relevant submissions and background evidence.  It was highlighted  that
    the Sri  Lankan  authority's  perception  of  the  individual  remained
    important.  The judge made no  findings  on  the  appellant's  previous
    arrest,  concession,  ill-treatment  and  detention  and  evidence   of
    continuing visits.

 9. The judge referred to TS (Political  opponents-risk)  Burma  CG  [2013]
    UKUT 00281.  The judge provided no reasons for finding the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities would not be interested in the  appellant's  attendance  at
    demonstrations.  The appellant's face was clearly identifiable.

10.  Further  it  was  for  the  judge  to  apply  the   UNHCR   guidelines
    independently and he failed to engage with this submission  and  failed
    to consider the UNHCR guidelines.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Phillips
    on the basis that the judge found at paragraph  15  the  appellant  had
    given a broadly credible and consistent account and had not exaggerated
    his role and yet had gone on to  state  that  his  assertion  that  his
    father and the police were  not  looking  for  him  was  not  credible.
    Further, the judge's finding that the activities in the United  Kingdom
    were an attempt to bolster his claim was not only inconsistent with the
    positive credibility findings generally but also unfair  when  no  such
    allegation was made at the hearing.

12. Further, First-tier Tribunal Judge Lewis found an error of law in  that
    the judge did not engage with the evidence at pages 18 and  19  of  the
    appellant's bundle. This was that he had been summoned  to  the  police
    station in November 2009 after the war had ended in connection  with  a
    statement made by an arrested  LTTE  terrorist  suspect  and  that  the
    appellant's own evidence in his statement was that the authorities  had
    visited his home in 2009, 2011 and 2013.

13. Judge Lewis found that the composite weight of the  evidence  including
    the video of the appellant attending a demonstration  in  October  2013
    against Britain attending the Commonwealth conference in Sri Lanka, the
    background evidence about the monitoring of separatist activity  abroad
    and the appellant's own history precluded, as being against the  weight
    of the evidence, the judicial finding that  the  appellant's  political
    activities in the UK were of no interest to the authorities.

14. Judge Lewis preserved the determination of Judge Ross for  its  primary
    findings of fact about events in Sri Lanka but he set it aside  to  the
    extent of its findings about events in the UK  and  its  assessment  of
    risk.

The Hearing

15. At the hearing Miss Seehra made an application for  an  adjournment  on
    the basis that there was DVD  evidence  which  required  a  transcript,
    family letters to be obtained and which  had  been  very  difficult  to
    obtain because the father had been in detention, although  he  was  now
    released and direct communication  with  him  was  problematical.   She
    further submitted that the Court of Appeal had yet to decide the matter
    with reference to the Upper Tribunal country guidance case of GJ.

16. Mr Deller submitted that he was in neutral on the  adjournment  and  he
    pointed out that GJ remained a reported case.

17. I gave directions that the matter would  proceed  but  today's  hearing
    would be confined to an observation of the DVD evidence which  had  yet
    to be observed.

18. This DVD evidence was observed until 11.35 at which point  Miss  Seehra
    confirmed that she had a further court hearing at 2 o'clock.

19. The matter was adjourned part heard to 28th April.

20. Regrettably the hearing on 28th April had to vacated because Mr  Deller
    was unavailable but at  the  resumed  hearing  on  2nd  June  2014  the
    appellant again attended and adopted his statement and circled  himself
    on the photographs of him at demonstrations and in  particular  of  him
    playing a drum.

21. Mr Deller in cross-examination asked the appellant if  there  any  more
    news from his family in Sri Lanka and the appellant responded that  his
    brother had been sent by his parents to Trincomalee where  one  of  his
    aunts lived.  His brother was already there.

22. He confirmed that he thought his father was detained  just  before  the
    end of 2013 because of the authority's interest in the appellant.   The
    appellant confirmed that when the authorities were searching for him in
    2009 his father told them  that  he  was  in  the  UK.   The  appellant
    confirmed that he had been on lots of demonstrations and that they were
    trying to do what they could, although he did not know if it was  going
    to work.

23. Mr Deller in submissions confirmed  that  Designated  Judge  Lewis  had
    reserved a number of findings with regards to credibility in the  error
    of law drawn up by him.  The case must still be looked at  through  the
    prism of GJ which was country guidance.   In  essence  the  appellant's
    profile as identified by the First-tier Tribunal must be viewed in  the
    light  of  the  quantity  of  evidence  shown  that  he  had   attended
    demonstrations.  The question is whether there was any interest in him.
     The First-tier Tribunal had been criticised for having  no  regard  to
    the document from the police station.  Further there was  letters  from
    the family which needed to be taken into account although  they  had  a
    limited evidential weight because they were members of the family.  The
    question was whether the evidence  now  took  the  appellant  over  the
    threshold such that he may be considered at risk  if  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka.  The burden of proof was on the appellant.

24. Miss Seehra referred to her skeleton argument and Judge Ross'  previous
    findings.  He had found him broadly credible.  This was someone with  a
    prior history with the LTTE and somebody who had been tortured  in  Sri
    Lanka.  Paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules was  relevant  in  that
    the appellant had been subjected to previous torture and therefore  his
    fear was well-founded unless he had a good reason to  suggest  that  it
    would not be repeated.

25. Miss Seehra referred to paragraphs 170, 113 and 275  of  GJ  and  these
    identified that it was possible to bribe the  authorities  for  release
    from detention and also bribe officials to facilitate  departures  from
    Sri Lanka.  The family member letters and the documents from the police
    were before the First-tier Tribunal but no findings had  been  made  on
    those.

26. The authorities had continued interest in people who were suspected  to
    links to the LTTE and this was evidenced in the  UNHCR  guidelines  and
    the US State Department Report.  It was noted that the  visits  by  the
    police coincided with the end of the visas such as the  expiry  of  the
    visa in 2011.  This was not something that the appellant had stated but
    was evidenced from the fact.

27. There is evidence in  GJ  at  paragraph  324,  326  and  179  of  phone
    monitoring, surveillance and face mapping.

28. Further Amnesty International Report referred to family  members  being
    harassed and there was also reference to the fact that individuals were
    arrested, released and re-arrested by the authorities.

29. Attendance at  demonstrations  was  monitored  and  the  appellant  had
    supplied evidence of him at such demonstrations by way  of  photographs
    and  DVDs.   These  photographs  appeared  on  the  internet  and   the
    photographs did appear on YouTube.   The  photographs  show  the  Tamil
    Eelam flag and placards and could be found on a Google search and  thus
    easily on the  internet.   It  was  well-known  that  Tamil  Eelam  was
    fighting for independence of the Tamil state.

30. There was evidence that the appellant had attended  the  December  2012
    Downing Street protest and  this  protest  was  organised  by  TYO.   A
    further demonstration attended by the appellant was  in  February  2014
    and this was also organised by TYO.   There  was  evidence  within  the
    bundle at page 7 that this was an organisation now banned  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities.  It was clear from the transcripts of the  CD  that
    the protest was against Rajapaksa, the Sri Lankan  President,  and  was
    promoting the goal of the Tamil Eelam which  was  adverse  to  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities.  The most recent demonstrations  in  February  2014
    evidence at page 85 of the appellant's bundle  show  that  at  the  Sri
    Lankan High Commission officials came  out  to  take  the  photographs.
    There were references in GJ to the Diaspora being  infiltrated  by  the
    authorities and that facial mapping techniques were adopted.

31. She submitted that the  authorities  would  take  an  interest  in  the
    appellant and were already monitoring him.  If he was not taken at  the
    airport and not on the stop list he will be on a watch list  and  would
    be visited once at home.  There was a concession  by  the  Home  Office
    that if suspects were detained there was a real risk that they would be
    subjected  to  ill-treatment.   This  was  acknowledged  in  GJ.    She
    submitted that he fell within the category of GJ and even if that  were
    not accepted he fell  within  the  UNHCR  guidelines  as  he  had  been
    suspected of being involved with the LTTE.

Conclusions

32. GJ and Others (Post civil war returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319
    (IAC) has established that the focus of  the  Sri  Lankan  Government's
    concern has changed since the civil war ended in May 2009 and that  the
    government's present objective is to identify Tamil  activists  in  the
    Diaspora who were working for Tamil separatism and to  destabilise  the
    unitary Sri Lankan state.

33. What was accepted in GJ was that if a person is  detained  by  the  Sri
    Lankan security services there remains a real risk of ill-treatment  or
    harm requiring international protection and  that  internal  relocation
    was not an option.

34. It was accepted that  the  risk  for  those  in  whom  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities were interested in existed not necessarily at  the  airport
    but after arrival in their home  area  where  their  arrival  would  be
    verified by the CID or police within days.

35. The head note of GJ confirmed that individuals who were perceived to be
    a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state  because  they
    were perceived to have a significant role in relation to post  conflict
    Tamil separatism within the Diaspora and were those  who  would  be  at
    risk.

36. It was also acknowledged that the Sri Lankan authority's  approach  was
    based on sophisticated intelligence both as to  activities  within  Sri
    Lanka and in the Diaspora.  The authorities knew that many Sri  Lankans
    had travelled abroad as economic migrants and that an individual's past
    history would only be relevant to the extent that it was  perceived  by
    the Sri Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the  unitary
    Sri Lankan state or to the Sri Lankan Government.

37. GJ set out that if the monitoring did not indicate that such  a  person
    was a Tamil activist working to destabilise the Sri Lankan  state  they
    would be reasonably unlikely to be  detained  by  the  security  forces
    although this proposition was framed  in  the  negative  such  that  if
    monitoring did not indicate that such a person  that  individual  would
    not be reasonably be likely to be detained.

38. Paragraph 288 of GJ referred to the revised UNHCR guidelines issued  on
    21st December 2012 which reflected the post  conflict  changes  in  Sri
    Lanka nonetheless they were issued very  soon  after  the  end  of  the
    conflict.   This  list  of   groups   required   particularly   careful
    examination as to who would be in need of international protection  and
    those identified were those "persons suspected of  certain  links  with
    the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam LTTE".  This also depended on  the
    specifics of the individual case and included "former  LTTE  supporters
    who may never have undergone military training  but  were  involved  in
    sheltering or transporting LTTE personnel or the supply  and  transport
    of goods for the LTTE" and further  "LTTE  fundraisers  and  propaganda
    activists and those with, or perceived as having had, links to the  Sri
    Lankan Diaspora that provided funding and other support to the LTTE".

39. The UNHCR guidelines would appear to be  wider  than  those  categories
    adopted by GJ. Nonetheless the Tribunal in GJ confirmed that the  UNHCR
    guidelines had assisted them in reaching their conclusions.

40.  However,  I  must  consider  all  of  the  evidence   and   particular
    circumstances in relation to the present appellant and  I  do  so  with
    reference to GJ.

41. Paragraph 303 of GJ refers to the Government  of  Sri  Lanka  as  being
    "reasonably confident that  there  is  a  low  risk  of  resurgence  of
    internal armed conflict from within Sri Lanka".  But it refers  to  the
    risk of resurgent coming from the Diaspora which included hotspots such
    as London.  As evidenced the government's concern is now not with  past
    membership or sympathy but whether a person is a  destabilising  threat
    in post conflict Sri Lanka.

42. Nonetheless, although the government of Sri Lanka would be  aware  that
    many were economic migrants returning to Sri Lanka, the past history of
    the appellant must be of relevance and it is  against  this  background
    that I consider the circumstances of the appellant.  I also  note  that
    paragraph 336 of GJ referred to the fact that the  former  Tamil  areas
    and Diaspora are  heavily  penetrated  by  the  security  services  and
    "photographs were taken of public demonstrations and the  GOSL  may  be
    using face recognition technology".

43. At paragraph 331 GJ, overall, concluded regarding Diaspora  activities,
    that  the  Government  of  Sri  Lanka  has  sophisticated  intelligence
    enabling it to distinguish those who are actively involved  in  seeking
    to revive and refund the separatist movement  within  Diaspora  with  a
    view  to  destabilising  and  attendance  at  one   or   even   several
    demonstrations in the Diaspora is not of itself evidence that a  person
    is a committed Tamil  activist  seeking  to  promote  Tamil  separatism
    within Sri Lanka.

44. As stated in GJ it is not the attendance  at  a  demonstration  in  the
    Diaspora alone which is sufficient to create a real risk or  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that a person would attract the adverse  attention
    on return to Sri Lanka and clearly there is not a risk  to  all  Tamils
    but it was accepted that in London there  had  been  demonstrations  on
    important Tamil anniversaries and that  the  Government  of  Sri  Lanka
    perceived committed Tamil activists working  for  Tamil  separatism  as
    continuing to oppose the Sinhalisation of Sri Lanka as a whole and  the
    single state approach is now enshrined in Sri Lankan policy.

45. It is against this background that  I  draw  together  the  threads  of
    evidence presented on behalf of the appellant.

46. The appellant's claim there had been that he had come to the UK because
    he was arrested and detained by the CID in Sri Lanka and was  going  to
    be executed because he had worked for the LTTE but an  agent  was  paid
    money by his father and he escaped to the UK as a student.   There  was
    no arrest warrant for him but he was wanted.  He claims he  worked  for
    the LTTE between 2005 and 2008 and had undergone  basic  training  with
    the LTTE but he was in fact  working  as  a  photographic  editor.   He
    claimed he was arrested by the CID in April 2009 and detained  for  two
    months and an agent helped him escape.   He  stated  that  he  had  not
    joined the LTTE voluntarily but was editing maps and videos for them.

47. The appellant stated that he was given the task of  delivering  parcels
    although he did not know what they were and as a  result  was  detained
    for two months by the CID but was released on a payment of a bribe.  He
    was put in a van, blindfolded and was left on the side of the road.  He
    then lived with an agent for four months until he left Sri  Lanka.   At
    the airport he was given instructions where to  go.   He  also  claimed
    that the police were looking for him and this had occurred in 2009  and
    also in 2011.  The appellant advanced that the authorities had  visited
    his father in 2009 and 2011 and evidence presented to me  was  that  he
    had also been visited in 2013.

48. First of all I take into account the findings of Judge Ross  who  heard
    the appeal at the First-tier Tribunal.  The findings in relation to the
    appellant's account of events in Sri Lanka were preserved by Designated
    Judge Lewis.  Judge Ross at paragraph 16 of his determination  reasoned
    the following

    'I consider that the appellant's account of his history in Sri Lanka is
    broadly credible.  He has not in my view, exaggerated his role  in  the
    conflict, and his account is consistent.  His association with the LTTE
    was reluctant, particularly asked he moved to Colombo.  I  accept  that
    he was seriously mistreated by the security forces, whilst  he  was  in
    detention, and that is why he has the scarring on his back and arms.  I
    consider however that if the authorities had been really interested  in
    him it is unlikely that they would have released him even on payment of
    a bribe.  There is no reason to believe that the appellant  is  wanted,
    and indeed he left Sri Lanka without any apparent difficulty,  although
    I accept that the country guidance case of CG indicates that  this  was
    not probative of a lack of  adverse  interest  in  an  individual  (see
    paragraph 170).  I am faced therefore with the case of a young man  who
    has been detained in the past, and mistreated, he has assisted the LTTE
    but not as a combatant and I have to consider whether he is at risk  on
    return'.

    The starting point is that it is clear that as a  matter  of  fact  the
    appellant is not a risk to the government  in  Sri  Lanka,  as  I  have
    already said he is not an enthusiastic Tamil separatist, but rather was
    caught up in the war reluctantly.  The war ended in May 2009 which  was
    at the same time as the appellant was released from his  second  period
    of custody.  He claimed that he has been told by his  father  that  the
    police have been looking for him and had visited his  father  in  2009,
    2011, and in 2013 (Q.126), but there is  no  supporting  evidence  that
    this is the case, and it is not  credible  that  the  police  would  be
    interested in him after all this time and having regard to the level of
    his involvement in the conflict'.

49. From the above  I  accept  that  the  appellant  was  detained  by  the
    authorities and perceived to have links with the LTTE whilst he was  in
    Sri Lanka.  A medical report by  Professor  Lingam  was  submitted  and
    which I find was consistent with the Istanbul  Protocol.   This  stated
    that the appellant had been beaten with wooden  sticks  and  wires  and
    burned on occasions.  The doctor confirmed that the injuries  were  all
    similar and inflicted at the same time by the same  instrument  but  he
    could not rule out the possibility  that  they  had  been  deliberately
    inflicted but he found no reason to dispute the history provided by the
    patient.  Bearing in mind the credibility findings of the Judge, I take
    this report into account and attach weight to the report.

50. From the findings of Judge Ross who accepted the appellant's account in
    Sri Lanka and the medical report I can only accept that  the  appellant
    was indeed tortured in Sri Lanka because he was of significant interest
    to the authorities at that time.  There is no doubt  that  the  medical
    reports indicate that the appellant  has  indeed  been  inflicted  with
    injuries and he claims that this was undertaken whilst he was  tortured
    and in detention.

51. On the basis that the appellant's evidence was found credible by  Judge
    Ross, I find that the complaint to the Wellawatte  police  station  and
    the complaint to the Human Rights Commission  bolster  the  appellant's
    claim that he indeed was  detained  and  tortured  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

52. That the appellant had a  visa  and  removed  himself  from  Sri  Lanka
    seemingly legally, cannot be counted as a definitive factor against him
    and as to whether the authorities have any interest in him  or  not.  I
    accept the evidence that I have referred above, to the effect that  the
    appellant may have been released from the authorities on payment  of  a
    bribe and that bribery and corruption is such in Sri Lanka that  it  is
    possible for appellants to remove themselves from Sri Lanka through the
    airport despite checkpoints even when  they  are  of  interest  to  the
    authorities.   This  would  appear  to  be  consistent   with   country
    background material.

53. With respect to the visits from the  police,  Judge  Ross  stated  that
    there was no supporting evidence that the police had visited  in  2009,
    2011 and in 2013 but bearing in mind the appellant  was  found  broadly
    credible in the remainder of his account with reference to Sri Lanka, I
    think it would be inconsistent to reject this.  It was the  appellant's
    evidence that his father had been  paid  a  number  of  visits  by  the
    authorities particularly those visits which corresponded with  the  end
    of his visas or the expiry of his visas and  in  2013  his  father  was
    placed  in  detention.   There  is  no  requirement  for  corroborative
    evidence although I accept that it is for the appellant  to  prove  his
    case.

54. It is  also  relevant  that  the  appellant  has  provided  substantial
    evidence that he has attended a number of demonstrations since he  came
    to the UK in 2009.

55. The appellant claims that he attended demonstrations between  2011  and
    2013 and indeed there was photographic evidence of the appellant at the
    forefront of the demonstrations and clearly visible  although  in  some
    occasions he has a hat on.  Nonetheless he is holding a placard and  in
    one photograph he is banging a drum.  I accept that  these  photographs
    are available on YouTube and on the internet and indeed video  evidence
    was played at the first hearing at the Upper  Tribunal  to  demonstrate
    the appellant's involvement. The timescale, that is over 2 or 3  years,
    would indicate that there is  more  possibility  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    government would deduce that the appellant  had  more  than  a  passing
    interest in opposing the Sri Lanka

56. As Miss  Seehra  pointed  out  his  attendance  at  the  February  2014
    demonstration and at the Downing  Street  demonstration  in  2012  were
    organised by the Tamil Youth Organisation, which  is  now  organisation
    banned by the Sri Lankan authorities. I  therefore  conclude  that  the
    authorities may well have a  particular  interest  in  identifying  the
    attendants.  It is clear that the appellant has  been  associated  with
    disparaging and undermining and the Sri Lankan Government.

57.  I conclude that on an assessment of the evidence that I have  set  out
    that the authorities would have an interest in this appellant on return
    and that he may well be placed in  detention  not  necessarily  at  the
    airport but on his  return  home.   As  indicated  above  there  is  no
    provision for relocation in Sri Lanka and I note from the  case  of  GJ
    that the Sri Lanka authorities have sophisticated intelligence which  I
    find may identify the appellant and his activities.

58. I find, in view of the appellant's past activities, which were accepted
    by the previous Tribunal Judge, and his current activities, he would be
    of interest on return to Sri Lanka and I therefore  allow  the  appeal.







Signed                                  Date 24th June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
