
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09781/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 September 2015                          |On 16 October 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     m i
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national born on 11  April  1991  and  he
    arrived in UK on 5 June 2010 on a student visa which  was  subsequently
    extended to 6 April 2014.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent made on 12 October  2012  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom following a  refusal  of  his  grant  of  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and  protection  under  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 2. A brief  history is that the appellant was born in Kandy and lived with
    his parents and two younger siblings in Akurana in Kandy until he  came
    to the United Kingdom.  Prior to leaving Sri Lanka he was studying  for
    a Diploma in Computing at Kandy IDM.  According to the  appellant,  his
    father owned a jewellery business and a tourist hotel in  Bentota  just
    outside Colombo.  The family are not of  Tamil  ethic  origin  although
    they do speak Tamil.  The family home in Akurana was in the name of the
    appellant and during May 2009 he rented the top floor to a family.  The
    police subsequently visited the appellant's house on 14 October 2009 to
    make enquiries about the tenants and the appellant was  arrested  taken
    to Katugastota  police  station  and  sexually  assaulted,  beaten  and
    questioned about his connections to the LTTE.

 3. On 28 October 2009 he was transferred to Bogambara prison and where  he
    remained until 18 January 2010.  He claims he was again mistreated  and
    questioned occasionally.  He was then released on bail by a court  with
    a condition that  he  report  fortnightly  and  his  father  and  uncle
    organised a bail application.  He was  taken  to  the  Royal  Infirmary
    after his release for treatment.  When reporting to the police  he  was
    arrested again and his parents decided he should be sent abroad and  an
    agent was arranged to obtain a Tier 4 entry clearance for him.

 4. Two months after arriving in the United Kingdom the appellant's  father
    told him the police had been looking for him on a regular basis and  on
    19 August 2010 the appellant was informed  that  his  father  had  been
    kidnapped the previous day.

 5. The background immigration history is that this matter has  been  heard
    three  times,  by  three  different  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges   and
    dismissed.    On  19  December  2012,  20  March  2012  and   now   the
    determination  promulgated  on  8  December  2014.   The  two  previous
    decisions were found to contain an error of law  and  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for fresh findings of fact.

 6. Of particular relevance was the report of Professor S Lingam  dated  14
    November 2012 and which was subsequently altered in writing in November
    2014.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kamara last  heard  the  appeal  and  on  8th
    December 2014 she dismissed his appeal on all  grounds.  She  found  at
    paragraphs 20 as follows

    'Reliance is placed on a report prepared  by  Professor  Sam  (Sundara)
    Lingam dated 14 November 2012.  Professor Lingam appears, from his  CV,
    to be appropriately qualified and experienced, given  the  600  medico-
    legal reports he has done for other asylum applicants.   The  Professor
    took a history from the appellant in Tamil and English and set out  the
    information provided by the appellant in  a  separate  section  of  the
    report.  I can see not reason to doubt that  the  professor  faithfully
    recorded what the appellant told him.  His findings were that the scars
    on the appellant's body were 'Highly consistent with  lacerations  from
    bearing.  Owing to the care with which Professor Lingam approached  his
    duties as an expert witness in his report, I attach  a  great  deal  of
    weight to his findings'.

 8. The judge proceeded at  paragraphs  22-23  to  discuss  the  subsequent
    alterations made to the medical expert report particularly in  relation
    to the sexual assault finding that it was the solicitors not the doctor
    who amended the report albeit the doctor accepted that he had made  the
    mistake in the report.  This report varied from the  account  given  to
    Judge Moore at a previous hearing.  Judge Kamara stated that

    'Had Professor Lingam genuinely  made  an  error,  I  consider  it  not
    unreasonable to expect the solicitors  to  provide  evidence  that  the
    report was corrected  shortly  after  the  report  was  compiled.   The
    appellant now says that Professor Lingam did not speak to him in Tamil.
     I prefer the account of professor Lingam in this regard owing  to  the
    fact that the appellant has a clear incentive to distance himself  from
    the account he provided to Professor Lingam'.

 9. In sum, the judge did not accept as credible the appellant's account of
    being arrested, detained  and  tortured  in  Sri  Lanka  nor  that  the
    authorities had any adverse interest in him at any stage  or  that  his
    father was abducted.

10. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and rejected by Designated Judge McClure.  An application  was
    renewed to the Upper Tribunal in the following terms:   (1)  the  judge
    failed to provide reasoned findings on medical evidence  which  related
    to scarring on the appellant's body, in particular (a) the  appellant's
    evidence of being ill-treated in the manner in which  he  had  received
    his scars was not challenged in cross-examination  or  in  submissions.
    RR (Challenging evidence) Sri Lanka [2010] UKUT 274 confirmed that  the
    respondent's  cross-examination  should  have  fearlessly  and  clearly
    challenged the appellant's evidence. This  was  not  done.   The  judge
    attached a great deal of weight  to  Professor  Lingam's  report  which
    opined that the scars on the appellant's body  were  highly  consistent
    with his account, but when reasoning the  above  the  judge  failed  to
    reason properly why she did not accept  the  appellant  had  been  ill-
    treated in the manner claimed. Further, there was not a two year  delay
    in pursuing corrections to the medical report for the reasons  set  out
    in the grounds of appeal.  This matter had been raised orally prior  to
    November 2014.  In any event,  it  was  not  apparent  why  this  would
    undermine Professor Lingam's professional opinion and conclusion  about
    the scars on the appellant's body to which the judge attached  a  great
    deal of weight.

11. The judge's approach and assessment of  the  documentary  evidence  was
    flawed and unfair and the lawyer's credentials remained unchallenged in
    the Presenting Officer's submissions.

12. Another challenge in  the  application  was  raised  with  regards  the
    Judge's rejection of the appellant's evidence of a lawyer's letter said
    to support the appellant's claim.  The  lawyer's  credentials  remained
    unchallenged in the  Presenting  Officer'  submissions  but  the  judge
    considered the Lawyer's Bar Association certificate had been  doctored.
    In the absence of any evidence undermining the lawyer's letter and  any
    challenge to his credentials the judge  adopted  a  flawed  and  unfair
    approach to the evidence  when  finding  the  lawyers  Bar  Association
    certificate had been  doctored.   The  judge  also  failed  to  address
    relevant submissions on that issue.

13. Further, the judge's finding that  it  was  implausible  the  appellant
    would be able to leave Sri Lanka without using  his  own  passport  was
    inconsistent with relevant country guidance evidence at GJ  and  others
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

14. A Rule 24 response was served although  the  author  of  that  Rule  24
    response did not have access to the Home Office file and  the  position
    was merely "protected".

15. I find there is an error of law within the decision. At paragraph 20 of
    the decision of Judge Kamara she states with reference to the report of
    Professor Lingam:

         "His  findings were that scars on the appellant's body were  highly
         consistent with lacerations from beating.  Owing to the  care  with
         which Professor Lingam approached his duties as an  expert  witness
         in his report I attach a great deal of weight to his findings."

16. That said, at paragraph 23 she states

         "While I accept the appellant gave Professor Lingam an  account  of
         being beaten, being forced to perform oral sex on his  captors  and
         raped  by  four  men  over  a  fourteen  day  period,   given   the
         inconsistencies as to what was said  to  have  occurred  I  do  not
         accept the report amounts to reliable evidence  that  these  events
         occurred."

17. First of all, the judge stated that the report of Professor Lingam  was
    not corrected until nearly two  years  later.  That  is  incorrect  and
    indeed the judge referred to the determination of Judge  Moore  who  at
    paragraph 41 identified that the appellant had raised an  inconsistency
    as early as November 2012.  Secondly,  although  those  inconsistencies
    relate to the  sexual  abuse  nature  of  the  report,  there  were  no
    inconsistencies  in  Professor  Lingam's  report  in  relation  to  the
    scarring which he considered were highly consistent with beatings.   It
    is quite clear that in the skeleton argument presented by  Miss  Seehra
    to the First-tier Tribunal that RR  (Challenging  evidence)  Sri  Lanka
    [2010] UKUT 274 was raised by Miss Seehra at the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The Home Office did not challenge this in what appeared to  be  a  very
    short cross-examination. As stated in the head note of RR  (Challenging
    evidence) if the respondent does not put its case clearly it  may  well
    be very difficult for the Tribunal to decide against an  appellant  who
    has not been  given  an  opportunity  to  deal  with  the  respondent's
    concerns.  Indeed it was the evidence of Professor Lingam before  Judge
    Molloy that he did not go into detail about the sexual matters  because
    the appellant was distressed and certain references could have  been  a
    mistake on his part.

18. At paragraph 25 the judge referred to "two documents  which  appear  to
    suggest that he was required to report to the police owing to his  past
    failure to  report".   The  judge  appears  to  attach  weight  to  the
    documents but does not say what weight is being given and similarly  at
    paragraph 27 the judge refers to the court cash receipt  and  which  Mr
    Spurling pointed out had the same reference number as the court summons
    to  which  the  judge  attached  no  weight.   This   appears   to   be
    contradictory.

19. It was pointed out in ground 2 of the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal that the appellant relied on numerous documents  in  support  of
    his claim and a lawyer's letter but  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    lawyer's credentials in line with PJ (Sri Lanka) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ.   I  do  not  accept  that  PJ
    suggests that there should necessarily be a challenge in every instance
    but it does not appear that the Home Office did make any  challenge  to
    the authenticity and reliability of that document.  It  is  noted  that
    there was a submission made by Miss Seehra on that issue. Clearly it is
    open to a judge to draw his or her own conclusions about  documentation
    without the need  for  cross-examination  on  every  single  point  but
    bearing in mind the issues that were raised in the skeleton argument it
    is reasonable to expect that there should be acknowledgment of the lack
    of challenge by the Secretary  of  State  and  the  judge  should  have
    addressed those points as they were specifically raised.

20. The further issue which does not appear to have been taken into account
    is that GJ and Others confirms that it is possible to leave the airport
    owing to the bribery and corruption that exists in Sri Lanka and indeed
    it was this appellant's case that the agent assisted  him  in  removal.
    The judge at [36] merely states:

         "I consider it implausible that if the appellant was  suspected  of
         sheltering members of the LTTE he would be released on  bail  by  a
         judge, allowed to report without serious incident over a period  of
         months and permitted to leave Sri Lanka openly using his own  valid
         passport  without incident".

    The skeleton argument did in fact state  that  the  appellant  received
    subsequent harassment and ill-treatment when he  did  report  and  that
    that was consistent with the Amnesty Report dated 13 March 2012.




    Notice of Decision

    The Judge erred in law for the reasons identified,  and,  in  a  manner
    which could have a material effect on the outcome.   I  set  aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Signed                                  Date 12th October 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


