
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09867/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th May 2016                              |On 27th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                          mr Firas aldusoqi Mahmoud
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A. Muzira, Solicitor, Soloman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Moan sitting at Birmingham  on  25  February
    2016) whereby the Tribunal dismissed his appeal against the decision of
    the Secretary of State to refuse to recognise him  as  a  refugee  from
    Syria on the ground that he  had  not  shown  there  was  a  reasonable
    likelihood that he was a Syrian national.  The First-tier Tribunal  did
    not make an anonymity  direction,  and  I  do  not  consider  that  the
    appellant  requires  anonymity  for  these  proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Reasons for Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 30 March 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson  granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

    1.   The appellant ("A") seeks permission to appeal, in time, against a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Moan) who, in a decision
         promulgated on 3 March  2016,  dismissed  A's  appeal  against  the
         Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  her   asylum   and/or
         humanitarian protection.

    2.   The grounds of appeal are as follows:

         (a)  the Judge was not justified in finding that A was not a Syrian
             national;

         (b)  the Judge was not justified in  preferring  report  from  2007
             which is clearly outdated given the provenance of  the  report
             of 13 August 2014 which was consistent with A's account;

         (c)  the Judge's comments at [77] are mere speculation and  in  any
             event, it is  clear  that  the  document  was  issued  by  the
             Ministry of Interior;

         (d)  the Judge failed to analyse the language report critically, as
             recommended in the case of MN & KY v SSHD [2014] UKSC 30.

    3.   Whilst I find (d) lacks merit given that the  Judge  has  analysed
         the language report very carefully and finds it inconclusive as  to
         A's origin, it is arguable  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  give
         sufficient weight to the report of August  2014,  as  indicated  in
         (b), and that his comments in relation  to  the  birth  certificate
         were also speculative.  Moreover, it does appear that  the  Judge's
         comments as to  the  authenticity  and  reliability  of  the  birth
         certificate were based in part on a material error of fact.

    4.   The grounds identify an arguable material error of law.

The Rule 24 Response

 3. On 14 April 2016 a member of the Specialist Appeals Team settled a Rule
    24 response opposing the appeal.  In summary, the Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately.  The judge gave  adequate
    reasons at paragraphs [120] and [121] for finding  that  the  documents
    that the appellant sought to rely on were not genuine.  The judge  also
    considered the language report at  paragraphs  [82]  to  [114]  of  his
    decision.

The Error of Law Hearing

 4. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Muzira developed the arguments raised in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Kandola
    submitted that the judge's decision was thorough and comprehensive.  He
    had adequately analysed the documents relied on  by  the  appellant  as
    showing that he was of Syrian  nationality,  and  the  language  report
    relied on by the respondent as showing that it was more likely that  he
    was a Tunisian national.  The  judge  had  not  accepted  the  language
    report uncritically.  In reply, Ms Muzira insisted that the  judge  had
    materially erred.  His reasoning was not properly  structured,  and  he
    had made a mistake in finding  that  the  birth  certificate  had  been
    issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, when in  fact  it  had  been
    issued by the Ministry of Interior.

Discussion

 5. In this appeal, everything  hinged  on  the  question  of  whether  the
    appellant was or was not a Syrian national.

The linguistic analysis report

 6. In support of a  positive  case  that  the  appellant  was  a  Tunisian
    national, the respondent relied on a report by  Verified  AB  dated  11
    June 2015, referred to  by  the  judge  as  "the  LOID  report",  which
    considered  two  alternative  hypotheses.   The  first  was  that   the
    appellant belonged to the Damascus linguistic community (as he claimed)
    and the  second  was  that  he  belonged  to  the  Tunisian  linguistic
    community.  The conclusion of the report was  the  appellant's  dialect
    deviated significantly from phonological, morphological and syntactical
    features to be expected in a Damascus  dialect,  with  the  consequence
    that the results  obtained  were  most  likely  inconsistent  with  the
    linguistic  community  in  Damascus.   Conversely,  when   the   second
    hypothesis was tested, the results  obtained  were  such  it  was  more
    likely than not that the appellant's dialect was  consistent  with  the
    linguistic community in Tunisia.

 7. The judge addressed the report at considerable length  from  paragraphs
    [82] to [114] of his decision.  This  exercise  took  up  nearly  three
    closely typed pages.  The number of paragraphs which the judge  devoted
    to the report does not  in  itself  demonstrate  that  the  judge  gave
    adequate reasons for  attaching  significant  probative  value  to  it.
    However, on a fair reading of what the judge  actually  said  in  these
    paragraphs, there is no merit whatsoever in Ms Muzira's submission that
    the judge simply regurgitated the contents  of  the  report,  with  the
    result that he accepted the contents uncritically.   On  the  contrary,
    the judge's assessment of the probative value of the  report  is  fully
    reasoned and it is an exemplary piece of work.

 8. The appellant  was  represented  by  Counsel,  and  the  judge  engaged
    directly with Counsel's submissions as to the  respects  in  which  the
    reliability of the report was called into  question.   The  judge  also
    rightly took into account the expertise of the analysts.  Analyst  1586
    was born and raised in Damascus  and  maintained  contact  with  Syria.
    Analyst 1601 was born and raised in Tunis and returned home every  year
    (paragraph 103).  The judge noted at paragraph [104]  that  the  report
    did not specifically confirm that it was analyst 1586 who explored  the
    hypothesis that the appellant was  from  the  linguistic  community  of
    Damascus and that it was analyst 1601 who explored the  hypothesis  the
    appellant was from the  Tunisian  linguistic  community.   But  he  was
    satisfied that this would be the case (paragraph 104), and that  was  a
    finding that was reasonably open to him.

 9. At paragraphs [107] to [113],  the  judge  addressed  the  respondent's
    policy document on the use of language reports, and the significance of
    the cases of RM (Sierra Leone and SSHD [2015] EWCA 51,  RB  (Linguistic
    evidence - Sprakab) Somalia [2010] UKUT IAC 329 and SSHD v MN  and  KY
    [2014] UKSC 30.  The judge correctly  directed  himself  in  accordance
    with the respondent's policy guidance and also the  guidance  given  in
    the authorities. It is not part of the error of law challenge that  the
    judge misdirected himself.

10. It was open to him to find, as he did at paragraph  [114],  that  while
    the report was not conclusive, the conclusions of the report  suggested
    that there was stronger evidence to suggest that the appellant was  not
    Syrian as against the evidence that suggested that he was Tunisian.

The photocopied Syrian passport

11. Earlier in his decision the judge addressed at paragraphs [52] to  [72]
    the topic of military  service/illegal  exit/passport.   The  appellant
    said in his asylum interview that he was called  for  military  service
    when he was 20 years of age.  The appellant then arranged his exit from
    Syria with two people and they left by sea.  He said  that  anyone  who
    wanted to leave Syria could do so.  The judge found this statement  was
    inconsistent with the objective evidence of checkpoints and  men  being
    turned away at the Jordanian and Lebanese borders,  or  being  arrested
    and jailed for not performing military service.

12. The appellant said in  his  asylum  interview  that  he  had  lost  his
    passport.  He said he had lost it in Syria in 2014.  He said he had got
    the passport in 2013.  He said he had photocopied his passport after it
    was issued, and he had provided a photocopy of his passport to the Home
    Office.  The judge reviewed the  photocopy,  and  ascertained  that  it
    purported to be a copy of a passport issued in August 2013  for  a  two
    year period. At the time the appellant said he was living in a camp and
    he accepted (as the judge  noted)  that  in  August  2013  he  had  not
    performed military service.

13. The judge referred to a report relied on by the respondent  dated  2007
    which confirmed that those who evaded military service could not obtain
    a passport or travel outside the country.

14. The judge then referred to a 2014 report from the same source relied on
    by the appellant. His Counsel submitted that the 2014 report undermined
    the assertion in the  2007  report  about  an  inability  to  obtain  a
    passport on the part of those who had not done military service.

15. Ms Muzira showed me a copy of the 2014 report, and it is convenient  to
    quote the extract from the report upon which  she  relies.   Under  the
    heading of "Penalties for evading military service", AP  reported  that
    in June 2012 the  Assad  Government  issued  an  amnesty  giving  draft
    dodgers who were still in the  country  90  days  to  report  for  duty
    "without punishment" while those living abroad were given 120 days.  In
    the next paragraph the following is stated:

         According to 7 Days, 'the Syrian  Government  will  not  renew  the
         passport of any man who does not either pay the [exemption] fee  or
         serve in the army' (8 Feb. 2014).   The  activist  stated  that  a
         passport will only be issued for two years for a man  who  has  not
         completed  his  military   service   (activist   23   July   2014).
         Corroboration could not be found among the sources consulted by the
         research directorate within the time constraints of this  response.



16. At paragraphs [66] to [72] the judge gave his reasons for treating  the
    assertion attributed to the activist  with  great  caution,  and  hence
    unreliable.  In particular, he noted from the 2014  report  that  there
    continued to be a travel ban for those that had not completed  military
    service:

         The assertion that a person who has neither paid the exemption  fee
         nor completed military service can obtain a two  year  passport  is
         one that I approach with caution.  Not only because it is not clear
         in the report that I have been asked to consider,  the  context  of
         that assertion, it also appears to lack corroboration  and  appears
         to be contrary to the  generally  restrictive  travel  arrangements
         that existed in Syria.

    The judge went on to say that he was unable to place weight on the poor
    photocopy of the passport provided  by  the  appellant.   The  risk  of
    interference with this document was great and when balanced against the
    credibility concerns of the appellant, "when he suggested he was issued
    with a two year passport when evading military service", it  could  not
    be regarded as reliable.

17. I consider that the judge has given adequate reasons for  finding  that
    the photocopied  passport,  and  the  appellant's  evidence  about  the
    circumstances in which he claimed to have been issued with a  passport,
    did not support his assertion of Syrian nationality, even to the  lower
    standard of proof.

The Syrian Birth Certificate

18. For the purposes of the  appeal  hearing,  the  appellant  produced  an
    original birth certificate, together with a translation, which, as  the
    judge  said  at  paragraph  [74],  confirmed  that  a  baby  with   the
    appellant's first name and date of birth was born in  Yarmouk  Camp  in
    Syria.  The judge went on to say the interpreter at the appeal  hearing
    was able to confirm that a stamp on the  certificate  issued  from  the
    Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  confirmed  the  authenticity   of   the
    signatures, but not the contents of the document, and that the date  of
    the stamp was 3 December 2015.  At paragraph [80], the  judge  observed
    the respondent had not asserted the birth certificate  was  a  forgery.
    But he still had to consider whether it was a document  he  could  rely
    upon.  He answered the question in the negative.  He held at  paragraph
    [81] that the explanation as to how the  certificate  was  obtained  in
    Syria and was then transmitted to the appellant was not  credible,  and
    this cast doubt on the reliability of the certificate.

19. Part of the judge's reasoning was that the birth certificate  had  been
    issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  This suggested to him  that
    the person who requested the  certificate  was  either  foreign  or  an
    expatriate.  In fact, as Mr Kandola accepts, the birth certificate  was
    purportedly  issued  by  the  Ministry   of   Interior,   whereas   the
    authentication stamp was from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

20. I do not consider that the judge has materially erred in characterising
    the document as being issued by the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  as
    opposed to being issued by the Ministry of Interior.  On any view,  the
    document has been purportedly authenticated by the Ministry of  Foreign
    Affairs, not by the Ministry of the Interior.  It was thus open to  the
    judge to find that the contents of the document were inconsistent  with
    the appellant's evidence as to how the document was obtained, which was
    by a personal visit to the Civilian Registry in Damascus.  If so, prima
    facie there would have been no occasion for there to be an  involvement
    on the part of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the authentication of
    the birth certificate.

21. Moreover, the judge's main reason for not treating the  certificate  as
    reliable has nothing to do with stamps on the birth  certificate.   The
    appellant's  evidence  was  that  an  unnamed   person   obtained   the
    certificate from the Civilian Registry in Damascus, and had sent it  to
    Mohammed Bitar who lived in Jordan.   Mr  Bitar  then  sent  the  birth
    certificate to the appellant in the UK.  The appellant said he did  not
    know Mohammed Bitar but his birth certificate had been sent via  Jordan
    because communications were monitored in Syria and his  unknown  friend
    in Syria might be arrested.  As Jordan was an Arab country, his unknown
    friend would be allowed to send items to Jordan.  It  was  put  to  the
    appellant that there was no reason for communications to the UK  to  be
    intercepted, as the UK was not at war with the Syrian Government.   The
    judge considered there was some merit in this line of argument,  as  he
    said in paragraph [79].

22. In conclusion, I find that the judge has  given  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the birth certificate was not reliable, in accordance with
    the guidance given in Tanveer Ahmed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 27 May 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
