

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09919/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8th June 2017                              |On 5th September 2017        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     XY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Chirico, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr O Sanders QC, instructed by Government Legal
Department

                  ERROR OF LAW / DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
Appellant/parties in this determination identified as XY. This direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

   1. The appellant was recognised as a refugee by the United Kingdom  on  7
      July 2011 and granted leave to remain until 7th July 2016. He left the
      UK in mid-2013 and was, at the time of the cancellation of his refugee
      status, at the time of his First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  and  now,  in
      France. On 23rd October 2014, the respondent  decided  to  cancel  the
      appellant's refugee status on the grounds that he should have been  or
      is excluded from being a refugee in accordance with  regulation  7  of
      The  Refugee  or  Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
      (Qualification)   Regulations   2006[1]   and   therefore    paragraph
      339A(vii)[2] of the  Immigration  Rules  applied.  He  had  no  appeal
      against that decision. The respondent, on the same day,  decided  that
      the appellant no longer met the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
      under which he was granted leave to remain in the UK, that this was  a
      material change in circumstances and therefore cancelled his leave  to
      remain under paragraph 321A(1) of the Immigration  Rules.  He  had  an
      appeal against that decision. He lodged an appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


   2. There is no statutory appeal against the decision  to  revoke  refugee
      status. If it is the SSHD's view that the  nature  of  the  change  of
      circumstances  is  such  that  leave   should   be   cancelled,   then
      cancellation is mandatory. A decision  made  under  paragraph  321A(1)
      does not import a discretion by the SSHD whether to  cancel  leave  to
      remain. The tribunal cannot take a  decision  on  how  the  respondent
      reached her decision to revoke refugee status but rather  whether  the
      decision by the SSHD to cancel leave was correct. If the  judgment  of
      the SSHD to revoke refugee status was correctly reached, there  is  no
      scope for any other outcome. Because the decision to revoke  leave  to
      remain is irrevocably linked  to  the  decision  to  cancel  leave  to
      remain, the appeal against that latter decision would  be  meaningless
      if the Tribunal was not also able to consider whether  the  revocation
      of refugee status was lawful. For example, if the SSHD had  unlawfully
      revoked refugee status, then it would  follow  that  the  decision  to
      cancel leave to remain would itself be unlawful. This  contrasts  with
      the position where the SSHD takes a decision under  paragraph  323(ii)
      where the SSHD has exercised a discretion whether to curtail leave  to
      remain. A decision taken under that paragraph of the Immigration Rules
      does import a discretion which is justiciable by the Tribunal.


   3. The appellant's appeal was dismissed by Designated Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Shaerf for reasons set out in a decision promulgated  on
      4th January 2017.

   4. Permission to appeal that decision was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
      Allen on 12th April 2017 and the appeal came before  me  on  8th  June
      2017. At the hearing, I directed the parties to file and serve written
      submissions addressing whether cancellation of the  appellant's  leave
      to remain would have been an automatic consequence of the cancellation
      of the appellant's refugee status and the relevance, if  any,  of  the
      fact that the appellant was outside the UK when  the  respondent  took
      her decision, when his appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal and
      when his original 5-year period of leave was due to expire[3].

   5. The appellant relies upon Paragraph 339B[4]  and  339Q[5]  Immigration
      Rules and refers to the Secretary of State's discretion to curtail  or
      revoke leave to remain. He submits that the curtailment of leave  does
      not automatically follow from the cancellation of refugee status.

   6. The respondent accepts that basic analysis  but  emphasises  that  the
      appellant's leave was cancelled under paragraph 321A(1)[6]; the change
      in circumstances namely the cancellation of  refugee  status,  causing
      the mandatory cancellation of leave.

   7.  Although  at  first  blush  these  may  seem  to   be   contradictory
      propositions they are not. The  scheme  of  the  Rules  is  such  that
      sufficiently reprehensible behaviour on  the  part  of  an  individual
      brings that person within the mandatory cancellation provisions of the
      Immigration Rules. So, if  a  person's  refugee  status  is  cancelled
      because of some unacceptable behaviour on their part, it is  perfectly
      rational for the Secretary of State  to  curtail  or  cancel  existing
      leave to remain under the mandatory provisions because of the material
      change in circumstances. If on the  other  hand,  a  person's  refugee
      status is cancelled because of, say, a change in conditions  in  their
      country  of  origin  such  that  they  no  longer  need  international
      protection and do not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,
      such change has not been brought about by any behaviour on the part of
      the individual; it is eminently reasonable for the Secretary of  State
      to exercise her discretion to cancel leave to remain  under  paragraph
      323 Immigration Rules (or indeed enable the individual  to  remain  in
      the UK for the balance of  their  leave  and  possibly  beyond).  This
      analysis is  also  congruent  with  the  approach  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge and the  parties,  that  the  cancellation  of  refugee
      status was inextricably linked to the cancellation of leave to  remain
      -  if  the  cancellation  of  refugee  status  was  contrary  to   the
      Immigration Rules, then it would follow that the  appeal  against  the
      decision to cancel leave to remain would be successful.

   8. In so far as the relevance of the appellant being outside  the  UK  is
      concerned, the submissions by Mr Chirico in his first written note are
      not relied upon by him and he has apologised for incorrectly asserting
      that which was not the case.  He  does  however  submit  that  if  the
      appellant now sought to  re-enter  the  UK  it  would  be  potentially
      relevant if he could demonstrate that  his  previous  leave  had  been
      cancelled as a result of a decision which was not in  accordance  with
      the  law  because  this  would  have  relevance  to  the  exercise  of
      discretion by  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer.  But  if  the  appellant
      succeeds in his appeal against the curtailment of his leave (and  thus
      the cancellation of his refugee status), on  whatever  ground,  it  is
      self-evident that this would have relevance to  the  exercise  of  any
      discretion by an Entry Clearance Officer. An Entry  Clearance  Officer
      will, on taking a decision, consider all relevant matters.

   9. I am satisfied having had regard to the submissions advanced  by  both
      parties that, in the light of the decision by the respondent to revoke
      refugee status, the decision to cancel  the  appellant's  leave  under
      paragraph 321A(1) was rationally and lawfully open  to  her.  But,  as
      explained above, for any appeal  to  be  meaningful  the  Tribunal  is
      required to consider the lawfulness of the decision to revoke  refugee
      status.

  10. I am satisfied also, having considered the submissions made, that  the
      appellant's leave to remain in the UK was  not  extended  pending  the
      determination of his appeal. In so far as any future  application  for
      variation is concerned, the appellant has been at liberty to apply for
      entry to the UK at any time since he left the UK  and  his  leave  was
      cancelled or after it would in any event have expired.

      Error of law

  11. The respondent, for reasons set out in two decision letters dated 23rd
      October 2014 and  10th  March  2015,  concluded  there  were  "serious
      reasons for considering the appellant had  committed  a  serious  non-
      political crime outside the UK prior to being recognised as a  refugee
      in the UK". In reaching  that  decision  the  respondent  relied  upon
      judgments of the UK courts in civil proceedings brought against XY  by
      JSC BTA Bank, a bank in Kazakhstan. The respondent had, prior  to  the
      civil judgments, recognised the appellant as a refugee in the  UK  and
      had accepted that the unfairness suffered by the appellant during  his
      trial in Kazakhstan had been politically motivated and that  he  would
      be at risk of being persecuted if returned to  Kazakhstan  because  of
      his political activity, high profile and the  political  situation  in
      Kazakhstan. The appellant had received an "Osman"  warning  issued  by
      the Metropolitan police on 29th January 2011. The respondent had  been
      aware that there were pending civil actions against the  appellant  in
      the UK courts at  the  time  he  was  recognised  as  a  refugee;  the
      appellant had informed the respondent of these  and  had  stated  they
      would come to nought. There is no dispute but that were it not for the
      operation of the exclusion clause, the appellant would continue to  be
      recognised as a refugee. There were no UK criminal proceedings pending
      against the applicant at the time of the respondent's decision or  his
      hearing before the First-tier Tribunal (or indeed now, so far as I  am
      aware).


  12.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  under  s82(1)  and
      82(2)(e) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002[7]  against  the
      decision to cancel his leave on the grounds

   a) that the decision was not in accordance with the law (s84(1)(e) of the
      2002 Act) in "fail[ing] to give individual consideration to the  facts
      of  the  appellant's  case,  fail[ing]  to  have  regard  to  relevant
      considerations and/or to apply anxious scrutiny to  the  evidence  and
      representations before her, acted with  procedural  impropriety,  took
      account of improper and therefore irrelevant considerations and  acted
      with actual or apparent bias";
   b)  the  decision  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules
      (s84(1)(a) of the 2002 Act) in that the "respondent erred in fact  and
      law in deciding that the Appellant is no longer  entitled  to  refugee
      status, that being the only basis upon which she decides to cancel his
      leave to remain";
   c) The respondent's decision to cancel the Appellant's  leave  to  remain
      amounts to an unlawful and/or disproportionate interference in his and
      his family's rights to respect for their private lives  (s84(1)(c)  of
      the 2002 Act).


  13. The appellant did not appeal under s84(1)(g) of the 2002  Act  -  that
      the person taking the decision should  have  exercised  differently  a
      discretion conferred by the Immigration Rules.


  14. Designated Judge Shaerf stated in [113] that the sole issue he had  to
      decide  was  "whether  the  respondent  had,   on   the   balance   of
      probabilities made out her case that recognition of the Appellant as a
      Convention refugee should be revoked" on the basis that he is excluded
      under Article1F(b) of the 1951 Convention because  there  are  serious
      reasons for considering the Appellant has  committed  a  serious  non-
      political crime. He concluded ([120])

              "To my mind the frauds for which there are serious reasons for
             considering  the  Appellant  to  have  perpetrated  amount  to
             serious non-political crimes within  the  meaning  of  Article
             1(F)(b). I have come to this conclusion  without  reliance  on
             the Appellant's conviction and sentence for contempt of  court
             and  flight  from  the  United  Kingdom......the   appeal   is
             dismissed."


  15. The appellant sought, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal.  The
      grounds relied upon are extensive, but can be summarised as follows:


   1) That the First-tier Tribunal failed to determine the first  ground  of
      appeal before it, namely that the respondent's decision was  otherwise
      than in accordance with the law (s84(1)(e) of the 2002 Act), and


   2) (i)     the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to determine core  issues
      relevant to the weight to be attached to civil  judgments  in  the  UK
      going to the motivation of the BTS Bank and the ability of the Bank to
      manipulate evidence;
           (ii)   the First-tier Tribunal judge unlawfully disregarded  the
           unchallenged evidence of the  witnesses,  Q  and  Dr  Lewis;  he
           treated the evidence as irrelevant but because that evidence was
           relevant to the assessment  of  the  core  issues,  it  was  not
           irrelevant;
           (iii)  the First-tier Tribunal judge made  a  clear  mistake  of
           fact  in  the  decision  namely  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
           decision records the appellant as having admitted to lies in the
           civil proceedings whereas he had not and does not;
           (iv)   the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in his approach to  a
           prior judgment of the High Court in a civil claim.


        Ground 1


  16. The appellant does not submit that had the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
      reached  a  decision  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not   in
      accordance with the law, then it should be remitted to the  respondent
      but contended that the First-tier Tribunal judge could and should have
      taken the decision itself; i.e. XY invited the Tribunal to  allow  the
      appeal on the grounds that the respondent had failed to  give  anxious
      scrutiny to the material before her and to give any  or  any  adequate
      reasons for its rejection, and to take a decision  for  itself.  There
      were two limbs to this ground: firstly, that there had been procedural
      unfairness  in  that  the  appellant's  solicitors  had  informed  the
      respondent  they  intended  submitting  further   evidence   yet   the
      respondent proceeded  to  take  her  decision  without  awaiting  that
      information. Secondly that there was improper motive  and/or  apparent
      bias in the decision-making process. Mr Chirico relied, in particular,
      upon what he asserted was improper contact by the respondent with  the
      Kazakhstan authorities about the appellant's case including a note  of
      a meeting on 31st January 2014 which states that a decision  had  been
      made to revoke XY's asylum status.  He  submits  that  the  respondent
      failed to make proper disclosure, that the respondent has  not  denied
      that meetings took place between the UK Ministry  of  Justice,  Kazakh
      officials and a private consultant working for BTA bank and  that  the
      respondent  had  not  engaged  with  these  matters  when  taking  her
      decision. Mr Chirico submitted that the further reasons  letter  dated
      10th March 2015 did not adequately respond to the representations made
      in considering whether there were  serious  considerations  justifying
      the decision she  took.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  should,  he
      submitted, have taken this into consideration in  determining  whether
      the decision of the respondent was not in accordance with the law.


  17. The submission by Mr Chirico that the respondent had proceeded to take
      a decision prior to receipt of further evidence,  which  it  knew  was
      going to be submitted is  correct  but  in  my  view  immaterial.  The
      further submissions were considered by the respondent  and  a  further
      "reasons" letter issued. That the appellant does not agree  with  that
      consideration is the context within which  the  statutory  appeal  was
      heard; the appellant was aware of the scope of  the  decision  against
      him and his grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  make  clear
      that he raised all the matters upon which he wished to rely.  Even  if
      the failure to await further  submissions  could  be  perceived  as  a
      procedural irregularity, that irregularity was remedied by the service
      of the further reasons letter. This gave rise to  no  disadvantage  to
      the appellant because both the submissions and  the  decision  letters
      were before the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  who  considered  them  in
      reaching his decision. There  is  no  allegation  that  the  procedure
      before the First-tier Tribunal was tainted by procedural impropriety.

  18. The ground of appeal asserting that the decision under  challenge  was
      not in accordance with  the  law  enables  public  law  duties  to  be
      considered in the context of a statutory appeal. But it does not  mean
      that the Tribunal should approach that ground in  isolation  from  the
      consideration of all the matters that are in issue  in  the  statutory
      appeal. The respondent's letter or letters do not stand  in  isolation
      from the whole of the statutory appeal as argued.  The  appellant  has
      not argued that the case should be "remitted to the respondent  for  a
      fresh decision" to be taken or that the appeal be allowed such that  a
      lawful decision remains to be taken by the  respondent  but  submitted
      that the First-tier Tribunal judge  should  have  taken  the  decision
      himself. That is exactly what the First-tier Tribunal judge did.

  19. In so far as Mr Chirico relies upon the failure of the respondent,  in
      the decision letters, to provide full disclosure  and/or  engage  with
      the submission that there had been improper discussions between the UK
      Ministry of Justice, Kazakh officials and the bank,  again  those  are
      matters that fall properly  for  consideration  within  the  statutory
      appeal and are not indicative of a decision not  being  in  accordance
      with the law.

  20. Judge Shaerf recorded XY's evidence that there had been a lack of full
      disclosure by the respondent and  recorded  the  submissions  of  both
      advocates in that regard. The judge concluded that XY's  evidence  was
      inconsistent and unhelpful. He found that XY was unable  to  focus  on
      any detail and his evidence  addressing  what  was  described  as  the
      'political narrative' was vague, lacking  in  detail  and  repetitive.
      That no specific reference is  made  to  the  very  limited  documents
      relied  upon  by  Mr  Chirico  in  this  ground  is  not,   in   these
      circumstances and in relation to this ground of appeal, material.

  21. That the First-tier Tribunal judge did not specifically make a finding
      on whether the decision of the respondent was "not in accordance  with
      the law" is therefore not an error of law, or if it  is,  then  it  is
      immaterial.

  22. The appeal on ground 1 is dismissed.

        Ground 2


  23. Judge Shaerf concluded


             "113.    ....the sole issue I have to decide  is  whether  the
             respondent has on the balance of probabilities  made  out  her
             case that recognition of the appellant as a Convention refugee
             should be revoked on the  basis  that  he  is  excluded  under
             Article 1F(b) of the 1951 Convention because there are serious
             reasons for considering the appellant has committed a  serious
             non-political crime.


             114. I see no reason to depart from the oft-repeated  findings
             of the higher courts, that the evidence shows on  the  balance
             of probabilities, having regard to both  the  requirement  for
             the cogency of the evidence relied on to be commensurate  with
             the seriousness of the conduct alleged and the evidence  about
             the conduct of banking in Kazakhstan, that the  appellant  has
             perpetrated a series of frauds involving what  may  fairly  be
             described as extraordinarily large sums of money. There was no
             submission that the political narrative alone  was  sufficient
             to excuse the frauds. Indeed, in the light of the  appellant's
             evidence which imparts (sic) amounted to little  less  than  a
             denial, it would have been difficult to make such an argument.
             I find the respondent has surmounted the demanding  hurdle  to
             show that the "serious reasons  for  considering"  requirement
             has been met. I am satisfied that for the purposes of  Article
             1F(b) of the 1951 Convention the  appellant  has  committed  a
             serious non-political crime.


             115. The appellant perpetrated the frauds or the bulk of  them
             before he left Kazakhstan and the bank was  nationalised(sic).
             Judgments of Teare J and Henderson J contain findings that  on
             the balance of  probabilities,  the  appellant  has  committed
             frauds on the Bank as defined by the laws of  both  Kazakhstan
             and the UK. ....I have to  decide  whether  the  serious  non-
             political crime or crimes for which there are serious  reasons
             for considering the appellant has committed for  (sic)  within
             the scope of that term as used by the 1951 Convention.


             116. Authoritative guidance is to be found in the judgment  of
             AH (Algeria) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 395.....At paragraphs  32-
             35 the Court referred to the views of Professors Goodwin-Gill,
             Hathaway and Grahl-Marsden, the last of whom suggests  by  way
             of  reference  to  the  UNHCR  definition  that  serious  non-
             political crimes  which  fall  within  the  scope  of  Article
             1(F)(b) involve significant  violence  against  persons  which
             warrant severe punishment and are such as to require exclusion
             of the perpetrator so  as  "to  make  clear  the  Convention's
             commitment to the withholding of protection  only  from  those
             who have committed truly abhorrent wrongs" Sullivan LJ went on
             at paragraphs 36-38 to conclude

                  36.           In a statement provided to the Grand Chamber
                  in the B and D case, the UNHCR set out its view as to the
                  seriousness of the acts covered by Article 1F, as follows:

                       "All the types of criminal acts leading to  exclusion
                       under Article 1F of the  1951  Convention  involve  a
                       high  degree  of  seriousness.    This   is   obvious
                       regarding Article 1F(a) and (c), which  address  acts
                       of the most egregious nature such as "war crimes"  or
                       "crimes against humanity" or "acts  contrary  to  the
                       purposes and principles of the United  Nations".   In
                       light of its context and the object  and  purpose  of
                       the exclusion grounds highlighted above,  a  "serious
                       non-political crime" covered by  Article  1F(b)  must
                       also   involve   a   high   threshold   of   gravity.
                       Consequently, the nature of an  allegedly  excludable
                       act,  the  context  in  which  it  occurred  and  all
                       relevant circumstances of the case  should  be  taken
                       into account to assess whether  the  act  is  serious
                       enough to warrant exclusion  within  the  meaning  of
                       Article 1F(b) and 1F(c)." (paragraph 2.2.1)






                  37.      The four questions answered by  the Grand Chamber
                  in B and D did not directly address this  issue,  but  the
                  Grand Chamber did say in paragraph 108 of its judgment:

                          "[108] Exclusion from refugee status  on  one  of
                          the grounds laid down in Article 12(2)(b) or  (c)
                          of Directive 2004/83, as stated in respect of the
                          answer to the first question, is  linked  to  the
                          seriousness of the acts committed, which must  be
                          of such a degree that the person concerned cannot
                          legitimately claim the  protection  attaching  to
                          refugee  status  under  Article  2(d)   of   that
                          directive."






                  38.  In paragraph [109] of its judgment the Grand  Chamber
                  accepted the submission of, inter alia, the UK Government,
                  that Article  12(2)  did  not  require  a  proportionality
                  assessment,  but  it  did  so  upon  the  basis  that  the
                  competent  authority  would  already  have  undertaken  an
                  assessment of the seriousness of the acts committed by the
                  person  concerned  and   of   that   person's   individual
                  responsibility, so that "a fresh assessment of  the  level
                  of seriousness of the acts committed  was  not  required."
                  It is clear, therefore, that for the  purpose  of  Article
                  12(2)(b) or (c) there must be an assessment of  the  level
                  of seriousness of the acts committed, and the  seriousness
                  must  be  of  such  a  degree  that  the  offender  cannot
                  legitimately claim refugee status.

                  .....


                  117.     I am satisfied that this  finding  of  the  Grand
                  Chamber is sufficient to show that  the  scope  of  crimes
                  which can give  rise  to  exclusion  under  Article  1F(b)
                  includes crimes of  any  nature.  Indeed  the  2009  UNHCR
                  Statement on Article 1F of the 1951 Convention at page  20
                  states: -


                      many  recognised  commentators   have   also   placed
                      significant emphasis on the seriousness of the crime.
                      Some refer to capital crime or  particularly  serious
                      crime,  while  others  to  crimes  against   physical
                      integrity,  life  and   liberty   or   crimes   which
                      potentially  attract  long   periods   of   custodial
                      punishment.


                  .......in  Spain,  France......,  "Serious  crimes"   are
                  considered to be those  crimes  for  which  domestic  law
                  imposes a minimum penalty  of  5  years  imprisonment....
                  Rather, criminal penalties should be considered  as  part
                  of the assessment  of  all  circumstances  of  the  crime
                  including any aggravating elements, the gravity of  which
                  should be judged by international standards  rather  than
                  by domestic laws.


                  .......


                  120. .... the frauds for which there are  serious  reasons
                  for considering the appellant to have  perpetrated  amount
                  to serious non-political  crimes  within  the  meaning  of
                  Article 1F(b). I have  come  to  this  conclusion  without
                  reliance on the appellant's conviction  and  sentence  for
                  contempt of court and  flight  from  the  United  Kingdom.
                  .....




  24. The essence of this second ground of appeal is that the question to be
      asked is whether, taking  all  the  evidence  in  the  round,  it  was
      demonstrated to the applicable standard of proof  that  the  appellant
      had committed a serious non-political crime. It is submitted on behalf
      of the appellant that the segregation  of  the  decisions  of  the  UK
      courts from the other evidence (the claimed conduct of the respondent,
      the links between the Kazakh State and the Bank  in  the  UK  domestic
      court cases and XY's motives for ceasing to defend the proceedings) is
      unlawful and this is one single substantive issue  to  be  determined.
      All the evidence is to be looked at in the round rather than  treating
      the civil judgments as probative and  then  looking  for  evidence  to
      undermine those judgments.


  25. The respondent submits that the  question  to  be  determined  is  not
      whether XY has committed a serious non-political crime outside the  UK
      but whether there were serious reasons for considering  that  he  had.
      Thus, the real issue was not whether the civil  court  judgments  gave
      rise to the conclusion that XY did defraud the  Bank.  The  respondent
      submits that  the  correct  approach  is  to  place  reliance  on  the
      decisions of the courts of this country and that,  unless  there  were
      very good grounds, it would be  improper  to  assume  they  cannot  be
      relied  upon.  He  submitted  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal   judge
      considered the substance of  the  civil  judgments  and  the  evidence
      relied upon by XY does not undermine those judgments.

  26. XY accepts there has been a "massive  fraud  on  the  Bank"  [63]  but
      denies that he is responsible or involved  in  any  way.  Although  no
      criminal proceedings have been brought (against anyone) either in  the
      UK or outside the UK, it was not argued that a fraud on  the  bank  to
      the extent considered in the civil proceedings, did not  amount  to  a
      serious non-political crime.

  27. Article 1F(b) is as follows:


             The provisions of this  Convention  shall  not  apply  to  any
             person with respect to whom  there  are  serious  reasons  for
             considering that:
             .....
              (b)he has committed a serious non-political crime outside the
             country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as  a
             refugee;
             ....


  28. As referred to by the First-tier Tribunal judge, the Grand Chamber  in
      B and D accepted that a proportionality assessment  was  not  required
      because the competent  authority  would  already  have  undertaken  an
      assessment of the seriousness of the  alleged  crime.  In  this  case,
      there was no dispute but that  fraud  to  the  extent  of  $4.4bn  was
      sufficient to  bring  the  crime  within  Article  1F(b).  It  is  not
      necessary or required that a further assessment is undertaken, in this
      case, to establish whether a $4.4bn fraud is a  serious  non-political
      crime.   The issue can only be whether there are serious  reasons  for
      considering ("serious reasons") that XY has committed such a crime.


  29. To that extent, the  submission  that  the  evidence  as  a  whole  is
      indivisible, is incorrect.


  30. As for the assessment of whether there are serious reasons, Mr Chirico
      submitted, in essence, that evidence had come to light since the civil
      proceedings that casts doubt on the outcome of those proceedings, that
      the involvement of the Kazakh  State  in  bringing  civil  proceedings
      against political opponents was identified  and  referred  to  by  the
      expert witnesses and the First-tier Tribunal  judge  fell  into  legal
      error in failing to  place  weight  upon  their  expert  opinion,  the
      reasons given to explain why the applicant  had  not  participated  in
      some of the civil proceedings were genuine  and  understandable,  that
      the civil proceedings he had participated in had  not  resulted  in  a
      direct  adverse  finding,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had
      mistakenly stated the applicant  had  admitted  lying  which  directly
      impacted upon his credibility and that there was evidence in the  form
      of leaked emails of improper contact between the  respondent  and  the
      Kazakh State giving the appearance of bias by the respondent which  it
      was in the public interest to be explored. Mr Chirico did  not  submit
      that no weight should be placed upon the civil judgments but that they
      were not the starting point; the civil judgments formed a part of  the
      evidence and should be considered in the context of the evidence as  a
      whole. He stressed he was  not  seeking  to  re-adjudicate  the  civil
      proceedings but that the context within which the civil court  reached
      their decisions was  different  to  that  within  which  the  Tribunal
      reached its decision on a refugee claim. He did  not  argue  that  the
      standard of proof applied by Judge Shaerf was  incorrect.  The  expert
      evidence, of the extensive political interference by the Kazakh  State
      which included the bringing  of  civil  claims  to  support  political
      persecutory  conduct  went  unchallenged  and  was  important  in  the
      assessment of "serious reasons". The appearance of bias was  a  matter
      of public interest given the context of the claim and  extent  of  the
      civil claims. Mr Chirico accepted that the  appellant  failed  to  co-
      operate with court orders,  failed  to  participate  in  some  of  the
      actions without giving reasons (until later) and although remaining on
      the record in one case, failed  to  participate.  None  of  the  civil
      claims were presently subject to appeal  although  the  applicant  had
      indicated that when he had access to funds  he  would  be  seeking  to
      appeal. Mr Chirico submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  had,
      in treating the civil judgments as a starting point, thus erred in how
      he approached the evidence that was before him.


  31. Mr Sanders submitted that the political motivation  of  the  Bank  and
      Kazakh State had been considered by the civil courts and it  had  been
      acknowledged that even if there were political  motivation,  on  which
      the courts made no finding although the allegations were put to  them,
      that did not detract from the right of the bank to pursue  the  claim.
      The civil judgments should be the starting point for consideration and
      the First-tier Tribunal judge had correctly considered  whether  there
      was evidence before him that, in effect,  reduced  the  weight  to  be
      placed upon those judgments to reach a conclusion that there were  not
      serious reasons.


  32. Mr Chirico submitted the First-tier Tribunal judge  erred  in  law  in
      taking the civil judgments against the appellant as a starting  point.
      He submitted that the reliance upon AH [2012] EWCA  Civ  395  and  the
      concept of mutual confidence between different legal systems  was  not
      appropriate in the appellant's case: there was a different standard of
      proof in civil matters as oppose to criminal matters  (which  was  the
      position in AH), XY had not committed a criminal offence  and  XY  had
      not given evidence.

  33. XY took a positive decision not to defend some of  the  civil  claims.
      Although he gave as his reason for this the kidnapping of his wife and
      daughter and threats that had been made to  colleagues  with  whom  he
      worked whilst in Kazakhstan and the use by the Kazakh State  of  court
      proceedings to persecute him, he made no attempt  to  explain  to  the
      Civil Courts the reasons why he failed to participate. In JSC BTA Bank
      v XY [2013]  EWHC  3691  (CH)  Teare  J  found  that  fraud  had  been
      established  "to  the  criminal  standard  of  proof";   despite   the
      allegations of unfairness, the Court of Appeal  held  that  "the  bank
      must be entitled to take legal action to recover that sum, even on the
      assumption that its motivation for doing  so  was  mainly  political".
      This was articulated by Teare J in JSC BTA  Bank  v  Ablyazov  (no  6)
      [2011] EWHC 1136 (Comm) [54]. The First-tier Tribunal  judge  examined
      the judgments carefully. His own judgment reproduces  significant  and
      relevant extracts from  those  judgments  and  in  particular  in  his
      findings he referred to JSC BTA Bank v XY and others [2013]  EWHC  510
      (Comm). Teare J referred to  having  kept  "well  in  mind"  that  the
      appellant's decision not to comply with court orders had  led  to  the
      striking out of his  defence  but  that  the  alleged  frauds  by  the
      appellant were an  essential  part  of  the  case  against  the  other
      defendants. Teare J found unequivocally that the scheme was fraudulent
      and  that  the  appellant  "must"  have  orchestrated  or  "at  least"
      authorised the fraud.


  34. There are 11 civil judgments, all adverse to the appellant, in some of
      which he participated fully and others he chose not  to.  He  did  not
      disclose to the civil courts why he was not participating  or  why  he
      had failed to comply with  court  orders.  There  are  no  outstanding
      applications for permission  to  appeal  any  of  the  judgments.  The
      content of the judgments has to be considered  -  which  is  what  the
      First-tier Tribunal judge did. But having considered the  content  and
      that the appellant did not participate, the judge rationally concluded
      that they were the starting point. To conclude that civil judgments of
      the courts of England and  Wales  were  not  the  starting  point  for
      consideration in these circumstances would be irrational. There was no
      error of law by the First-tier Tribunal judge in taking that approach.
      It is entirely clear that it could not legitimately be said that there
      were not serious reasons for considering the appellant  had  committed
      serious non-political crimes outside the UK prior to  his  recognition
      as a refugee.

  35. The First-tier Tribunal judge then carefully considered  the  evidence
      before him and whether it was such as to cast  sufficient  doubt  upon
      that conclusion. Again, his approach cannot be faulted because  to  do
      otherwise would be irrational.

  36. The First-tier Tribunal judge in his judgement makes  clear  reference
      to the appellant's evidence. At paragraph 87 Judge  Shaerf  found  the
      appellant had made "no real attempt to address any  of  the  offensive
      adverse findings made against [him] in relation to the specific frauds
      practised  on  and  misappropriations  from  the  [Bank]   extensively
      detailed in the findings of Teare J and Popplewell J and not set aside
      in whole or in part to any material extent by the Court of  Appeal  or
      the Supreme Court". Judge Shaerf referred in detail to the failure  of
      the appellant in his oral evidence to address the particular  findings
      of the courts other than to deny  his  involvement  or  knowledge.  He
      claimed that he had been unable to obtain  documents  to  support  his
      defence in the civil courts because of the  political  obstruction  by
      the Kazakh State.

  37. Judge Shaerf considered and accepted the evidence of Q and  Dr  Lewis.
      That evidence did not address the appellant's personal involvement  or
      lack of involvement. Both experts acknowledged they had no dealings or
      knowledge which went to the substance of the  civil  proceedings  save
      that they described in  detail,  as  accepted  by  Judge  Shaerf,  the
      political actions of the Kazakh state and how  that  could  impact  on
      whether or not proceedings were brought and/or pursued.  Judge  Shaerf
      referred to the political aspect of Dr Lewis' evidence "to be expertly
      set out". Dr Lewis in his report considered leaked  emails  which  had
      come to light after the civil proceedings. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Shaerf recorded ([40, 41]) that Dr Lewis concluded that the

             "Bank  in  civil  proceedings  against   the   appellant   had
             misrepresented its case...there is a pattern of  collaboration
             between the authorities in Kazakhstan and the  authorities  in
             Ukraine and in Spain and Italy...He was satisfied  the  Kazakh
             authorities had near absolute control of [the  Bank]  and  had
             prevented the appellant  obtaining  access  to  evidence  with
             which  to  defend  the  civil  proceedings  ...and   generally
             illustrated the plausibility of the appellant's  account....Dr
             Lewis considered the  Kazakh  authorities  had  presented  the
             campaign  seeking  the  prosecution  and  extradition  of  the
             appellant  and  his  business  associates  as  the  legitimate
             independent activity of the Bank, seeking redress and recovery
             of stolen assets....On the basis of his study...he argued that
             such a claim is misleading. His view, based on  his  extensive
             researches, was that it was more credible to view the  actions
             taken by the Bank to recover assets as inextricably linked  to
             the  wider  political  pursuit  of  the  President   and   his
             allies....".


  38. The First-tier Tribunal judge took into  account  Dr  Lewis'  evidence
      that he was unable to comment  whether  the  appellant  had  committed
      fraud or embezzlement because he had no expertise in Kazakh  corporate
      law. The judge accepted that the Kazakh authorities have pursued cases
      against the appellant in other jurisdictions and  that  at  a  certain
      level business in Kazakhstan becomes  political.  Dr  Lewis  took  the
      view, unchallenged by the respondent and  accepted  by  Judge  Shaerf,
      that the civil proceedings in the UK leading to the  freezing  of  the
      appellant's assets and actions to recover them would enable the Kazakh
      authorities  to  "establish  a  cover  for  a  European   network   of
      surveillance  of  their  political  opponents".  But  this  could  not
      rationally result in a finding that there were not serious reasons for
      concluding that the appellant did not commit fraud.


  39. Although allegations of political  interference  were  raised  by  the
      appellant in the civil proceedings and not determined, the  issue  was
      considered and it was held that whilst there may be such  interference
      or motivation, the right of the Bank to recover its  assets  remained.
      Judge Shaerf considered the evidence of the experts in the context  of
      the civil judgments, the appellant's oral and written evidence and  in
      the knowledge of the leaked emails and  reached  the  conclusion  that
      their evidence did not provide any reason to depart from the  findings
      of fact made by the civil courts. He was  aware  of  and  specifically
      referred to the consideration by Dr Lewis of the leaked  emails.  That
      conclusion was rational, entirely  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge, and discloses no error of law.


  40. Mr Chirico asserts  the  leaked  emails  are  evidence  that  requires
      further and closer examination and in particular  full  disclosure  by
      the respondent of contact she  has  had  with  the  Kazakh  State.  He
      submits that this could impact upon the weight to  be  placed  on  the
      civil court judgments.  One of the emails  referred  to  a  disclosure
      that the appellant's refugee status was to be  revoked  prior  to  the
      appellant being informed that  a  decision  had  been  taken  to  that
      effect. The appellant has sought fuller disclosure of the  source  and
      context of these emails which has not been forthcoming. The submission
      that this gives an appearance of bias on the part  of  the  respondent
      and needs to be examined does not impact upon  the  judgments  of  the
      civil courts. To assert that would be to imply that the judges were in
      some way complicit in meetings that may or may not  have  taken  place
      between officials of the UK Government and the Kazakhstan  Government,
      adverse to the appellant or that each judge in all 11 cases was duped.
      There is no possible justification for such an assertion. Whatever the
      outcome of the search for disclosure such  an  implication  cannot  be
      sustained. The appellant withdrew from some civil proceedings,  failed
      to comply with court orders and did not seek particular disclosure  of
      documents. The civil proceedings involved several  hundred  companies.
      The appellant failed to explain how the Kazakh government or the  Bank
      could maintain control over  documents  relating  to  several  hundred
      companies such that no or inadequate disclosure took place.


  41. It was accepted by both parties  that  Judge  Shaerf  had  incorrectly
      stated that the appellant had admitted  lying  in  connection  with  a
      number of companies, but this does not  detract  from  the  conclusion
      reached by Judge Shaerf that the appellant's evidence was unfocussed:

             "vague, lacking in detail and repetitive.... [his] evidence on
             the commercial aspects and the  banks  litigation  in  the  UK
             Courts amounted to no more than a  general  disagreement  with
             the conclusions reached in the High  Court.  Even  before  the
             Tribunal he was  unable  to  focus  on  any  detail  and  gave
             unhelpful or inconsistent evidence...".


        That error by Judge Shaerf is immaterial when seen in  the  context
        of the overwhelming evidence adverse to the appellant. It is  plain
        from  reading  the  judgment  as  a  whole  that   it   is   simply
        inconceivable that the outcome would have been  any  different  but
        for this error.


  42. Judge Shaerf considered the evidence and reached the  conclusion  that
      there was insufficient evidence as a whole to  displace  or  undermine
      the findings of the civil courts. That  was  a  conclusion  fully  and
      rationally open to him.

  43. Judge Shaerf concluded

 119. ...I am satisfied that by the standards generally  accepted  by  those
      States which are signatories to the 1951 Convention the extent, nature
      and quality of the frauds for which  there  are  serious  reasons  for
      considering them  to  have  been  perpetrated  by  the  appellant  are
      staggeringly huge and equally unacceptable at the bar of international
      law and standards....


 120. To my mind  the  frauds  for  which  there  are  serious  reasons  for
      considering the appellant to have perpetrated amount to  serious  non-
      political crimes within the meaning of Article 1(F)(b) ....


  44. The appellant has not identified any material  error  of  law  in  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf. The appeal to the  Upper
      Tribunal is dismissed. The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Shaerf  is
      to stand.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  UTJ
    Allen made an order pending the outcome of the appeal before the  Upper
    Tribunal. As I indicated at the hearing, if I dismissed  the  appeal  I
    would grant an anonymity order  to  take  effect  until  the  date  for
    seeking permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  has  expired.
    Thereafter an application for anonymity would have to be re-made.



[pic]

                                    Date 4th September 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] Regulation 7.-(1) A person is not a refugee, if he falls within the
scope of Article 1 D, 1E or 1F of the Geneva Convention.
(2) In the construction and application of Article 1F(b) of the Geneva
Convention:
(a)the reference to serious non-political crime includes a particularly
cruel action, even if it is committed with an allegedly political
objective;
(b)the reference to the crime being committed outside the country of refuge
prior to his admission as a refugee shall be taken to mean the time up to
and including the day on which a residence permit is issued.
(3) Article 1F(a) and (b) of the Geneva Convention shall apply to a person
who instigates or otherwise participates in the commission of the crimes or
acts specified in those provisions.

[2] 339A(vii) he should have been or is excluded from being a refugee in
accordance with
regulation 7 of The Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
(Qualification)
Regulations 2006;

[3] I received written submissions from Mr Chirico dated (incorrectly) 6th
June 2017 and a further note from him dated 23rd June 2016; and from Mr
Sanders QC dated 19th June 2017.

[4] Paragraph 339B as in force at date of decision: When a person's grant
of asylum is revoked or not renewed any limited leave which they have may
be curtailed.

[5] Paragraph 339Q as in force at date of decision: (i)...
 (ii)...
(iii) ...
(iv) The Secretary of State may revoke or refuse to renew  a  person's  UKRP
where their grant of asylum or humanitarian protection is revoked under  the
provisions in the immigration rules.

[6] Paragraph 321A(1) The following grounds for the cancellation of a
person's leave to enter or remain which is in force on his arrival in, or
whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom apply;
(1) there has been such a change in the circumstances of that person's case
since the leave
was given, that it should be cancelled;
[7] The appellant's appeal was filed prior to the Immigration Act 2014
coming into force and he thus had available to him the grounds of appeal
under s84 of the 2002 Act prior to amendment by the Immigration Act 2014.

