
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09931/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 8 April 2015                      |On 21 April 2015                     |
|Prepared on 14 April 2015            |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                     TK
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Counsel instructed by Fountain Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally on 18 June  2014
         and claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  that  she  was  a  Pentecostal
         Christian and a citizen of Eritrea. That application was refused on
         13 November 2014, and in consequence a removal decision was made in
         relation to her, which identified  both  Eritrea  and  Ethiopia  as
         possible removal destinations.

      2. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal  against  those  immigration
         decisions and her  appeal  was  heard  on  23  December  2014,  and
         dismissed by decision of Judge Buchanan, promulgated on 21  January
         2015.

      3.  The  Appellant  duly  applied  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal, and that application  was  granted  by  Judge
         Kamara on 6 February 2015 on  the  basis  the  Judge  had  arguably
         failed to apply current country guidance for Eritrea and  Ethiopia.
         The Respondent filed a Rule  24  Notice  dated  19  February  2015.
         Neither party has formally applied  for  permission  to  rely  upon
         further evidence pursuant to Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         Procedure Rules 2008.

      4. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Pentecostal Christian

      5. It was not in dispute before the Judge that  the  Appellant  was  a
         Pentecostal Christian. As such she would be at risk of  persecution
         on the basis of her religion if, as a citizen of that country,  she
         were returned to Eritrea, but not if, as a citizen of Ethiopia  she
         were returned to Ethiopia.

    Nationality

      6. It is accepted by both parties that  although  the  Respondent  had
         placed the claim in issue, the Judge accepted  that  the  Appellant
         was a citizen of Eritrea [6.28]. He went on to find that she  would
         as a result be at risk of persecution on the basis of her  religion
         were she to be returned to Eritrea [6.29].

      7. What the Judge did not do was make any finding that  the  Appellant
         was a citizen of Ethiopia,  and  the  Respondent  had  advanced  no
         positive case to that effect before him. It is not  entirely  clear
         why he went down this path, save that this was apparently  the  way
         in which the submissions made on behalf of the Respondent were made
         to him, but the Judge then appears to have gone on to conclude that
         the Appellant  would  face  no  risk  of  harm  in  Ethiopia  as  a
         Pentecostal Christian, and thus to dismiss the appeal on the  basis
         she could in safety be returned to that country.

    Error of Law?

      8. It is accepted before me that the Judge's approach was flawed.  The
         Judge concluded that the Appellant was a citizen of Eritrea as  she
         claimed to be, and that as a Pentecostal Christian she would be  at
         real  risk  of  persecution  upon  return  to  that  country.   The
         Respondent had advanced no positive case to the effect that she was
         a citizen of Ethiopia, (whether or not she held  dual  nationality)
         and the Judge made no such finding. Thus the appeal ought  to  have
         been allowed on asylum grounds.

      9. In consequence the parties are agreed that I should set  aside  the
         decision upon the asylum appeal and remake it so as  to  allow  the
         appeal on that ground.




DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    21 January 2015 did involve the making  of  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision to dismiss the asylum appeal that requires that decision to be
    set aside and remade. I remake that decision so as to allow the  asylum
    appeal.



Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 14 April 2015



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.



Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 14 April 2015

