
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09522/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31 March 2015                     |On 16 April 2015                      |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                                     PM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A  Radford  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Turpin  &
                    Miller, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe. Following the refusal  of  the
    respondent to grant her asylum or any other kind of  leave  to  remain,
    the appellant appealed to the First tier Tribunal. Her appeal was heard
    by Judge Colvin, a Judge of the First tier Tribunal at Taylor House  on
    14 November 2013. The appeal was dismissed for reasons given  in  Judge
    Colvin's determination dated 9 December 2013.

 2. The appellant obtained permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  from
    Judge Rintoul against the decision of Judge  Colvin.  The  appeal  came
    before  me  on  24  October  2014  and  for  reasons  detailed  in   my
    determination dated 30 October 2014, I found that the decision  was  in
    material error of law for reasons I gave. I directed that the appeal be
    heard afresh but by agreement of parties the  findings  made  by  Judge
    Colvin regarding the appellant's claim of having been  sexually  abused
    were retained. I reserved the fresh hearing of this  appeal  to  myself
    and I accordingly heard it on 31 March 2015.

 3. The appellant, born on 29 August 1963, arrived in the United Kingdom on
    24 April 2013, with a business visa, which  was  valid  from  September
    2012 to September 2014. She claimed asylum on 16 August 2013. Her claim
    is that she fears persecution in Zimbabwe  because  she  has  been  the
    victim of continuous sexual abuse by a man in high position named  [Z].
    This person is the [ - ] in  Zimbabwe  and  was  related  to  her  late
    husband who died in December  2000.  He  had  been  HIV  positive.  The
    appellant was expected to marry him after his death  but  she  refused.
    The appellant is also  HIV  positive  and  following  [Z]  having  been
    diagnosed HIV positive, he has become very angry  and  blames  her  for
    infecting him. He had her detained for several days and she escaped  to
    come to the UK on her business visa, which she  had  already  obtained.
    She states that if she were to return to Zimbabwe he would kill her and
    subject her to treatment contrary to Article 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 4. I have noted the reasons of the respondent to  refuse  the  appellant's
    claim. It is essentially on  grounds  of  credibility,  the  respondent
    relying heavily on lack of corroborative evidence about the appellant's
    relationship with [Z] and her claim that she escaped from  his  custody
    and left Zimbabwe on her own passport.

 5. I have reminded myself that in  directing  that  the  appeal  be  heard
    afresh, it was agreed by the parties and with my consent,  to  preserve
    the findings made by Judge Colvin in paragraph 29 of her determination.
    The Judge in this paragraph accepted that the appellant is  "likely  to
    have been the victim of sexual abuse following the death of her husband
    by a family member who considered it his right to "inherit" her in  the
    traditional way ...". What the Judge did not accept is that the  abuser
    was [Z] who she found to be "the [ - ]  and  part  of  Robert  Mugabe's
    government and has been for a number of years". The Judge's refusal  to
    find the abuser to be the man the appellant claimed to  be  her  abuser
    was due to lack of  objective  evidence  of  relationship  between  the
    appellant and [Z].

 6. In paragraph 28 of her decision Judge Colvin said, "This is not a  case
    where the appellant has been incoherent or inconsistent in the core  of
    the account she has given." I agree with Judge Colvin,  having  made  a
    careful and detailed appraisal of the appellant's  evidence  throughout
    the asylum proceedings and the oral evidence she gave  at  the  hearing
    before me when she was cross-examined at length.

 7. As Ms Fijiwala, representing  the  respondent  said,  if  I  found  the
    appellant credible, then her claim of being at real risk of persecution
    on removal to Zimbabwe must succeed. I do find  the  appellant's  claim
    credible. I find that the appellant has given reasonable  and  credible
    explanations raised by the respondent regarding the credibility of  her
    claim including her ability to leave Zimbabwe on her own  passport  and
    her failure to seek asylum in the UK during her previous visits.

 8. In my judgment the reasons doubting her credibility fall away when  the
    standard to which she is required to discharge the burden of  proof  is
    real likelihood rather than on balance of probabilities. The fact  that
    the appellant has not produced "objective evidence" of her relationship
    to the abuser is perfectly understandable  in  the  circumstances.  His
    relationship to the appellant is through her husband and who  has  been
    dead for many years and who did not get  along  with  the  abuser.  The
    relationship with the husband has never been claimed  to  be  close  or
    direct. They shared grandfathers but came from different  grandmothers.
    In my view the expectation that the appellant  could  and  should  have
    produced  relevant  birth  certificates  to  prove   the   relationship
    objectively is placing too heavy a burden on  the  appellant.  In  this
    context, I have borne in mind the state of her mental health  and  also
    that such evidence could at best  be  corroborative  of  what  she  has
    consistently claimed throughout the proceedings. Corroborative evidence
    is not generally required in asylum cases. The discrepancies alleged by
    the respondent in the appellant's description of the relationship  with
    her abuser are no more than  illusory  and  non-existent  and  at  best
    minor, given the relationship itself and the circumstances  surrounding
    that relationship.

 9. I also note that the  appellant's  social,  economic  and  professional
    background in Zimbabwe were not such as to cause her to emigrate to the
    UK for economic reasons. She was gainfully employed  in  the  field  of
    orthodontics. I also note that the appellant has  made  no  attempt  to
    bolster her claim through suggesting that she was an  active  supporter
    of the MDC. She has candidly admitted  that  she  was  not  politically
    active in Zimbabwe and was no more than "a passive  MDC  supporter".  I
    note the compelling nature of the appellant's statements in her witness
    statement dated 4 November 2013 in particular in paragraph 6 where  she
    has said, "If the Home Office want to know why I didn't  speak  to  [Z]
    much when he was with me, this was because I was too busy  being  raped
    and abused. That is he tough reality of it ...".

10. I have taken due account of  the  objective  evidence  on  Zimbabwe  on
    conditions relevant to the appellant's claim. In this  context  I  have
    found the information relating to women in Zimbabwe as set out  in  the
    COI Report for Zimbabwe 2012 very helpful and supportive of  the  claim
    that the appellant has made. I  have  also  considered  and  given  due
    weight to the report of Dr Ian McCubbin, Senior Clinical  Psychologist.
    Letter date 5 November 2013 from AC, Specialist Orthodontist  has  also
    been important in my consideration of the claim. I note  in  particular
    that it was in 2009 that the appellant had told him that she was  being
    abused by [Z] who she described at the time as [her] husband's  cousin.
    This description of the relationship was a loose description. But  what
    is important is that upon getting to know the name  of  the  abuser  as
    [Z], it was decided not to engage help  from  police.  This  is  strong
    evidence of the consistency and bona fides of the appellant's claim.  I
    have also taken due account of the fact that it was  after  her  abuser
    discovered that he too had become HIV positive that  he  threatened  to
    kill her. This happened just before the  appellant  fled  Zimbabwe  and
    indeed caused her to flee.

11. In my judgment the appellant has discharged the burden of proof. I find
    that she is a refugee under the Refugee  Convention  and  needs  to  be
    granted asylum in accordance with  paragraph  334  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Date: 13 April 2015



Anonymity Direction:

The direction made by Judge Colvin shall remain in force.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Having allowed this appeal I make an award of full fee paid or payable


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

