
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/09130/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 October 2016                         |On 25 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                 SOMAYEH [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Worthington, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is a resumed hearing  following  a  finding  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law such that its decision fell to be set aside.   My
    written decision following the hearing on 15 March 2016 was as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, Somayeh [K], was born on 13 September 1983  and
         is a female citizen of Iran.  She arrived in the United Kingdom  in
         June 2014.  She applied for asylum but her claim  was  rejected  by
         the respondent and a decision taken to remove her from  the  United
         Kingdom was taken on 26 August 2014.  The appellant appealed to the
         First-tier Tribunal (the late Judge Upson)  which,  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 13 July 2015, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant
         now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Diwnycz  conceded
         that the  judge  had  erred  by  failing  to  consider  a  material
         submission made to him at the First-tier Tribunal hearing that  the
         appellant was at risk on return to Iran as an  undocumented  failed
         asylum seeker (ground 1).  I am also satisfied that the judge erred
         in that respect and that it is necessary for the Upper Tribunal, at
         a resumed hearing, to consider that  aspect  of  the  appeal.   The
         remaining grounds of appeal are,  in  essence,  challenges  to  the
         judge's findings of fact.  In  that  respect,  the  judge  made  no
         proper finding as to whether the appellant had been  raped  as  she
         claims [35].  That fact remains to be determined.  I  am  satisfied
         that  the  findings  at  [36-37]  can  remain  and  are  adequately
         reasoned.  At [38] the judge found that the surveillance systems of
         the  Iranian  authorities  are  so  sophisticated  that,  had   the
         appellant's husband been of interest to the authorities,  he  would
         not have been able to have left the country  at  all.   I  consider
         that finding should be looked at again for I am  unclear  from  the
         decision as to the evidential basis for it.  I find that the  Upper
         Tribunal should look again at the appellant's account  of  how  she
         left Iran and make findings accordingly.

         Notice of Decision

         3.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 13 July
         2015 is set aside.  The findings of fact at paragraphs 36-37 of the
         decision are preserved.  The decision will be  remade  following  a
         resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal  Judge  Clive
         Lane).  The Tribunal will  consider  afresh  the  circumstances  in
         which the appellant and her husband came  to  leave  Iran  and  the
         allegation  of  rape  (First-tier  Tribunal  decision  [35]).    In
         particular,  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  to  consider  whether   the
         appellant is at real risk of harm if  she  returns  to  Iran  as  a
         person who has made  a  failed  claim  for  asylum  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

         4.   No anonymity direction is made."

 2. At the resumed hearing there was a discussion regarding the  matter  of
    the appellant's alleged rape at the  hands  of  Etaalat  in  Iran.   As
    recorded above, I ordered that the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal
    at [36-37] should stand.  Those findings are as follows:

         "36.  The  appellant's  husband,  she  says,   was   charged   with
             embezzlement and adultery.  I am not persuaded that  a  charge
             of embezzlement  would  of  itself  lead  to  the  authorities
             pursuing him to the extent that they would  threaten  to  kill
             the appellant's children if she  did  not  tell  them  of  his
             whereabouts.

         37.  The appellant stated in her W/S [witness statement]  that  she
             did not know what her husband did at work but  in  her  asylum
             interview (question 24) she said that, although they  did  not
             talk about his job, she knew that he  worked  in  the  finance
             department.  Also there is a contradiction as to  the  release
             her husband and whether that was on the payment of a bribe  or
             a bail bond, I am not persuaded that Etaalat would  have  been
             prepared to release him in any circumstances  if  he  were  of
             interest to them in the way that the appellant would claim.  I
             therefore reject the appellant's evidence about her  husband's
             employment and the circumstances of his being wanted."

 3. The allegation of the rape is discussed by  the  late  Judge  Upson  at
    [35].  It is clear that the alleged rape occurred, in  the  appellant's
    account,  because  Etaalat  had  been  interested  in  the  appellant's
    husband's activities.  It follows from my upholding of the findings  at
    [36-37] that the rape itself is not material to the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum; indeed, it is a natural consequence of upholding  the  late
    Judge Upson's findings to the effect that the appellant's  husband  was
    not employed as she claimed and that he was not wanted by Etaalat  that
    the rape itself may either not have  taken  place  at  all  or  was  an
    incident wholly unrelated the appellant's reasons for claiming asylum..
     Mr Worthington, for the appellant, sought to persuade me to re-open my
    conclusions as regards the late judge's findings but I  refused  to  do
    so.  I acknowledge, however, that it would have been better if, at  the
    error  of  law  hearing,  the  connection  between  the  rape  and  the
    (rejected) account of embezzlement and problems with Etaalat  had  been
    addressed in greater detail.

 4. There remains a question as regards the manner in which  the  appellant
    and her children allegedly left Iran.  The  judge's  finding  regarding
    the sophistication of surveillance systems [38]  is,  rather  like  the
    rape, not of material interest given that the  late  Judge  Upson  made
    this finding to reinforce his (preserved) findings that the appellant's
    husband was not of interest to the Iranian authorities.  The  appellant
    seeks to persuade me that she would not have left Iran as a female with
    children without the consent of her father or her  husband.   Whilst  I
    note that submission, there was force in Mr Diwnycz's  submission  that
    the appellant appears to have left the country without  any  difficulty
    accompanied by two children.  Those children would, in turn,  have  had
    to have leave school and, had permission not been provided and had  the
    appellant's exit not been legal, it is difficult to  see  how  she  may
    have overcome the obvious  obstacles  to  which  Mr  Diwnycz  referred.
    Having regard to all the evidence, and considering  whether  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing there to be  a  real  risk  that  the
    appellant would face  ill-treatment  upon  return  on  account  of  the
    circumstances of her exit from Iran, I have concluded that there  would
    not be such a risk.

 5. An issue has also arisen as to whether one of the  appellant's  grounds
    of  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision   has   been
    determined.  That ground concerns the appellant's alleged conversion to
    Christianity (ground 3).  Whilst I did observe [2] in my error  of  law
    decision that, "the  remaining  grounds  of  appeal  are,  in  essence,
    challenges to the judge's finding of fact", I told  Mr  Worthington  at
    the resumed hearing that I would address the question of the conversion
    in greater detail and would consider whether the late Judge  Upson  had
    erred in  his  treatment  of  the  appellant's  claimed  conversion  to
    Christianity.

 6. The late Judge Upson discussed at some length the appellant's claim  to
    have converted.  He considered the  evidence  of  the  witness  Brother
    David Lanstrom.  The findings which he  reached  at  [42]  are,  in  my
    opinion, sound and adequately reasoned.  The late Judge Upson concluded
    that "Brother David Lanstrom was a credible witness but  I  also  found
    that he has been misled by this  appellant  in  the  furtherance  of  a
    desire to remain with her children in the UK".  It is  clear  that  the
    judge's assessment of the credibility of the appellant's claim to  have
    converted was a holistic one, taking into account all the evidence.   I
    am also satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal's  findings  as  to  the
    speed with which the appellant  converted  to  Christianity  may  stand
    [41].

 7. I am satisfied, as was the late Judge Upson, that the appellant is  not
    a genuine Christian convert  but  had  attended  church  and  undergone
    baptism with a view to remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  fact
    remains that the appellant does appear to have attended church and  has
    been baptised.  Mr Worthington sought to persuade  me  that  this  fact
    alone will expose the appellant to risk; if she were  asked  about  her
    conversion to Christianity upon her return to Iran  she  would  not  be
    expected to lie and would have to explain that she had attended  church
    and had been baptised.

 8. I have considered that submission very carefully  but  I  am  satisfied
    that the appellant is not entitled to refugee status on account of  her
    attendance at a Christian church or her baptism.  It is  possible  that
    the appellant, accompanied by her two children with whom she  has  been
    found to have left Iran legally, on return to that country  may,  as  a
    returnee from Europe, be questioned by Iranian  officials.   I  am  not
    persuaded that she would be asked directly whether she had converted to
    Christianity  or  had  attended   a   Christian   church;   given   the
    circumstances of her departure from Iran, I can find no reason why  she
    should be asked.  Further, I do not consider that the  appellant  would
    need to volunteer to those authorities the fact that she  has  attended
    church.  By that logic, any asylum seeker from Iran can  expect  to  be
    granted refugee status  in  the  United  Kingdom  provided  he  or  she
    attended a service  at  a  Christian  church  whilst  living  here  and
    notwithstanding that he/she had not converted to  Christianity.   There
    is no evidence to suggest  that  the  Iranian  authorities  ask  "open"
    questions which might induce returnees to volunteer  information  which
    might place them at risk. Indeed, if the appellant can be  expected  to
    volunteer such information then there is no reason why she  should  not
    also tell her interrogator that she was not a genuine convert  but  had
    attended only in order to support a spurious asylum claim.  It  follows
    that the late Judge Upson did not err in law in his  treatment  of  the
    appellant's claimed religious conversion.

 9. In the light of my findings above, I find that  the  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.



Notice of Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

11. This appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

12. This appellant is not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

13. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


