

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      AA/09988/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester Piccadilly         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 20th January 2016                    |On 20th April 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mohammad Juma Noori
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Faryl, Counsel instructed by Watson Ramsbottom
Partnership

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Afghanistan born on the 19th May  1994.
    On the 29th April 2015 the First-tier Tribunal allowed his  appeal,  on
    asylum and human rights grounds, against a decision to refuse  to  vary
    his leave and to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.  The  Secretary  of
    State now has permission[1] to appeal against that decision.




    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The Respondent arrived in the UK on the 24th February 2009 when he  was
    14 years old. In accordance with her  policy  on  Unaccompanied  Asylum
    Seeking Children the  Secretary  of  State  granted  him  Discretionary
    Leave,  limited until he turned 17 and a half in November 2011. Shortly
    before that leave expired  the  Respondent  applied  to  'upgrade'  his
    status to that of refugee, or  in  the  alternative  further  leave  to
    remain on a discretionary basis.


 3. The reasons for refusal letter is  dated  4th  November  2014.  It  was
    accepted that the Appellant is a Shi'a Hazara, and that as a result  he
    had suffered mistreatment in Afghanistan, but not  that  this  kind  of
    discrimination amounted to persecution. It was not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was at any risk of forced recruitment  or  otherwise  by  the
    Taliban.   The Secretary of State noted that the Respondent  still  has
    family in Afghanistan: a father, two brothers and a sister.    Attempts
    have been made, by the Home Office and the Red  Cross  to  trace  them,
    using the information supplied by the Appellant. Although they were not
    located, the Secretary of State believes her obligations to  trace  his
    family were met.   If  the  Respondent  has  any  subjective  fears  of
    returning to his home in Ghazni he could go  and  live  in  Kabul.  The
    Secretary of State relies on the findings of the Upper Tribunal  in  PM
    and Ors (Afghanistan) CG [2007] UKAIT 00089  and  RQ  (Afghanistan)  CG
    [2008] UKAIT 00013, both decisions in which Kabul  was  held  to  be  a
    generally safe and reasonable internal flight alternative  for  healthy
    adult males.


 4. The appeal came before the First-tier  Tribunal.  Judge  Dickson  heard
    oral evidence from the Respondent, and from the Respondent's  Hungarian
    girlfriend, Ms Szabina Petrovics.  The Respondent relied on the Refugee
    Convention and Article 8 ECHR.

 5. In respect of Article 8 the Tribunal accepted the credible evidence  of
    the Respondent and his girlfriend that they were a couple. However they
    were not living  together  and  the  Tribunal  did  not  consider  this
    relationship amounted to a family life. What it did  was  to  serve  to
    illustrate the extent to which the Respondent had "adapted  to  English
    life and friendships".  His private  life  had  been  established  over
    seven years as a young man and although the matter was finely  balanced
    the Tribunal did not consider it to be proportionate to remove him now.
    A relevant factor in that balancing exercise was the delay  in  dealing
    with the upgrade application. This "unfortunate and unacceptable" delay
    had been attributed by the Secretary of State to staff shortages.   The
    appeal was  therefore  allowed  with  reference  to  Article  8.   That
    finding, and outcome, are not challenged by the Secretary of State.

 6. In respect of the asylum grounds of  appeal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made the following findings of fact:

              i) The Respondent is a Shi'a Hazara from Ghazni;
             ii) He left Afghanistan when he was 13 years old;
            iii) Before he left Afghanistan the Taliban had taken his father
                 and brother to a training camp;
             iv) They had returned with his father in order to take him;
              v) He managed to escape before they came back to take him;
             vi) The Appellant has not heard from any family  members  since
                 he left Afghanistan and has no idea whether they  are  even
                 alive;
            vii) Significant parts of Ghazni are now under Taliban control;
           viii) The background material showed the  security  situation  in
                 Kabul to  have  significantly  worsened  with  the  Taliban
                 frequently attacking targets in and around the city;
             ix) The Hazara population has  come  under  attack  and  during
                 Spring 2015 staged daily protests in Kabul;
              x) The humanitarian situation in Kabul is poor with around 70%
                 of the population living in 'informal' settlements,  ie  in
                 shacks, tents or derelict buildings  and  the  unemployment
                 rate is high;
             xi) The Respondent has never been to Kabul;
            xii) He has no contacts there.

      Having apparently accepted that the Respondent would  be  at  risk  of
      persecution in Ghazni  the  primary  focus  of  the  determination  is
      internal flight.  Having  identified  the  factors  listed  above  the
      Tribunal notes the objective background material in respect  of  being
      'connected' in Afghan society: "being unknown or distrusted within the
      current  situation  in  Afghanistan  creates  a  lack  of  safety  and
      security, acute loneliness, depression and  hinders  opportunities  to
      progress".  Applying these findings  to  Lord  Bingham's  guidance  in
      Januzi the Tribunal finds the Respondent to have discharged the burden
      of proof and the appeal is allowed.

 7. It is this conclusion which is challenged in this appeal. The Secretary
    of State  submits  that  in  reaching  its  conclusion  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has not done enough to distinguish the  Respondent's  position
    from that of any other young Afghan man. The Secretary of State  relies
    on the extant country guidance in AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) and HK and Ors (minors- indiscriminate violence
    -  forced  recruitment  by  Taliban  -  contact  with  family  members)
    Afghanistan CG [2010] UKUT 378 (IAC).
















    My Findings

 8. As noted above, this appeal only concerns the asylum grounds of  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal. The appeal was allowed on human  rights
    grounds and that finding is unchallenged and preserved.


 9. The challenge is to the decision to allow the appeal on asylum grounds.
    Mr McVeety points to the established principles that apply  to  country
    guidance cases, namely that they should be followed  unless  there  are
    good reasons to depart from them.  Mr McVeety submits that the Tribunal
    appears to have been unduly swayed by the fact that at the date of  the
    appeal the President of the Upper Tribunal, McCloskey J, had ordered  a
    stay on removals to Afghanistan. The stay was subsequently  lifted  and
    removals have continued apace.

10. I have read the country guidance cases cited with care.

11. The Secretary of State submits that the First-tier  Tribunal  has  here
    failed to apply the guidance in HK when assessing the  truthfulness  of
    the Respondent's account of forced recruitment  of  his  father,  elder
    brother and then  himself.  I  have  not  found  this  decision  to  be
    particularly helpful. The Tribunal in that case simply makes the  point
    that there has not been shown to be a general risk to  Afghan  boys  of
    forced recruitment by the Taliban, particularly in the provinces  under
    scrutiny in that case (Loghar, Kunduz and Kunar). It then  goes  on  to
    state that such claims should be assessed on a case by case basis. That
    is exactly what the Tribunal has done here.  The  Tribunal  heard  oral
    evidence from the  Respondent,  and  read  his  interview  records  and
    statements. Having done so it was satisfied that his account was  true.
    The fact that his brother had been taken and - at  the  date  that  the
    Respondent left Afghanistan was  still  in  the  training  camp  -  was
    plainly relevant to whether the Respondent himself might be said to  be
    at risk [see for instance paras 35-36 HK).  The Judge was  entitled  to
    believe the witness and to make the findings that he did.

12. Similarly it is difficult  to  see  in  what  way  Judge  Dickson  made
    findings at odds with the guidance in AK.  Whilst the Upper Tribunal in
    that case found that Kabul can in general be considered to  be  a  safe
    and reasonable internal flight alternative it stressed,  in  accordance
    with the classic principles,  that each case must be considered on  its
    merits [at 243]:
         "As regards Kabul city, we have already discussed the situation  in
         that city and we cannot see  that  for  the  purposes  of  deciding
         either refugee eligibility  or  subsidiary  protection  eligibility
         (and we are only formally tasked with  deciding  the  latter)  that
         conditions  in  that  city  make  relocation   there   in   general
         unreasonable, whether considered under Article 15(c) or under 15(b)
         or 15(a). We emphasise the words "in general" because it  is  plain
         from Article 8 (2) and our domestic case law on internal relocation
         (see AH (Sudan) in particular) that in every case there needs to be
         an inquiry into the applicant's individual circumstances; and  what
         those circumstances are will very often depend  on  the  nature  of
         specific findings made about the credibility  of  an  appellant  in
         respect of such matters as whether they have family ties in  Kabul.
         But here our premise concerns an appellant with  no  specific  risk
         characteristics and someone found to have an uncle  in  Kabul:  see
         above paras 3,5,154, 186 and below, paras  250-254).  To  summarise
         our  conclusion,  whilst  when  assessing  a  claim  in  which  the
         respondent asserts that Kabul  city  would  be  a  viable  internal
         relocation alternative, it is necessary to take into account  (both
         in assessing "safety" and reasonableness") not only  the  level  of
         violence in that city but also the difficulties experienced by that
         city's  poor  and  also  the  many   IDPs   living   there,   these
         considerations will not in general make return to Kabul  unsafe  or
         unreasonable, although it will still always be necessary to examine
         an applicant's individual circumstances".
13. In this case various factors were identified which cumulatively led  to
    a  finding  that  internal  flight  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  this
    appellant.  He  is  a  Shi'a  Hazara,  a   group   who   already   face
    discrimination and on the evidence before  the  Tribunal,  were  facing
    increasingly violent attack.  He has not been to Afghanistan  since  he
    was 13 (at the date of the appeal he was nearly 21) and has never lived
    in Kabul. He has - in contrast to the appellant in AK -  no  relatives,
    friends nor alternative support network in Kabul. He has  no  means  of
    tracing his family members or discovering their whereabouts.   Although
    not expressly relied upon in respect of internal flight the  Tribunal's
    findings as to the strength and depth of his private life in the UK may
    also be relevant to this assessment: he is not simply an Afghan who has
    never been in Kabul, but he is a young man who has spent the past seven
    formative years in the UK.  Whilst it is unarguable that  the  Tribunal
    did not specifically cite AK in its  determination  (it  is  not  clear
    whether the case was drawn to the court's  attention)  I  am  satisfied
    that this error is in no way material. The refusal letter to  which  it
    had regard cited older country guidance which also made it  plain  that
    in general Kabul  is  a  reasonable  place  to  seek  internal  flight;
    moreover the Tribunal made a number of sustainable findings  about  the
    Respondent's particular circumstances which justified its findings that
    for him life in Kabul would not be reasonable.


14. The final point made on the Secretary of State's behalf  was  that  the
    Judge placed too much emphasis on the 'stay' of returns to Afghanistan,
    operational at the date of the appeal. It  is  evident  that  this  did
    feature in the  submissions  made;  the  Secretary  of  State  in  fact
    requested an adjournment until the  issue  was  resolved.    I  am  not
    however satisfied that this was a factor  which  swayed  the  Tribunal.
    The determination makes clear that it was the factors individual to the
    appellant which led to the findings of fact.






    Decisions

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and is upheld.


16. I was not asked to make a direction for anonymity and on  the  facts  I
    see no reason to do so.










                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   29th
                                January 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused on the 27th May 2015 by First-tier Tribunal De
Haney but granted upon renewed application by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on
the 30th July 2015

