
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09243/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27th June 2014                               |                           |
|                                                |On 8 July 2014             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                                 Mr Ali Bara
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Khalique, Counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co
                    Solicitors (Tonbridge)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of the Ivory Coast.   Though  his  date  of
    birth is recorded as 19th February 1996 that is  in  fact  in  dispute.
    The background to his claim is that in 2006 his family home  was  burnt
    down by members of the Muslim community because he and his family  were
    Christian.  In other words, the Appellant bases his  case  on  conflict
    between the Muslim and Christian populations in his home country.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  or  before  2nd  March
    2013; that is the date when he was arrested by Kent Police after  being
    spotted coming from under a freight vehicle.  He was referred  to  Kent
    Social Services and he made application to be recognised as a refugee.

 3. On 28th June 2012 a decision was made to refuse the application but  he
    was granted discretionary leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  until
    19th August 2013 on the basis of his minority.  On  15th  August  2013,
    however, he made application for further leave to  remain  but  on  9th
    October 2013 a decision was made to  refuse  the  application  and  the
    Appellant appealed.

 4. On 5th November 2013 his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain sitting at Hatton Cross.  He rejected the factual  matrix  upon
    which the claim was based.  He did not accept that  the  Appellant  was
    Christian.

 5. He then went on at paragraph  29  to  consider  the  Appellant's  case,
    despite his finding, as if the Appellant had established that  he  were
    Christian but dismissed the appeal on the basis that the Appellant  had
    not established  even  to  the  lower  standard  sufficient  background
    material to justify a finding that he would be at risk  of  persecution
    were he to be returned to the Ivory Coast.  In those circumstances  the
    question of internal relocation did not arise.

 6. Not content with that  decision  by  Notice  dated  2nd  May  2014  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  There were four grounds.  The first three relate to the  age
    of the Appellant and the fourth suggests an  incorrect  application  of
    the standard of proof.

 7. On 12th May 2014 Judge Saffer granted permission though it is  of  note
    that he focused entirely on the issue of the failure of  the  judge  to
    take account of the Appellant's minority when assessing the evidence.

 8. Ms Khalique sought to persuade me that the failure on the part  of  the
    judge to make a finding as to the Appellant's age was material not only
    to the legality of whether or not the Appellant might be  returned  but
    also went to the reliability of the findings made  by  the  judge  with
    respect to the core issue in the claim, namely his faith.

 9. Mr Duffy fairly and properly conceded at the outset that the judge  had
    made no finding on the age of the Appellant when it was the Appellant's
    case that he would not be 18 until 19th  February  2015.   Clearly  the
    failure of the judge to make  a  finding  on  that  point  is  material
    because it goes to the lawfulness of the decision of the  Secretary  of
    State to remove the Appellant both in the asylum  claim  and  on  human
    rights grounds, given her policies in relation to minors.

10. In the circumstances it becomes necessary to set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in order that it can be remade.

11. The defect can, however,  be  rectified.   The  age  of  the  Appellant
    forming part of a claim for refugee status must be established  against
    the lower standard of proof.  There was an age assessment conducted  in
    this case which was not produced by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the
    purpose of the remaking of the appeal. The Appellant's evidence on  the
    other hand is that his date of birth is such that he  will  not  be  18
    until 19th February 2015.  I asked Mr Duffy if he could provide me with
    a copy of the age assessment but he was not able to do so.  It  may  be
    in any event that not much turns  on  the  age  of  the  Appellant  now
    because as Mr Duffy told me it was unlikely that the Appellant would be
    removed before 19th February 2015 in any event but in  the  absence  of
    the age assessment, the evidence of the Appellant received  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, adopting the approach of the Judge to consider and
    deal with the appeal on the alternative basis of the claim, leads me to
    finding that the Appellant will not be 18 until 19th February 2015.

12. That, however, does not mean that the  Appellant  is  a  refugee.   The
    grounds go, as I have already indicated, to the failure on the part  of
    the Secretary of State to make the appropriate enquiries  with  respect
    to the Appellant and the judge failing therefore to recognise the error
    in that but there was no suggestion before me that any enquiries  would
    have made any material difference and I am told now that the  Appellant
    has made enquiries through the Red Cross.  As I say, the Appellant  now
    would not be removed in any event before he is 18 on the  basis  of  my
    finding, which accords with his own contention.

13. The issue as to whether or not the Appellant is Christian or Muslim  is
    not material to the eventual decision, though of course I  accept  that
    it is material to him, because as I have already  indicated  the  judge
    approached the case in the alternative saying at paragraph 29:

         "I am far from satisfied that the Appellant was a Christian when in
         the Ivory Coast.  If I am wrong about that and  he  in  fact  is  a
         Christian the question that I have to decide in whether if returned
         to his home country now he would face persecution on account of his
         faith."

    The judge was right to pose himself that question, and I have to remake
    the case  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  that  was  available.   No
    application has been made under  Rule  15  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce additional evidence and so I look
    to the determination of the judge and ask myself whether there  is  any
    basis to interfere with the findings.  I find no basis for doing so. It
    was open to the judge to say that there was  no  sufficient  background
    material adduced to demonstrate that the Appellant as a Christian would
    be persecuted.  In those circumstances, as I have indicated,  there  is
    no basis for examining whether or not it would be unduly harsh for  the
    Appellant to relocate.

14. Ms Khalique suggested to me that she  and  those  instructing  her  had
    identified problems with the age assessment form.  As I  have  said,  I
    have not seen that form, it has not been produced. She did not  produce
    it. She would not have relied upon it in any event. If indeed there are
    matters which arise or have arisen  since  the  determination  of  this
    matter in the First-tier Tribunal then it would  be  a  matter  for  Ms
    Khalique and those who instruct her to consider the basis upon which if
    at all it is appropriate to approach the Secretary of State  again  but
    that is a matter for them, not for me.

15. As to any argument in relation to the standard  and  burden  of  proof,
    given what appears at paragraph 18 of  the  determination,  I  find  no
    substance in the contention. It is clear that the Judge  was  aware  of
    the correct standard and I find no sufficient basis for saying that  it
    was not applied.

16. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  and  remade  such  that  the  appeal
    brought on asylum grounds is dismissed but the appeal on  human  rights
    grounds is allowed because it would be unlawful having  regard  to  the
    third test in Razgar to remove the Appellant and in any event it  would
    be unlawful as contrary to the  Secretary  of  State's  own  policy  to
    remove the Appellant prior to his 18th birthday, which is I  find  19th
    February 2015.

Decision

For the avoidance of doubt therefore  the  appeal  is  dismissed  on  asylum
grounds but allowed on human  rights  grounds.   It  is  a  matter  for  the
Secretary of State as to what length of time is  granted  to  the  Appellant
but consistent with my finding would be leave granted  until  19th  February
2015 at the least.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
