
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09394/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 25 March 2014                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                        MOHIDEEN BAWA MOHAMED ABDULLAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr C J Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant is a Tamil Muslim citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 28  October
   1965.  He came to the UK on a visit visa in March 2007,  and  overstayed.
   He made an asylum claim on 23 May 2013.  The respondent  refused  it  for
   reasons explained in a letter dated  26  September  2013.   Judge  Clough
   dismissed the appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  reasons
   explained in her determination dated 20 December 2013.




2) The first and  principal  point  raised  in  this  appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal is that the judge fell into error of the nature encapsulated  by
   Lord Justice Wilson in Mbanga v SSHD [2005] INLR 377 at paragraph 24:

    What the fact finder does at his peril is  to  reach  a  conclusion  by
    reference only to the applicant's evidence and then, if it be negative,
    to ask whether the conclusion should be shifted by the expert evidence.




3) The grounds secondly criticise  the  judge's  finding  at  paragraph  32,
   where she limits the weight she gives  to  a  Medical  Foundation  Report
   regarding the appellant's mental condition because  the  appellant's  GP,
   who is to be assumed to be competent and aware of likely  problems  faced
   by asylum seekers, prescribed him only 20 MG of Citalopram daily, with no
   further interventions in respect of his mental state.  "Even taking  into
   account the limited consultation time with GPs ... I cannot reconcile the
   ... prescription of a first line anti-depressant given the description of
   the appellant's mental difficulties ... in the medical report and this is
   even allowing for the stress an outstanding appeal is likely to  have  on
   an appellant."  The ground argues that the finding of PTSD resulted  from
   a focused analysis by a doctor trained in detection of  medical  evidence
   of torture, whereas there is no  evidence  that  the  GP  considered  the
   relevant measurement, and that "logically the reliance upon this point is
   irrelevant."

4) The third point in the grounds is that although the judge  accepted  that
   the  appellant's  scars  were  not   self-inflicted,   she   reached   an
   inconsistent conclusion that they might have been  caused  in  a  traffic
   accident or deliberately.

5) The grounds finally make a rather  confused  point  about  the  appellant
   potentially falling into risk categories  outlined  in  country  guidance
   case law.

6) Further to the grounds, Mr Ndubuisi submitted that  the  finding  related
   to the GP's prescription was not open to her.  He accepted that the judge
   did not  err  in  her  approach  to  physical  findings  in  the  Medical
   Foundation report, but said there was error in rejecting its  finding  on
   the  psychological  or  psychiatric   aspects.    She   fell   into   the
   "compartmentalisation" error identified  in  Mbanga.   Her  determination
   should be set aside  and  a  fresh  hearing  ordered  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

7) Mr Mullen submitted that the Mbanga point was at best a  complaint  about
   the form not the substance of  the  determination.   The  judge  did  not
   compartmentalise, or approach matters in the wrong order.  At  paragraphs
   22-26 she set out the relevant aspects of the Medical  Foundation  report
   in detail.  She  next  found  several  good  reasons  for  rejecting  the
   credibility of the appellant's account, in particular  at  paragraphs  28
   and 29.  She found at paragraph 30 that  the  physical  evidence  was  of
   trauma inflicted on the appellant.  She noted  that  the  author  of  the
   Medical Foundation report accepted the information given by the appellant
   about his treatment in Sri Lanka, which is of  course  unsurprising,  but
   that was a matter the judge had to address for herself.  The  observation
   that the GP's prescription  only  of  a  minor  anti-depressant,  without
   further  recommended  intervention,  was  sensibly  found  to  be  rather
   inconsistent with the Medical  Foundation  report.   That  was  only  one
   aspect of the overall consideration.  The judge went on at  paragraph  33
   to give good reasons for rejecting the appellant's account of the 5 years
   he spent in the UK prior to making his claim and his explanation that  he
   was unaware of and  unable  to  claim  asylum  during  that  period.   At
   paragraph 34, she gave  further  reasons  for  the  conclusion  that  the
   evidence looked at a whole was not credible.  The comment  thereafter  at
   paragraph 35 that the view of the author of the medical  report  did  not
   outweigh those findings did not, in proper context, disclose an error  of
   reaching a conclusion first by reference only to other evidence.

8) Mr Ndubuisi in response emphasised that there was no evidence before  the
   judge to show that the GP had the  same  opportunity  of  making  a  full
   mental health assessment as did the  author  of  the  Medical  Foundation
   report.  The judge might have commented on what  the  GP  ought  to  have
   done, but she was not entitled to conclude as she did.  Proper assessment
   of the appellant's mental health condition and of the evidence  regarding
   the availability of medical resources in  Sri  Lanka  might  have  led  a
   different outcome.  Paragraph 35 disclosed the precise  error  identified
   in Mbanga.

9) I reserved my determination.

10) Read on its own, the judge's comment at paragraph 35 that  the  physical
   findings in the Medical Foundation  report  do  not  outweigh  her  other
   findings might be construed as an error of approach.  However,  to  focus
   on that passage alone would be  a  partial  and  unfair  reading  of  the
   determination.  The judge did not reach that  conclusion  before  looking
   all of the evidence relevant to it.  She used the report as part  of  the
   context to be surveyed prior to coming to any  conclusion.   She  made  a
   fair summary of the report, and its  findings  on  physical  aspects  are
   entirely accepted.

11) The observation that the GP's prescription does not fit  well  with  the
   report is one which the judge was entitled to make.

12) The determination  contains  several  good  reasons  for  rejecting  the
   appellant's evidence as incredible before that conclusion  is  stated  at
   paragraph 34.  The  particular  stage  in  a  determination  at  which  a
   conclusion is stated is not material.

13) It is perfectly consistent to accept that scars are not  self-inflicted,
   and to find that they may have an accidental  or  deliberate  cause.   By
   deliberate cause the judge plainly  did  not  mean  self-infliction,  but
   deliberate cause at someone else's hands and in circumstances other  than
   those described.









14) The fourth point in the grounds remains obscure, but  nothing  can  turn
   on it, standing the entirely negative findings on credibility.

15) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


                               [pic]
                                31 March 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
