
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09741/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated on                       |
|19 July 2016                         |29 September 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                 ABU RAHMAT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ata, Ata & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appellant, a national of Afghanistan, born  20  January  1996  has
    been granted permission to appeal the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Holt.  For reasons given in her decision dated 12  February  2015
    she dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  dated  04
    November 2014 refusing to vary the appellant's leave to enter or remain
    and the further decision to remove him from the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant who had arrived in the United Kingdom in the early course  of
    2008 claimed asylum which was refused.  However, in the  light  of  his
    age he was granted discretionary leave to remain for three years  until
    17 April 2011.  Further leave was granted by the  Secretary  of  State,
    under the discretionary leave to remain policy then in force, until  20
    July 2012.  The appellant made an application for further leave  on  19
    July 2012, which led to the above adverse decisions, for reasons  given
    in a letter dated 28 October 2014.  The Secretary of  State  relied  on
    reasons previously given in a letter dated 26 August 2011  in  deciding
    not to treat the more recent application as one for asylum.

 2. The asylum claim had been based on a fear of the  appellant's  father's
    enemies pursuing a vendetta against him. The appellant introduced a new
    limb to his claim in a statement dated 28 January  2015  on  the  basis
    that he would be unable to access any meaningful  protection  from  the
    state authorities as a Christian convert from Islam.  He refers to  his
    notice of appeal having raised this new limb and  he  confirms  he  was
    baptised on 30 November 2014.

 3.  The  appellant's  representative  (Mr  Peter   Thornhill,   Solicitor)
    indicated to Judge Holt that he would  not  be  pursuing  the  original
    asylum claim and would not be advancing an Article  8  claim.   Instead
    the focus would be on the appellant's conversion to  Christianity.  The
    judge found the claim  was  not  credible.  Permission  to  appeal  her
    decision was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Holmes) and subsequently on renewal of  the  application  by  the
    Upper Tribunal (UTJ Reeds) on  17  June  2015.   Thornhills  solicitors
    continued to act for the appellant at that stage.

 4. The Respondent took steps to remove the appellant.  On  5  August  2015
    Thornhills wrote to National Removals Command, explaining that although
    they were aware of the refusal by the Upper Tribunal of the application
    for permission to appeal they had not received a copy of the notice  of
    decision. They knew that it had been served  on  the  Liverpool  Asylum
    Team on 2 July 2016. The copy that had provided by the  respondent  was
    only of the second page. Attempts to obtain a full copy  had  not  been
    successful. The letter reiterates a request for  a  full  copy  of  the
    decision in the context of Thornhills awareness that it was possible to
    apply for judicial review and they were conscious of the  limited  time
    frame within which to do so.

 5. On 27 August 2015 the appellant applied for permission to proceed  with
    the claim for judicial review of  UTJ  Reeds  decision.   Duncan  Lewis
    Solicitors were now acting and we note that the statement of facts  and
    grounds were settled by  counsel.   Although  the  challenge  raised  a
    matter that had not been previously raised in  the  grounds  of  appeal
    before the Tribunal, it was contended  that  the  issue  was  "Robinson
    obvious" such that permission ought to properly be granted.  In essence
    it was argued that the Secretary of State had acted in  breach  of  her
    public law duty to properly inform the court of the true position under
    her published Home Office Asylum Instruction  on  Discretionary  Leave.
    It was argued that the appellant's entitlement to indefinite  leave  to
    remain under the policy was relevant to whether his  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom was lawful and proportionate.

 6. The claim included an application for urgent interim relief prohibiting
    the appellant's removal and we note, in particular, section  9  of  the
    form a reference to Mr Ata of Duncan Lewis Solicitors in  which  he  is
    described as a consultant  solicitor  "in  the  firm  of  Duncan  Lewis
    Solicitors" and that he  had  the  conduct  matter  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant.  It is not clear whether an order was made staying removal of
    the appellant pending consideration of the application but in any event
    the matter came before Dove J  on  22  October  2015  when  he  granted
    permission with the following observation:

         "I am prepared to grant permission for this claim to  be  commenced
         out of time and grant an extension of  time  in  that  extent.   It
         seems that the claim was commenced only a very short time after the
         time limit had expired.   I  am  satisfied  that  it  is  at  least
         arguable that the claimant's case should have been considered under
         the  transitional  assessment  set  out  in  paragraph  14  of  the
         statement of facts and grounds, and that the failure to do  so  was
         arguably an error in this case.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  case
         engages  an  important  point  of  principle  in  relation  to  the
         application of the transitional arrangements  and  that  there  are
         potentially serious consequences for the claimant  were  he  to  be
         returned."

    The application was accompanied by  a  letter  dated  25  August  2015,
    addressed to National Removal Command from Duncan  Lewis  pointing  out
    their client had not been served with a decision refusing permission to
    appeal until 17 August 2015. A copy of the letter from Thornhill  dated
    5 August was also enclosed.  This assertion appears to  have  persuaded
    Dove J to extend time. It remains unexplained how it is Thornhills were
    aware that the decision refusing permission  had  been  served  on  the
    Liverpool Asylum Team, but that is not an aspect which it is  necessary
    for us to pursue.

 7. On 21 August 2015 Ata & Co, a third firm of  solicitors,  wrote  to  UK
    Visas and Immigration.  They made formal  applications  for  indefinite
    leave to remain in these terms:

         "Our client herewith applies for indefinite Leave to Remain on  the
         basis that he had six years residence with Discretionary  Leave  to
         Remain under the old policy.  In your  decision  dated  28  October
         2014 there is a  conspicuous  omission  of  the  application  of  a
         published policy to our client's case, rendering  the  decision  of
         October 28th not in accordance with the law,  and  hence  unlawful.



         We request your urgent attention to this apparent  mishandling  and
         request that our client is released on TA."

 8. In reply on 23 August, National Removals  Command  explained  that  the
    case had been reconsidered.  It was observed that on 19 July  2012  the
    appellant had made an application for further leave to remain  and  not
    for indefinite leave to remain.  Furthermore, it was observed that  the
    appellant had failed to lodge an application on  the  appropriate  form
    and pay the relevant fee as this is  a  charged  application  with  the
    submissions of 21 August 2015.  The reply addresses  other  aspects  of
    the history of this matter including reference to the competence of the
    appellant's solicitor before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was  not
    considered it would be appropriate  to  grant  leave  to  remain.   The
    attention of Ata & Co was drawn to paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and short reasons are given why it was considered the submissions
    did not amount to a fresh claim.

 9. This letter must have been before Ata & Co Solicitors (or Mr Ata  as  a
    consultant to Duncan Lewis & Co) before the judicial review  claim  was
    lodged on 27 August and indeed the  contrary  is  not  asserted.   That
    claim however, made no  reference  to  the  fresh  claim  decision  but
    instead purported to be a  Cart  Judicial  Review.   Whether  this  was
    through incompetence or for some other reason we do not know.  What  we
    do know is that by mid August 2015, Mr Ata in  his  role  as  the  sole
    practitioner with Ata & Co Solicitor or as a consultant to Duncan Lewis
    & Co, was well aware that the point he  wished  to  run  had  not  been
    raised as a ground of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

10. There was no request for a substantive hearing in the  Judicial  Review
    proceedings and on 18 January 2016, the Vice  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal granted permission to appeal.  On that  basis  the  case  came
    before us on 19 July.

11. On 2 February 2016 the Secretary of State  provided  a  response  under
    Rule 24 observing that she did not have a copy of the decision  of  the
    High Court nor the appellant's initial grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal.   Having  read  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination,  it
    appeared to her to be detailed and well reasoned and  that  cogent  and
    adequate  reasons  had  been  given  for  the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    conclusion that the appellant did not qualify for leave in  the  United
    Kingdom as a refugee.

12. No application had been made to amend the grounds of challenge  to  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal prior to the hearing before us  and
    Mr Ata acknowledged the only course open to him was to  seek  to  amend
    the grounds or apply for an adjournment. He sought  both  but  did  not
    seek to pursue the original grounds. He attributed his difficulties  to
    the absence of legal aid.  He had not received notice of hearing  which
    he had learned of only three days prior and was appearing pro bono.  He
    claimed to have notified the tribunal of his involvement  in  a  letter
    sent 11 April 2016 or  possibly  earlier.   Mr  Ata  also  produced  an
    extract from the policy on which he sought to rely, which Mr Avery  did
    not accept related the correct policy.  The latter reminded us  of  the
    Secretary of State's position set out in her  letter  dated  25  August
    2015.

13. We did not consider there was a justified basis for adjournment or that
    permission to amend grounds should be given.  With  Mr  Ata  no  longer
    wishing to pursue the original grounds of challenge, we  dismissed  the
    appeal.  In coming to this decision we had have regard to the following
    matters.  It was not until after the hearing on 21 July  2016  that  an
    email was received from Ata & Co Solicitors in terms  that  they  acted
    for the appellant in relation to "his immigration matter".  A  form  of
    authority dated 20 July 2016 was enclosed.  At the hearing Mr Ata  said
    that  he  had  written  to  the  tribunal  indicating   a   change   of
    representative on 11 April  2016.   That  letter  is  on  Duncan  Lewis
    letterhead and is in these terms:

         "We write to request that our client's appeal is listed for a fresh
         hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in   the   light   of   the
         administrative  court  decision  dated  16/12/2015   quashing   the
         decision of the Upper Tribunal to refuse our client's  application.
         Please see attached for the administrative court's decision.

         If you have any queries, please do not hesitate to contact us.

         Please  ensure   that   you   quote   our   reference   number   in
         ASRA/RO62700001/Rahmat in  all  correspondence  and  communications
         with this office."

14. The letter is addressed to the Immigration and Asylum Tribunal (a  body
    which does not exist) and appears to have been based on a misconception
    that the consequence of the decision of Green J was that the First-tier
    Tribunal had jurisdiction to hear the appellant's  appeal.   Notice  of
    the hearing was sent out by the Upper  Tribunal  on  16  June  2016  to
    Thornhills and to the appellant.  Although Duncan Lewis's letter of  11
    April 2016 indicates that the appellant was now their client,  it  does
    not explain in clear terms that they had been instructed in the  appeal
    proceedings in place of Thornhills. In any event the appellant had been
    served and as Mr Ata acknowledged, he had three  days'  notice  of  the
    hearing. There is a lack of clarity as to the relationship between  Ata
    & Co and Duncan Lewis, but in any event it is beyond doubt that Mr  Ata
    has been familiar with the matter since August 2015 and would have been
    aware, following his success on the judicial review proceedings, of the
    need to consider applying  for  permission  to  amend  the  grounds  of
    challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision. In the  light  of  his
    previous involvement, three days was ample time for him to prepare  the
    case. Despite what Mr Ata said to us, it is clear that Ata  &  Co  were
    not on record at any time before the hearing before us.

15. Having refused the request for adjournment  we  considered  whether  to
    permit amendment of the grounds.  We saw no justification for doing  so
    along the uncertain and  vague  lines  that  Mr  Ata  advanced  in  his
    submissions.  Whether or not the policy applied to  the  appellant  was
    not raised before the First-tier Tribunal and the attempt to do so  now
    on a "Robinson obvious" basis is a misunderstanding of the principle in
    Regina v SSHD, ex parte Robinson [1998] QB929.  That  decision  enabled
    the immigration appellate authorities to consider an obvious  point  of
    Convention jurisprudence which may avail an appellant even if it is not
    pleaded or otherwise advanced on his behalf.  As observed by  Keene  LJ
    in Miftari v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 418 at [39] "The rationale was  that,
    if such a point were ignored on technical  grounds,  there  will  be  a
    danger that this country will be in breach of its obligations under the
    Convention".  "Robinson obvious" was also considered by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AA(Nigeria) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1249 in which  regard  was
    also had to Bulale v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 806.  As observed by Richards
    LJ at [32]:

         "[32]    I have no difficulty with the notion  that  this  quarters
         jurisdiction to consider an issue even though it was not considered
         by the tribunals below, but I am more doubtful whether the tribunal
         could be said to have erred in law by failing to consider an  issue
         that was not raised before them and was not obvious in the Robinson
         since (and, I should perhaps add, that did not go to jurisdiction).
          The Court in Bulale appears to have  been  of  the  view  that  an
         appeal could in principle succeed in the  circumstances  described;
         but that was not put to the  test,  since  the  actual  appeal  was
         dismissed because the tribunal was found to  have  made  a  finding
         that it was entitled to reach as a matter of EU law."

16. The submission before us  did  not  relate  to  any  obvious  point  of
    Convention Law. We are not persuaded that Mr Ata's attempt to amend the
    grounds is legally justified but instead it  is  an  ambition  that  is
    entirely misconceived. We are not persuaded to change our view  in  the
    light of the matters raised in the post hearing letter from  Ata  &  Co
    dated 21 July 2016 which encloses what purports to  be  the  policy  in
    force between July 2014 and August 2015.

17. With Mr Ata no longer relying on the grounds on  which  permission  has
    been granted, there is no remaining challenge to the  decision  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date:  06 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
