
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/09492/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On  24 August 2015                         |On  22 September 2015           |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     MT
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Crimson
Phoenix
For the Respondent:    Mr Stephen Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant  is  a  young
    asylum seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 6  November  2014  refusing  to  grant  him
    further leave to remain and to remove him to Sri Lanka.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka  born  in  1988.  It  is  not
    disputed that he entered the UK  lawfully  on  a  student  visa  on  16
    October 2010 but then overstayed from 5  June  2013.  He  then  claimed
    asylum on 21 October  2014  and  was  detained  under  the  fast  track
    process. A medical assessment was carried by a consultant psychiatrist,
    Dr S, on 10 September 2014 and a report  was  produced  on  23  October
    2014. The appellant also submitted a medical report from Dr O.

 4. The appellant claims that he was a victim of torture and  rape  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities,  was  released  on  a  bribe,  has  engaged  in
    diaspora activities in the UK and is at risk on return. He  is  also  a
    suicide risk.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  attended  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 15  May  2015.  The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant was generally credible regarding his allegations  of  torture
    from 2007-2010. It was highly likely that his injuries were  caused  by
    torture - including being pistol-whipped, struck by a  knuckle  duster,
    pushed to the ground and  raped,  kicked  by  soldiers  wearing  boots,
    struck with a bayonet, dragged along a road and  struck  with  an  iron
    rod. The appellant was  ill-treated  because  of  his  believed  social
    connections with a member of the LTTE. He  was  first  detained  during
    September 2007 and then again in July 2009 until May 2010. He was raped
    on at least two occasions because of his imputed political affiliations
    to the LTTE. He  has  been  receiving  mental  health  treatment  since
    September 2014. The appellant's treatment during his second  period  of
    detention was because of the perception of the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    that his family's business was involved  in  money-laundering  for  the
    LTTE in order to fund its resurgence. The appellant was  moved  to  his
    final detention location because it was believed that he could identify
    former LTTE members as part of a vetting process.

 6. The judge further found that the appellant was released  in  2010  upon
    payment of a bribe, left Sri Lanka on his own passport having  obtained
    a visa to study in the UK; his step-father was reported missing by  his
    mother in August 2014, the appellant attended a  demonstration  in  May
    2014 but he had never previously supported the LTTE. The appellant  did
    have serious mental health conditions but was not at  risk  on  return.
    His mental health would need careful support on return but  that  would
    be assisted by his continuing family network  and  the  relevant  state
    mental health services. His name was not on a stop list and there  were
    no outstanding warrants or court orders.





The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 11 June 2015 on the  basis
    that the judge failed to make findings on relevant matters  which  were
    material to whether the appellant was on a stop list, the decision that
    he was not on a stop list was Wednesbury unreasonable, the  judge  also
    failed to properly consider the evidence relating to suicide  risk  and
    failed to apply the six stage test in Y  &  Anor  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 362.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Judge Andrew on 23  June
    2015 on the basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to
    properly apply GJ (post-civil war returnees) [2013] UKUT  319  both  in
    relation to the stop list  and  the  suicide  risk.  All  grounds  were
    arguable.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated 7  July  2015,  the  respondent  sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that  there  was  no  evidence
    that the appellant was on a stop list there being no extant court order
    or arrest warrant. The judge  made  full  and  clear  findings  on  the
    medical reports and concluded that return would not breach  obligations
    under Articles 3, 5 or 8.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

11. Mr Sellwood submitted that the appellant was informed that he would  be
    recorded as an escapee, he  was  detained  twice  and  his  father  and
    stepfather are missing. Records  are  kept  of  those  detained.  Those
    released on a bribe are normally listed as absconders (paragraph 146 of
    GJ). Those with the appellant's profile who are told that they will  be
    recorded as an escapee are reasonably likely to  be  on  a  stop  list.
    There were three medico-legal reports before the  judge.  Dr  S  cross-
    references the appellant's account against  his  behaviour  during  the
    consultations. The appellant suffers from pain and  severe  depression.
    The judge failed to apply the six stage test  in  relation  to  suicide
    risk. It is difficult to see how  the  judge  could  have  avoided  the
    conclusion that there was a risk of breach of  Article  3  rights.  The
    appellant's case is strikingly similar to that of Y.

12. Mr Whitwell submitted that the scrutiny of  the  judge's  decision  was
    very high to the point of being unfair. The grounds amount to  no  more
    than disagreement. Paragraph 33 of the decision is key -  there  is  no
    confirmed prosecution or arrest warrant. There is no evidence that  the
    appellant is on the watch list let alone the stop  list.  It  is  clear
    that the judge is well aware of the suicide case law. The judge had  to
    decide how much weight to  give  to  the  medical  evidence  and  gives
    reasons. The references to the evidence before the judge amounts to  an
    attempt to re-litigate the issue.

13. Mr Sellwood submitted in reply that the cause of concern is failure  to
    make findings. Anxious scrutiny was required and submissions were  made
    on that basis. The  stakes  could  not  have  been  higher.  The  judge
    referred to Y at paragraph 11 but there is no evidence  of  application
    of the six stage test. There is no requirement for a signed  confession
    or a prosecution to be on the stop list. The judge failed to take  into
    account material facts in relation to the psychiatric report. The judge
    reached a completely opposite  conclusion  about  adequacy  of  medical
    facilities from GJ at paragraph 447 onwards.

14. I find that the decision includes a number of clear  findings  of  fact
    which are soundly  based  upon  the  evidence.  They  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs 31 to 33 of the decision. However, a number  of  key  issues
    are not mentioned in the decision. The  judge  has  not  determined  or
    taken into account the following issues;

               1) The evidence that the appellant was informed that he would
                  be recorded as an escapee  upon  release;  his  stepfather
                  having secured his release through bribing an official.

               2) The  objective  evidence  from  GJ  that  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities hold electronic records and every detention of
                  a suspect by the security forces results in a record being
                  raised.

               3) The appellant's profile as a person who has been  detained
                  and tortured on two occasions on suspicion of working  for
                  or assisting the LTTE.

               4) The evidence that the appellant's  biological  father  has
                  not  been  heard  of  since  he  was  detained  with   the
                  appellant.

               5) The implications of the appellant's stepfather having been
                  reported as missing  in  August  2014,  having  previously
                  bribed an official to secure the appellant's release.

               6) The risk implications of the finding at paragraph 33  that
                  the appellant was ill-treated during his second period  of
                  detention because of the authorities' perception that  his
                  family's business was involved in money laundering for the
                  LTTE in order to fund its resurgence,  combined  with  the
                  disappearance of the father and stepfather.

15. I find that the failure to make findings or to take  account  of  those
    issues  means  that  the  judge  has  not  properly  engaged  with  the
    principles set out in GJ in terms of assessment of future risk for  the
    appellant, particularly as to whether he is on the  stop  list  at  the
    airport or whether he is at risk of further detention and ill-treatment
    in his home area. The judge has also failed to refer to paragraph  339K
    of the Immigration Rules which states that;

    "The fact that a person has already  been  subject  to  persecution  or
    serious risk of harm ... will be regarded as a serious indicator of the
    person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm, unless there are  good  reasons  to  consider  that  such
    persecution or serious harm will not be repeated"

16. I find that the judge has not applied the six stage test approved in  Y
    when determining whether the appellant's mental health gave rise  to  a
    real risk that his protected rights under Articles  3  or  8  would  be
    breached by return to Sri Lanka. The judge did give three  reasons  for
    attaching less weight to the report from Dr S at paragraph  37  of  the
    decision but did not consider where the appellant would  access  mental
    health services  in  Sri  Lanka  and  whether  there  was  a  realistic
    possibility that  the  appellant  would  venture  into  proximity  with
    officialdom (paragraph 47 of Y).

17. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

18. Mr Sellwood invited me to order a rehearing in the First-tier  Tribunal
    if we set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph 7.2  of
    the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements  I  consider   that   an
    appropriate course of action. There are a number of factual  issues  to
    be resolved, there may be further medical evidence  and  the  appellant
    may give evidence at the rehearing.

19. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined by a judge other than the  previous  First-tier  judge.  The
    findings at paragraphs 31 to 33 of the  decision  and  the  finding  at
    paragraph 34 that the appellant left his final detention  by  means  of
    financial payments from his family are preserved.




Signed   [pic]                      Date 18 September 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


