

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09448/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 31st October 2017                     |On 02nd November 2017             |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                     Y A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty, of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                 Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of South Africa born in November 1952. He
       arrived in the UK in 2001. He applied for asylum in  December  2014,
       and was refused that status in a decision of  the  respondent  dated
       10th June 2015. His appeal against this decision  was  dismissed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingam in a determination  promulgated  on
       the 29th April 2016.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law on  24th  May  2016.  The
       matter came before the Upper Tribunal, and  on  23rd  November  2016
       Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Freeman  and  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Mandalia promulgated their decision that the First-tier Tribunal had
       erred in law, and set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
       The error of law decision is appended to my decision at Annex A.

    3. The matter came before me pursuant to a transfer order to remake the
       appeal. The decision of Judges Freeman and  Mandalia  was  that  the
       findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal should  stand,  and
       that this hearing was purely to  deal  with  an  assessment  of  the
       objective evidence to determine whether the appellant  was  at  real
       risk of serious harm if returned to South Africa.

Submissions - Remaking

    4. I am not proposing to  make  reference  to  the  country  of  origin
       materials and expert evidence referred to by the representatives for
       the appellant and respondent in  this  summary  of  submissions  but
       simply to summarise their positions on risk on return. I  will  deal
       with the country of origin materials supporting these  positions  in
       my conclusions.

    5. The position of the respondent,  as  set  out  in  the  reasons  for
       refusal  letter  and  in  oral  submissions  is  that:   "the   laws
       implemented in South Africa do not persecute LGBT  individuals,  and
       the environment for homosexual individuals in South  Africa  is  not
       such that would amount to persecution."  There  are  no  persecutory
       laws, and there is an operational  police  service  to  protect  the
       appellant against criminal elements, and no sustained  and  systemic
       failure of  state  protection.  Further  South  Africa  is  a  large
       country, and the appellant could relocate away from  any  particular
       groups he feared, such as PAGAD in Cape Town. There was evidence  in
       public opinion surveys of positive and tolerant public attitudes  in
       South Africa towards gay people as well as of prejudice and bigotry.
       There was clearly also a thriving gay scene in some  of  the  larger
       towns.

    6. The position of the appellant is that whilst there  are  proper  and
       good laws which should protect the appellant in South  Africa  as  a
       gay man in reality these do not provide  sufficiency  of  protection
       and he is at risk from groups such as  PAGAD  who  are  a  fanatical
       Muslim group based in Cape Town, and from similar groups  throughout
       South Africa which remains as predominantly  homophobic  country  in
       terms of social attitudes and a place in which there  is  widespread
       discrimination against  LGBT  people,  and  a  place  where  a  very
       significant proportion of the community are prepared to  countenance
       using violence against non-gender conforming people. It is contended
       that in practice gay men in South Africa are  routinely  subject  to
       violence, and that homophobic attitudes are prevalent in the  police
       service with reports  of  them  further  attacking  gay  people  and
       failing to  properly  to  investigate  their  complaints  of  abuse,
       leading to secondary victimisation. It is also argued that there  is
       an underreporting of abuse,  and  particularly  of  corrective  rape
       which is an issue for men as well as women and other hate crime.  It
       is said that it is likely that a gay man in  South  Africa  will  be
       subject to violence, and there was no sufficiency of protection, and
       that this risk extends to the  entire  country  with  the  appellant
       perhaps being more notable as a gay  man  on  relocation  as  he  is
       Asian, and so from a minority ethnic group. It is also  argued  that
       the situation has worsened over the past four years, with  the  more
       recently country of origin material from the  respondent  showing  a
       more violent and serious picture than that from 2013.

    7. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination.

Conclusions - Remaking

    8. The summary factual matrix of this case is that it is accepted  that
       the appellant is gay man who intends to live openly in South Africa.
       He is 65 years old and has lived in the UK since 2001.   He  had  an
       arranged marriage in South Africa with a woman which broke down  and
       was from a wealthy background. He has been  a  film  maker,  with  a
       British Film Institute profile, and  has  worked  running  a  family
       business. It is accepted that the other trustees of a mosque in Cape
       Town, where he inherited a trusteeship from his father, opposed  his
       involvement in the affairs of that mosque, probably because  of  his
       sexuality, but not that he was subject to attempts on his  life  and
       damage to his property as a result of this.

    9. The question before me is whether the appellant is at real  risk  of
       serious harm on return to South Africa from  non-state  actors,  and
       particularly  vigilante  homophobic  elements  and  an  organisation
       called PAGAD, and with no sufficiency of protection  or  possibility
       of finding  safety  by  internal  relocation  away  from  the  Asian
       community in Cape Town which is his home area.

   10. Internal relocation would, I find, be a potentially reasonable thing
       to expect the appellant to do if this could reduce the risk he faces
       to one lower than a real risk of serious harm,  as  he  is  a  well-
       educated man, who is multilingual and who  has  historically  worked
       running a family business and as a film-maker, and would not seem to
       have any particular on-going links to Cape Town. However,  there  is
       no information before me which  suggests  that  any  area  of  South
       Africa has a significantly lower level of homophobic  violence,  and
       so ultimately I conclude that the question is simply  whether  there
       is sufficient state protection against this violence or not.

   11. The law relating to sufficiency or effective  protection  where  the
       risk is from non-state actors was considered by the House  of  Lords
       in the decision in Horvath v SSHD [2000] INLR 239 HL.  The  standard
       of protection which is applied in such a case is not one which would
       eliminate all risk but is  a  practical  standard,  which  does  not
       impose an impossible or disproportionate burden on the  authorities.
       There was must be: "a system of domestic  protection  and  machinery
       for the detection, prosecution and punishment of actings contrary to
       the purposes which the Convention requires to  have  protected"  and
       "more importantly...an ability  and  a  readiness  to  operate  that
       machinery". There must therefore be criminal laws which  can  impose
       commensurate punishments  for  crimes  committed  and  a  reasonable
       willingness by law enforcement  agencies  including  the  police  to
       detect prosecute and punish offenders. There must be cogent evidence
       that a state which is willing to afford protection is unable  to  do
       so particularly if it is a democracy. The  Court  of  Appeal  upheld
       these  principles  in  the  case  of  R  (on  the   application   of
       Bagdanavicius) v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1605 and their application  in
       the context of Article 3 ECHR. In the summary of principles there is
       included the fact  that  an  effective  system  of  protection  will
       normally have a systemic ability to deter and or prevent the form of
       persecution of which there  is  risk.  These  principles  have  been
       relied upon by the Upper Tribunal in the decision in AW (sufficiency
       of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31.

   12. Regulation 4(2) of the Refugee or Person in  Need  of  International
       Protection (Qualification) Regulation 2006 provides that the  state,
       as an actor of protection, has to take "reasonable steps" to prevent
       serious harm  "by  operating  an  effective  legal  system  for  the
       detection,  prosecution  and   punishment   of   acts   constituting
       persecution or serious harm and the applicant must  have  access  to
       such protection."  This is the UK implementation of  the  obligation
       imposed by the Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC at  Article  7(2),
       and this provision is  considered  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
       reported case of  NA and VA (protection: Article 7(2)  Qualification
       Directive) India [2015] UKUT 432 providing the following  additional
       guidance: "the operation  of  an  effective  legal  system  for  the
       detection,  prosecution  and   punishment   of   acts   constituting
       persecution or serious  harm  and  access  to  such  system  by  the
       claimant may not, in a given case,  amount  to  protection.  Article
       7(2) is non-prescriptive in nature.  It  prescribes  neither  minima
       nor maxima.  The duty imposed on states to take  "reasonable  steps"
       imports the concepts of margin of appreciation and proportionality."
       In resolution of the particular appeal before  them  a  Presidential
       Panel of the Upper Tribunal found it  was  therefore  necessary  not
       only to establish the willingness of the authorities to take  action
       against the perpetrators of serious harm  via  an  analysis  of  the
       system of  legislation  prosecution  and  punishment  but  also  the
       efficacy of  the  available  measures;  the  protection  this  would
       provide to the appellants; and the nature of the individual  threats
       to the appellants.


    13. It is common ground that the government  of  South  Africa  has  an
        extremely good and progressive constitution and domestic laws which
        prohibit discrimination  and  crimes  against  gay  men  and  other
        members of the LGBT community.  As  set  out  in  the  respondent's
        Country  Policy  and  Information   Note   South   Africa:   Sexual
        orientation and gender identity July 2017 (henceforth the July 2017
        Country Policy Note) at paragraph 5.2.1.  In  its  summary  of  the
        situation of South Africa, the NGO  Outright  Action  International
        observed that: "The South African constitution provides one of  the
        most comprehensive sets of protective measures of individual rights
        not  only  in  southern  Africa  but  in  the  world.  A   ban   on
        discrimination  on  the  basis  of  sexual  orientation  has   been
        enshrined in the South African constitution for twenty years.  This
        is particularly notable given that consensual adult same-sex sexual
        acts are subject to criminal penalties in  many  of  the  country's
        neighboring states. In addition, same sex marriage  is  a  national
        right. As further evidence of its  commitment  to  protecting  LGBT
        rights, South Africa recently voted in favor of the  Resolution  on
        Human Rights, Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity adopted by the
        27th Session of the Human Rights Council in September  2014,  which
        has been hailed as a significant step forward in the fight  against
        violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and  gender
        identity."

   14. The South African government has also approved the  publication  for
       public comment of the Prevention and Combating of  Hate  Crimes  and
       Hate Speech Bill in October 2016 although this has not become law to
       date. The UN Human Rights Council in April 2017 and the Human Rights
       Watch Report of 2016 recorded that the South African government  had
       taken significant steps to improve coordination  between  government
       and civil society in combatting violence against LGBT people. I find
       that there is an excellent legal framework for protection of gay men
       such as the appellant from persecution, and that the  South  African
       government is working to improve this and  to  try  to  improve  its
       effectiveness. There are also clearly appropriate  prison  sentences
       for the murder of gay  people  in  which  the  perpetrators  receive
       additional punishment for having acted out of hatred  towards  their
       victims as LGBT people, for instance see paragraph  6  of  the  July
       2017 Country Policy Note.  Further,  there  is  evidence  of  police
       receiving training  in  dealing  with  gender/  LGBT  violence,  see
       paragraph 6.3.2 of the July 2017 Country Policy Note.

   15. It is also the case that South Africa's major cities have a thriving
       nightlife and most have gay clubs and venues,  with  Cape  Town  and
       Johannesburg being the gay capitals, see  8.2.2  of  the  July  2017
       Country Policy Note.

   16.  However,  there  are  credible  reports   of   pervasive   official
       mistreatment  which  includes  sexual   and   other   assaults   and
       discrimination of LGBT people, including gay men, by security forces
       and police, as recorded by the US State  Department  country  report
       published in March 2017. There are also credible reports from the UN
       Human Rights Council that there is a lack of due  diligence  by  law
       enforcement officers reflected in a low conviction rate and  a  lack
       of proper data, see paragraphs 6.2.1 and  6.2.5  -6  and  6.3.3  and
       7.5.6 of the July 2017 Country Policy Note.  This  is  supported  by
       evidence from Amnesty International in their 2016/2017  report,  set
       out at paragraph 19 of  the  expert  report  of  Professor  Mario  I
       Aguilar regarding problems of police involvement in crime and  found
       at page 13 of the appellant's consolidated bundle.

   17. The reason for this disparity between the legal  framework  and  the
       reality of action implementing it  to  protect  those  in  the  LGBT
       community is said by both parties in this case to be a reflection of
       prevailing societal attitudes which are not universally accepting of
       gay and other LGBT rights. The surveys to  which  my  attention  was
       drawn paint, however, an inconsistent picture. Some  would  indicate
       in the region of three quarters  of  South  Africans  have  tolerant
       views: for instance, 77% having no concerns if their  neighbour  was
       gay or 76% agreeing that human rights apply to  everyone  regardless
       of sexual orientation, see paragraphs 7.1.3 and 7.1.4  of  the  July
       2017 Country Policy Note. Other opinion  polls  indicate  however  a
       less tolerant picture: for instance, 72% of South  Africans  viewing
       same sex activity as morally wrong,  see  7.1.5  of  the  July  2017
       Country Policy  Note,  which  in  turn  is  linked  to  conservative
       Christian religious views, and said to be more prevalent  in  poorer
       less educated black African communities, see paragraph 7.3.1 of  the
       July 2017 Country Policy Note. The link to the  views  of  Christian
       churches is also one made by the expert Professor Aguilar.

   18. This leads to the question of how prevalent violence is towards  gay
       men such as the appellant in South Africa. It is  notable  that  the
       Policy Summary at 3.1.2 of the July 2017 Country Policy Note states:
       "LGBT persons are generally accepted or tolerated by  South  African
       society,  although  discrimination  and   violence   is   relatively
       widespread particularly  in  rural  areas...While  LGBT  people  are
       likely to  face  some  form  of  discrimination,  harassment  and/or
       violence from societal actors, in general LGBT persons  are  not  at
       risk of persecution or serious harm from non-state actors  but  each
       case will need to be considered  on  its  facts."  The  respondent's
       position seems therefore to be that whilst it is likely that  a  gay
       man such as  the  appellant  would  face  violence,  harassment  and
       discrimination in South Africa this would not be likely to amount to
       a real risk of  serious  harm.  As  Ms  Easty  has  highlighted  the
       position of the respondent does appear to be that the likelihood  of
       violence to persons such as the appellant  has  worsened  since  the
       2013 Operational Guidance Note on South Africa as in that report  it
       was stated: "LGBT persons remain vulnerable  to  societal  violence,
       discrimination and hostility". This would appear to be  a  statement
       that this behaviour was less likely that it is now perceived to have
       become.

   19. Looking at the  sources  of  information  on  this  topic,  OutRight
       International concluded from a 2016  survey  that  violence  against
       openly gay people was "rampant", see paragraph  7.4.2  of  the  July
       2017 Country Policy Note. The Other Foundation found that some three
       million south Africans felt that they  might  use  violence  against
       gender non-conforming people, see paragraph 7.4.6 of the  July  2017
       Country  Policy  Note.  This  is  the   context   of   their   being
       approximately half a million people who identify themselves as  gay,
       out of a general population of approximately 56 million people.

   20. One 2003 study suggests that the  prevalence  of  "corrective  rape"
       against gay men could be similar to that against lesbians but  there
       is a lack of data on this issue, see the "Men are  also  "corrective
       rape" victims" article by Bhekisisa dated April 2014 at page  68  to
       70 of the appellant's Consolidated Bundle. The Amnesty International
       2016 report, also comments on the gross under reporting  of  attacks
       against gay people,  see  paragraph  11  of  the  expert  report  of
       Professor Mario I Aguilar.  A study on the rape of  men  by  Gcobani
       Qambela in the Graduate  Journal  of  Social  Science  published  in
       November 2016 starts observing that South  Africa  has  one  of  the
       world's highest rates  of  sexual  and  gender  based  violence  and
       examines how the position that South Africa is a  highly  homophobic
       society feeds into the incidence of  male  rape  and  leads  to  low
       reporting rates due to further  risk  of  victimisation  during  the
       reporting process.

   21. There is evidence about the operation of PAGAD, in  the  appellant's
       consolidated bundle at pages 260 to 330  in  a  2001  study  by  the
       Institute of Criminology at the Department of  Criminal  Justice  of
       the University of Cape  Town.  This  is  an  organisation  that  the
       appellant has specifically identified as having posed a risk to  him
       historically at his point of departure from South  Africa  in  2001,
       although these facts have not been believed.  PAGAD  began  in  Cape
       Town as a predominantly Muslim group which attempted to  provide  an
       umbrella for anti-crime groups attempting to address an  upsurge  in
       crime in the newly democratic South Africa. It then evolved  into  a
       violent vigilante organisation / urban terror group,  associated  in
       part with radical Islamic groups which led to it no longer  being  a
       popular mass movement, and to repression against  it  by  the  South
       African state. Amongst the targets for  this  organisation  in  2001
       were gay bars on the basis that they were a symbol of westernisation
       and were not in line with conservative social morality supported  by
       radical  Islam,  see  particularly  page  322  of  the   appellant's
       consolidated bundle at which examples of the bombings of gay bars in
       November 1999 and August 2000 are cited.

   22. There is no evidence before me regarding any on-going operations  by
       PAGAD, or to the current existence, targets or  reach  within  South
       Africa of PAGAD, and  as  such  I  cannot  conclude  that  there  is
       evidence satisfying the lower standard of proof that this particular
       organisation poses a real risk of serious harm to the appellant. The
       appellant's case must therefore be decided on the basis  of  whether
       the country of origin materials as a whole disclose a real  risk  of
       serious harm  to  an  openly  gay  man  in  South  Africa  with  his
       particular profile.

   23. I do not find the  expert  report  of  Professor  Mario  Aguilar  of
       assistance in resolving this issue. I accept that Professor  Aguilar
       has some appropriate  qualifications  although  he  would  not  have
       seemingly studied the issue of  gay  rights  in  current  day  South
       Africa but instead focused his research on  religion  and  politics,
       particularly in the apartheid  era  of  South  African  history.  He
       confirms his duty to the Court and his understanding of his duty  as
       an expert  but  his  conclusions  are  not  ultimately  particularly
       helpful to determining the key issue in this appeal. This is because
       his sources of information do not go beyond the human rights reports
       cited in the appellant's bundle and July 2017 Country  Policy  Note.
       His first conclusion is that: "While South Africa has advanced  laws
       to protect the LGBT community from hate crimes, they have  not  gone
       far enough, and in practice they have failed to protect  members  of
       the LGBT community from violence,  kidnapping  and  killings."  This
       does not however assist in answering  the  primary  question  before
       this Tribunal of whether there is a real risk of serious harm  to  a
       gay man returned to South Africa. It is of course patently true that
       laws have not prevented all violence towards  gay  people  in  South
       Africa, but the report does not provide material  which  assists  in
       the assessment of the likelihood of this violence  taking  place  to
       men such as the appellant.

   24. This is a very finely balanced decision. I start from  the  position
       of the respondent in the July 2017  Country  Policy  Note  that  the
       appellant  as  a  gay  man  is  likely  to  suffer  some   form   of
       discrimination, harassment and/or  violence  from  societal  actors.
       Although it is not conceded that this will always, in  the  view  of
       the respondent, amount to persecution or a real risk of serious harm
       a likelihood of facing violence on return  is  a  matter  that  must
       weigh in the appellant's favour. The nature of this violence  is  of
       course further illustrated by the other country of origin reports  I
       have summarised above, and  does  include  failings  by  the  police
       service to protect  gay  men  and  to  rigorously  uphold  the  law,
       evidence of violence to gay men by the police and a failure to  keep
       proper statistics on  this  issue  which  would  perhaps  facilitate
       official action to increase protection in this area.

   25. NA and VA makes it plain I must look at the position with respect to
       sufficiency of protection for  this  appellant  and  his  individual
       position with respect to risk. I find  that  the  risk  of  violence
       resulting in serious harm is higher with this appellant than  others
       due to his state of ill health with HIV infection, and his being  65
       years old. The medical evidence from Guy's and St  Thomas'  hospital
       dated March 2016 records that he has factures of the hip,  low  bone
       mineral density  and  osteoporosis  and  high  cardiovascular  risk.
       Evidence from the same hospital from January 2015 indicates  he  has
       heart disease having had a recent heart attack,  and  also  that  he
       suffered from depression. I find that the appellant  would  also  be
       less able to avoid danger of  violence  from  societal  actors  than
       other gay South African men due to the fact  he  has  not  lived  in
       South Africa for the past 16 years and so will be more out of  touch
       with societal indicators of danger than those who have  lived  there
       continuously, and also because he suffers  from  memory  loss  as  a
       result of his various medical conditions.  The  appellant  does  not
       have extended family to return to in South Africa who  could  assist
       him with integration and current safety advice. I also find that  at
       least initially the appellant would struggle to provide for  himself
       financially although perhaps having access to a small pension,  thus
       not having access, at least initially, to the  protection  that  can
       sometimes be bought with money through  for  instance  taking  taxis
       rather than walking or living in more protected housing,  as  it  is
       clear he has no savings and it is reasonable to surmise that finding
       work is likely to be a difficult process given his  lack  of  recent
       work experience, age and ill-health.

   26. I do not find that the material before me shows  that  all  gay  men
       would  face  an  insufficiency  of  protection  against   homophobic
       societal violence in South Africa or that there was a real  risk  of
       serious harm as a result of that violence given the excellent  legal
       framework and obvious efforts by the democratic government of  South
       African government to  advance  in  preventing  hate  crime  as  the
       material  before  me  is  not  comprehensive  enough  for   such   a
       conclusion. However I am satisfied that this has been shown  to  the
       lower standard of proof to  be  the  case  for  this  appellant  who
       intends  to  live  as  an  openly  gay  man  with   his   particular
       vulnerabilities in the context of the country  of  origin  materials
       before me. I find that the appellant has  a  well  founded  fear  of
       persecution for reason of his social group as a gay man, and for the
       same reasons his removal would also be a breach of Article 3 ECHR.




            Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal   involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside the decision

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by  allowing  it  on  asylum  and
      human rights grounds.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
    protection claim.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date: 1st November 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley





















ANNEX A: Error of Law Decision



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This decision, to which both members of the panel  have  contributed,
       determines the appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Lingam promulgated on 29th April 2016,  in  which
       she dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
       respondent of 10th  June  2015,  to  refuse  to  grant  asylum  under
       paragraph 336 of HC395 and to remove the appellant from the UK.


    2. An anonymity direction was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  is
       continued by us.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
       otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these
       proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member
       of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to
       the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to
       contempt of court proceedings.


Background


    3. The appellant is a South African national.  He left South  Africa  in
       April 2001 with the benefit of a 6-month visa to enter  the  UK.   On
       7th November 2001, the appellant made an application  for  indefinite
       leave to remain in the UK.   The  application  was  refused  with  no
       right  of  appeal.  On  27th  August  2008,  the  appellant  made  an
       application for further leave to remain in the UK.  That  application
       was rejected because the relevant fee was not paid.  The  application
       was renewed on 23rd December 2008, but was refused with no  right  of
       appeal.   The  decision  to  refuse  the  renewed   application   was
       maintained on 12th July 2014.


    4.  On 9th December 2014 the appellant claimed asylum.   A decision  was
       made by the respondent to refuse to  grant  asylum  and  humanitarian
       protection on 10th June 2015 and that decision was the subject of the
       appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


    5. Broadly stated, the appellant's asylum claim is advanced on the basis
       of his sexuality.  The appellant, a  Muslim,  realised  that  he  was
       homosexual when he was about 10 years old.  He was unhappy because of
       bullying, and the secrecy and lies that he had to live with.   As  he
       developed as a person, he realised that  he  was  attracted  to  men.
       Although he never  discussed  his  sexuality  with  his  family,  the
       appellant believes that they suspected him to be gay because  he  was
       effeminate.  The appellant married in 1982.  His wife was  aware  of,
       and accepted the appellant's sexual preference, but the marriage  did
       not work out because of other issues between the  two  families.   In
       1991, the appellant inherited the position of a trustee of a  Mosque,
       following his father's death.  It was then that the appellant  claims
       that he began to experience problems  in  South  Africa.   The  other
       trustees of the mosque felt that someone of  the  appellant's  sexual
       orientation should not be a trustee of  the  Mosque.   The  appellant
       believes that two attempts were made on his life  by  way  of  damage
       caused to his property, that were directly  linked  to  the  position
       that he held as a trustee of the Mosque.


    6. The appellant fears the PAGAD group, a Muslim  group  based  in  Cape
       Town that targets traffickers and homosexuals.  He also  fears  those
       that targeted him there because of the position that  he  held  as  a
       trustee of the Mosque.  The appellant claims that since  arriving  in
       the UK he has been able to openly express his sexuality.


    7. In her decision of  10th  June  2015,  the  respondent  accepted  the
       appellant's identity and nationality.  She accepted that gay men  are
       a particular social group, and that the reason given by the appellant
       for claiming a well-founded fear of persecution is one  that  engages
       the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention.    The  respondent
       accepted the appellant's sexuality as  a  gay  man  and  accepted  as
       credible the appellant's account that  the  trustees  of  the  Mosque
       opposed his involvement in the affairs of the mosque.  The respondent
       concluded that the appellant's account that the two attempts made  on
       his life were directly linked to the  position  that  he  held  as  a
       trustee of the Mosque, was not credible, wholly speculative  and  not
       well founded.  The respondent noted the  appellant's  fear  from  the
       PAGAD.


    8. The respondent assessed the appellant's ability to  return  to  South
       Africa as a gay man, by reference to  the  decision  of  the  Supreme
       Court in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.  The respondent  referred  in  her
       decision to section 19 of the Country of  Origin  Information  Report
       (COIR) for South Africa dated July 2010 and concluded:


        a. It is evident that the laws implemented in South Africa  do  not
           persecute homosexual individuals, and the environment  for  them
           in South Africa is not such that it would amount to persecution.




        b. The appellant previously kept his sexuality hidden owing to  the
           fear of disapproval from people around him, and not  because  of
           persecution. On return to South Africa, the appellant could move
           away from his family and community, and this should  enable  him
           to express his sexuality more freely, in an open manner.


        c. Since the appellant left South Africa in 2001, significant steps
           have been taken by the government, including the  commitment  of
           resources, which have resulted  in  clear  improvements  in  the
           internal security situation in South Africa. The appellant would
           benefit from this upon his return. The appellant has  failed  to
           demonstrate that the authorities of South Africa would be unable
           or unwilling to offer protection  if  he  sought  it.  There  is
           evidence available  that  the  authorities  are  able  to  offer
           protection in the circumstances described. There is a system  of
           protection in place, and a reasonable willingness by  the  state
           to  operate  it.   The  appellant  has  failed  to  establish  a
           sustained and systemic failure of state protection on  the  part
           of the authorities in South Africa.


        d. The appellant has not established that it would be  unreasonable
           to expect him to live elsewhere in South Africa.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingam


    9.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lingam  sets  out  her   findings   and
       conclusions as to the appellant's claim for international  protection
       at paragraphs [22] to [63] of  her  decision.   The  Judge  notes  at
       paragraph [27] of her decision that she does not have to revisit  the
       appellant's evidence on his sexuality as that aspect of his claim has
       been accepted as credible.  The  Judge  goes  on  to  consider  those
       aspects of the claim advanced by the appellant that were not accepted
       by the respondent, and in particular the appellant's account that  he
       was  targeted  by  the  Mosque  trustees.   The  Judge  rejected  the
       appellant's account that the trustees  of  the  Mosque  knew  of  his
       sexuality.  She also found that the appellant's s sexuality  was  not
       of continuing interest to the trustees.


   10. The Judge states in her decision:


             "48.      The respondent identified the appellant as a gay man
             and was satisfied, on analysed objective material on the State
             that the law implemented by the South African  government  did
             not persecute LGBT  individuals  and  the  environment  for  a
             homosexual individual in South Africa is not such  that  would
             amount to persecution (para 47 RFRL).


             49. Using the approach in HJ (Iran), the appellant  has  shown
             he is a gay man.


             50. I have taken account of the various?material relied on  by
             the appellant including  his  own  oral  evidence.   There  is
             evidence of societal harassment,  Intimidation,  violence  and
             hate crimes against gay and the LGBT groups by  the  community
             but there is no evidence that  the  South  African  government
             condones such intimidation and harassment of the LGBT and  gay
             groups. There are established LGBT groups in South  Africa  as
             well as HR Commission for Gay & Lesbian.    There  is  an  NGO
             named PFLAG,  which  provide  a  medium  for  communities  and
             individuals to inform people of lesbian and gay  rights.   The
             organisation has a large following.


             51. With reference to question 2 in HJ (Iran),  the  appellant
             stated that being an open gay man in the UK, he was likely  to
             do the same  in  South  Africa.    I  am  satisfied  that  the
             appellant's only reason for keeping his sexuality a secret was
             because  of  community   and   societal   judgement   of   his
             sexuality.... I am satisfied he has the backing of a Gay group
             named GMG as the founder member gave oral evidence in  support
             of the appellant as well  as  the  group  called  NAZ  Project
             London (provides support network for Black  Asian  communities
             with sexual health promotion and HIV).... I am satisfied  that
             he has grown in confidence with his  sexuality  and  being  an
             active member of a gay group in the UK, he has  the  knowledge
             and  experience  to  enforce  his  rights  in  South   Africa;
             particularly given his status as a renowned film maker who  is
             an ideal position to assist the gay and lesbian communities to
             entrench their rights.  I find if he were to live  discreetly,
             it is not to avoid persecution but social pressures  which  do
             not account to persecution and the Convention is not open  for
             protection.   As he fails to?satisfy question 2 in HJ  (Iran),
             I am satisfied on the guidance  that  I  am  not  required  to
             determine the remaining questions.


   11. At paragraphs [53] to [61]  of  her  decision,  the  Judge  considers
       whether there  is  a  sufficiency  of  protection  available  to  the
       appellant and whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  require  the
       appellant to live elsewhere in South Africa.  Importantly, the  Judge
       states:


             "55.      There is evidence that since  2001,  the  government
             had introduced various legislations to  protect  its  gay  and
             lesbian  communities  including  the  establishment  of   HRC.
             Whilst, isolated incidents occur, the appellant has failed  to
             show that there is  a  systematic  failure  or  abuse  by  the
             government to protect its gay/lesbian communities or that  the
             South African government is unable or unwilling to protect him
             against those who intend to hurt him; a claim that is rejected
             thus far.   On those  reasons,  the  appellant  would  find  a
             sufficient level  of  protection  in  his  birth  country  and
             therefore  international  protection  is  unwarranted  in  the
             appellant's case.


             57. The appellant's circumstances are  as  follows:  He  lived
             mainly in South Africa for 45  years;  studied  six  years  in
             India and remained the last 15 years in the UK.  He had  lived
             alone for five years in South Africa before coming to  the  UK
             (q38-39). He was a practising gay in South  Africa  and  India
             and in 1982 he entered into an arranged marriage with a female
             who was from an equally wealthy Asian family in South  Africa.
              His only movie production shot in South Africa was in 1983 (q
             48) but primarily; he worked in the family food business (oral
             evidence) for 14 years. He gave initial evidence that  he  was
             relatively well off in South Africa. His  sister  bought  over
             the family business and he profited from the sale.  He  gained
             also property interests from his late father's  estate  (q235-
             236); although  at  oral  evidence  he  sought  to  deny  such
             interests.  The  appellant's  evidence  is   silent   on   the
             circumstances of his assets in South Africa.


             58. I have already rejected his claim that the Mosque Trustees
             targeted  or  persecuted  him.    Given  the  appellant's  low
             credibility level, I reject also his  claim  that  his  rather
             long stay in the UK was unplanned; just as I reject his  claim
             that he is without any assets in South Africa or that he would
             genuinely sacrifice claiming  asylum  or  securing  protection
             merely on the premise of a chance to shoot  a  film  in  South
             Africa when in reality film  sets  and  backgrounds  can  very
             easily be replicated or re-created anywhere in the world. I am
             satisfied that his actions are clearly not of a person who  is
             truly in fear for his life.


             59. Hence, I reject his claim he has no particular  reason  to
             return to South Africa or have no life there (q85)  especially
             as he continues to share language and  cultural  ties  in  his
             birth country. The support letters from  his  previous  doctor
             and long term friend confirm some ties in South Africa.   I am
             satisfied that if  the  appellant  wishes  to  avoid  societal
             attention as an open gay man, he can live away from the  Asian
             community.


   12. The Judge dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian  and  ECHR
       grounds.


The appeal before us


   13. The appellant advanced three grounds of appeal.  The  first  concerns
       whether the Judge was entitled to  find  that  the  trustees  of  the
       Mosque would  know  of  his  sexuality  in  circumstances  where  the
       respondent's reasons for refusal letter accepted  that  the  trustees
       would not want him involved in their affairs  for  that  reason.  The
       second concerns the sufficiency  of  protection  for  homosexuals  in
       South  Africa  against  attacks  by  non-state  agents.    The  third
       concerns the appellant's claim under Article 3  in  relation  to  his
       medical condition.


   14. Permission to appeal was granted on the second ground only, by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Smith on 29th June 2016.  In  granting  permission  to
       appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith observed:


             "4. I grant permission  however  in  relation  to  the  second
             ground. The overall tenor of the background evidence  is  that
             the main problem arises  for  lesbians  as  part  of  a  wider
             problem of violence against women and the  examples  given  of
             attacks against gay men suggest that there is a sufficiency of
             protection.   However, the Appellant included  in  his  bundle
             the OGN dated 2013 (which has  not  apparently  been  updated)
             which  does  state  at  3.10.13  that  LGBT   persons   remain
             vulnerable to societal violence, discrimination and  hostility
             which can in individual cases amount to persecution  and  that
             the authorities are unlikely to be able to  provide  effective
             protection in such cases.  In circumstances  where  the  Judge
             found that the Appellant would live openly on return to  South
             Africa, it was incumbent on her to deal  with  that  evidence.
             The Respondent may  need  to  clarify  her  position  as  that
             paragraph of the OGN is unsourced and appears, at first blush,
             to be inconsistent with the other evidence.


   15.  The matter comes before us to consider whether or not  the  decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved the making  of  a  material
       error of law, and if the  decision  is  set  aside,  to  re-make  the
       decision.


   16. Before us, Ms Easty submits that the background evidence referred  to
       by the respondent in her decision letter is material taken  from  the
       Country of Origin Information Report (COIR) for South  Africa,  dated
       July 2010.  However the Operational Guidance Note  (v7:  March  2013)
       that had been provided  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  the
       appellant's bundle, is in stark contrast to the matters  relied  upon
       by the respondent.  Ms Easty submits that in reaching  her  decision,
       the respondent relied upon outdated information and  that  the  Judge
       fell into the error of adopting the objective evidence referred to by
       the respondent, without having regard to  the  more  recent  material
       cited in the appellant's  skeleton  argument,  and  the  more  recent
       Operational Guidance Note.  Ms Easty refers us in particular  to  the
       following extracts from the Operational Guidance Note:


             "3.10.13   Conclusion.  While  South   Africa's   constitution
             outlawed discrimination based on sexual orientation, and same-
             sex  marriages  have  been  legalised,  LGBT  persons   remain
             vulnerable to societal violence, discrimination and hostility.
             This can in individual cases amount  to  persecution  and  the
             South African authorities are unlikely to be able  to  provide
             gay men, lesbians, bisexuals and transgender persons or  those
             perceived as such, with effective protection.


             3.10.14   Where  persons  identifying  as  LGBT  do  encounter
             social hostility they may be able  to  avoid  this  by  moving
             elsewhere in South Africa. There  are  however  likely  to  be
             difficulties in finding  safety  through  internal  relocation
             given that  homophobic  attitudes  are  prevalent  across  the
             country. The Supreme Court in the case of HJ (Iran)  made  the
             point that internal relocation is not the answer if it depends
             on the person  concealing  their  sexual  orientation  in  the
             proposed new location for fear of persecution,


   17. Ms Easty submits that the Judge erred in failing to  have  regard  to
       the more recent materials  that  were  referred  to  in  the  further
       evidence put before the  Judge  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   She
       submits that had the Judge  had  regard  to  the  objective  evidence
       referred to, which includes evidence of numerous assaults against men
       and women, the Judge would not  have  concluded  that  the  appellant
       would find a sufficient level of protection in South Africa, or  that
       it would not be unduly harsh for  him  to  relocate  elsewhere.   She
       submits that the objective evidence establishes a general risk.   If,
       you are known to be a homosexual,  as  the  appellant  would  be,  on
       return, you are vulnerable to societal violence,  discrimination  and
       hostility and the South African authorities are unlikely to  be  able
       to provide effective protection.


   18. In reply, Mr Kotas submits that there is no requirement upon a  Judge
       to refer to all of the objective material before the Tribunal,  in  a
       decision.  He submits that the Judge has  adequately  summarised  the
       material in paragraph [55] of her decision and that the assessment as
       to whether there is an objectively well-founded fear of  persecution,
       must be assessed by reference to the findings made by the Judge.   He
       submits that the question is whether the  appellant  has  established
       that he, as an individual, would be at risk upon  return.   Mr  Kotas
       reminds us that beyond accepting the appellant's sexuality, the Judge
       rejected much of what was said by the appellant. He submits that  the
       tenor of the objective evidence is that there  is  a  sufficiency  of
       protection  and  that  the  evidence  does  not  establish  that  the
       appellant would be at risk in the future.


   19. Both representatives  confirm  that  there  is  no  country  guidance
       dealing with the risk upon return to South Africa's  for  members  of
       the LGBT community.


Discussion


   20. We have carefully considered the extracts that are referred to in the
       respondent's decision of 10th June 2015 from the  Country  of  Origin
       Information Report (COIR) for South Africa dated July 2010.  The COIR
       refers to objective evidence set out in the Gay Times in 2010, the US
       State Department 2009 Human Rights Report; South Africa  released  in
       March 2010, and the Human Rights Watch report of January 2010.  It is
       right to say by reference to that material, as the respondent did  at
       paragraph [47] of her decision, that there is evidence that the  laws
       implemented in South Africa do not persecute homosexual persons,  and
       the environment for them in South Africa,  is  not  such  that  would
       amount to persecution.


   21. At paragraph [48] of her decision, the Judge appears to adopt what is
       said  by  the  respondent  in  paragraph  [47]  of  the  respondent's
       decision.  However, there was in our judgement, a wealth of objective
       evidence before the Judge of what the appellant describes as  a  more
       "vigilante homophobic environment in South Africa, despite the  legal
       liberalism which is in black  and  white".   Much  of  the  objective
       evidence relied upon by the appellant post-dates that COIR report  of
       July 2012.


   22. We have considered the content of the Operational Guidance Note  (v7:
       March 2013) that was before the First-tier Tribunal.  We have already
       set out above, the extracts from that report that were cited to us by
       Ms Easty.  Section 3.10 of the note deals  with  "Lesbian,  gay  men,
       bisexual transgender (LGBT) persons.  Insofar as is material  to  the
       appeal before us, we note that the note also states:


            3.10.6     A 2011 Human Rights Watch  report  notes  that  while
             there have been significant legal advances in recognising  the
             rights  of  the  LGBT  community,  lesbians,  gay   men,   and
             transgender people in South Africa continue to face  hostility
             and violence. Social  attitudes  lag:  recent  social  surveys
             demonstrate a wide gap between the ideals of the  constitution
             and public attitudes toward such individuals. Negative  public
             attitudes towards homosexuality go hand in hand with a broader
             pattern  of  discrimination,  violence,  hatred,  and  extreme
             prejudice against people known or assumed to be lesbian,  gay,
             and transgender, or those who violate gender and sexual  norms
             in appearance  or  conduct  (such  as  women  playing  soccer,
             dressing?in a masculine manner, and refusing to date men). And
             constitutional protections are greatly weakened by the state's
             failure to adequately enforce them.


            3.10.9     During the 17th  UN  Human  Rights  Council  session,
             South Africa successfully pushed through the adoption  of  the
             first-ever UN resolution  on  sexual  orientation  and  gender
             identity. This action affirmed South Africa's  endorsement  of
             the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual  and  transgender  "LGBT"
             people worldwide, but does address the concerns  of  the  LGBT
             community at home. A 2011  Human  Rights  Watch  report  found
             that,   despite   the   country's   progressive   legislation,
             discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation and gender
             identity is widespread in society and evident in the behaviour
             of government officials, including the  police  and  teachers.
             Black lesbians and transgender men are  especially  vulnerable
             and live under constant threat of verbal, physical, and sexual
             violence  from  acquaintances  and  strangers.  Civil  society
             pressure following recent cases of rape, torture,  and  murder
             of black lesbians and  transgender  people  has  prompted  the
             Department of Justice and Constitutional Development to form a
             multi-sectoral task  team  to  formulate  legal  and  judicial
             responses to violence against members of the LGBT community."


   23. In our judgement, the conflict in the objective evidence between that
       which is referred to in the respondent's decision letter and that set
       out in the Operation  Guidance  Note  and  other  objective  evidence
       contained in the appellant's bundle, was a matter  that  should  have
       been addressed by the Judge  in  her  assessment  of  the  risk  upon
       return.  The Judge's failure to do so, amounts to a material error of
       law and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, so  far
       as the  general  risk  to  homosexual  persons  in  South  Africa  is
       concerned.


   24. We have carefully considered how we should proceed with remaking  the
       decision.  The factual matrix of this appeal has been determined  and
       the findings made by the Judge stand,  so  far  as  this  appellant's
       individual case is concerned, except for any general risk he may face
       on return as a homosexual  person.   There  is  no  country  guidance
       dealing with the risk upon return to South Africa's for such  people,
       and  in  light  of  the  potential  conflicts  within  the  objective
       evidence, in our  judgement,  this  appeal  may  provide  a  suitable
       opportunity for the Upper Tribunal to provide  guidance  as  to  that
       general risk upon return.


Notice of Decision


   25. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge involves the  making  of  a
       material error on a point of law and the decision is set aside.


   26. The findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


   27. The matter shall be listed  for  further  hearing  before  the  Upper
       Tribunal limited to  an  assessment  of  the  objective  evidence  to
       determine the risk upon return to South Africa.

Signed                                             Date 01 November 2017



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


We have found there to be an error of law and have set  aside  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal.  Whether there should  be  a  fee  award,  is  a
matter that will be considered in due course once the decision is remade.


Signed                                             Date 1st November 2017

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
