
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09644/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10 June 2015                      |On 15 June 2015                      |
|Prepared on 10 June 2015             |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. Z.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Caswell, Counsel instructed by Miles Hutchinson &
                    Lithgow Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant says that she is a citizen of Albania. She claimed to
         have entered the United Kingdom illegally with her infant child  on
         6 May 2013, in the  company  of  her  husband,  although  she  only
         applied for asylum after both she and her husband were arrested for
         the use of false Bulgarian identity documents when trying to open a
         bank account in the UK. The Appellant accepted upon arrest that she
         had herself used false Bulgarian identity documents  to  seek  work
         and benefits in  the  UK,  using  the  false  identity  of  Antonia
         Vosileva Georgeve to do so.

      2. The Respondent refused the asylum claim on 4 November 2014  and  in
         consequence she made a decision of the  same  date  to  remove  the
         Appellant (with her child) from the  UK  as  one  who  had  entered
         illegally.

      3. An appeal against that removal decision was heard and dismissed  by
         First Tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie in a Decision  promulgated  on  2
         January 2015. The Judge was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  had
         given a truthful account of her experiences.

      4. The Appellant applied to the First Tier Tribunal for permission  to
         appeal, but permission was refused by Judge Cox on 19 January 2015.
         The application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal,  and  permission
         was then granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun on 23 April 2015.

      5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice on 13 May  2015.  She  argued
         that the grounds were misconceived.

      6. Thus the matter comes before me.

    The standard of proof

      7. The first ground asserts that the Judge failed to identify  in  his
         decision the standard of proof that  he  applied  to  the  evidence
         before him when making findings upon the disputed issues of fact.

      8. It is not in dispute before me that there is nothing in the text of
         the decision itself that would found any suggestion that the  Judge
         applied the wrong standard of proof when weighing the evidence.  Mr
         Caswell's argument is simply that the Judge failed to  specifically
         identify what standard of proof he employed was itself an error  of
         law sufficient to require the decision to  be  set  aside  and  the
         appeal reheard. He argued that a failure to do so would lead to  an
         erosion of confidence in the First Tier Tribunal.

      9. In my judgement this argument overlooks paragraph 8 of the decision
         in which  the  Judge  identified  that  the  burden  lay  upon  the
         Appellant to establish that her return to Albania would expose  her
         to a real risk of harm. Whilst a more  explicit  reference  to  the
         standard of proof is commonplace, and indeed desirable, it does not
         follow that the Tribunal's decisions are fatally flawed for use  of
         the sort of terminology deployed by the Judge. The  danger  of  the
         submissions made is that they would lead to the elevation  of  form
         over substance. Just  as  the  failure  to  refer  expressly  to  a
         statutory duty does not of itself show that they duty has not  been
         performed, so too must be the absence of specific full reference to
         the standard of proof adopted; Baker v SSCLG [2008] EWCA  Civ  141.
         In my judgement there is nothing in the text of this decision, when
         it is read fairly as a  whole,  to  suggest  that  the  Judge  used
         anything other than the  applicable  low  standard  of  proof  when
         considering the account upon which the asylum and Article 3  claims
         were based. He gave entirely adequate reasons  for  his  conclusion
         that the Appellant's account was incredible.

    Country guidance

     10. The second ground is the complaint that the Judge  failed  to  make
         specific reference within his own decision to any country  guidance
         decision of the Upper Tribunal, specifically AM  &  BM  (Trafficked
         women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80.

     11. Whilst it is common ground before me that the Judge  did  not  make
         any specific reference to this decision, it is not accepted by  the
         Respondent that there was no implicit reference to it.  Thus  there
         is a passage in the decision in which  the  reasons  given  by  the
         Respondent in her letter of 31 October 2014 for refusing the asylum
         claim  are  set  out  [21-32].  That  letter  itself  made  express
         reference to both DM (Albania) CG [2004] UKIAT 59 and to AM  &  BM.
         The Judge then went on in  the  course  of  his  decision  to  make
         specific reference to the background evidence placed before him  by
         the parties [33 & 41].

     12. Moreover in the circumstances of this case  it  is  argued  by  the
         Respondent that there was in fact no need for the Judge to make any
         specific reference to AM & BM. The central issue for the  Judge  to
         resolve was the credibility of the Appellant's  own  account  which
         patently suffered from a number  of  serious  credibility  problems
         that no reference to the decision in AM &  BM  would  assist  with.
         Those were rehearsed in both the  letter  giving  the  Respondent's
         reasons for refusing the asylum claim, and in  the  letter  of  the
         Competent Authority in which her claim to  have  been  forced  into
         prostitution and trafficked from Albania were  also  rejected,  and
         again in the decision.

     13. The Judge's key adverse findings of fact are  adequately  reasoned,
         and they were plainly open to him to make on the evidence that  was
         before him [39-44]. The Judge rejected  the  Appellant's  claim  to
         have ever been a prostitute, or to have ever  been  trafficked.  In
         those circumstances  there  was  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the
         Appellant's claim of having been abandoned by her husband was true,
         because her claim to have been abandoned by him was dependent  upon
         the truth of those claims. It followed that the Judge did not  need
         to consider the Appellant's return to Albania with her  child  from
         the perspective of her ability to cope upon return as a  woman  who
         was without family support, and/or as one likely to be perceived by
         society within Albania as one who was divorced or abandoned by  her
         husband. The Appellant could return to her home area, and  to  both
         her own family, and to that  of  her  husband,  and  she  could  be
         reunited there in due course with her husband.

    Conclusions

     14. In my judgement it is plain, when the decision is read as a  whole,
         that the Judge considered all of the evidence,  and  gave  adequate
         reasons for  his  decision.  Notwithstanding  the  terms  in  which
         permission to appeal was granted, there is no merit in the  grounds
         advanced before me. Accordingly there is no error disclosed in  the
         Judge's approach to the  evidence,  and  his  decision  reveals  no
         material error of law that requires it to be set aside and remade.

DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 2
    January 2015 contained  no  error  of  law  in  the  dismissal  of  the
    Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set  aside  and
    remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 10 June 2015


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 10 June 2015

