
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09329/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 August 2015                     |On 21 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     MAR
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, Simman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is an Iranian national  born  on  5  March  1996  and  he
    appealed against the decision of the respondent made on 23 October  014
    to remove him by way of directions under Section 47 of the Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006  and to refuse  to  grant  him  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and protection under the European Convention.

 2. The reasons for refusal letter set  out  the  considerations  including
    those in relation to Article 8 and  in  particular  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE. It was noted that the appellant at that time  was  18
    years old but under the age of 25 but had not spent at least  half  his
    life residing in the UK. His asylum claims  were  refused  but  he  was
    given discretionary leave to remain.  The documentation showed that  he
    had previously studied at South Thames  College  on  an  ESOL  Entry  1
    course and that he had submitted undated supporting letters from one Mr
    K and Mrs H.

 3. The Secretary of State did not accept  that  he  had  demonstrated  any
    particular ties in the United Kingdom or that he was  unable  to  build
    ties in his own country of  nationality  on  return.   Further  it  was
    considered he could use the education he had attained in the UK  for  a
    job in Iran.  Any private life he had developed was whilst  in  the  UK
    with a precarious immigration status and that removing him would not be
    contrary to the UK's obligations under  the  ECHR.  He  was  no  longer
    eligible for discretionary leave under the UASC policy and his  removal
    would not breach Article 8.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin considered the appellant's appeal  and
    dismissed his appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

 5. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that  the
    judge erred in law by  refusing  to  hold  that  the  decision  of  the
    respondent not to grant further leave to the appellant at  a  time  she
    was not able to  remove him to  Iran  would  leave  him  destitute  and
    interfere with the appellant's  rights  under  Article  8.   The  judge
    decided it was a matter for the High Court to examine the  policies  of
    the respondent but the judge  should  have  determined  the  matter  in
    relation to the Human Rights Act.  This was a government  policy  which
    made people within the jurisdiction destitute and could not be said  to
    be a proper policy. At the very least the judge  should  have  remitted
    the matter to the respondent for further consideration.

 6. The issue was whether the  conditions  of  failed  asylum  seekers  who
    cannot be removed from the UK and who are not allowed to work and could
    not access benefits services would thus  be  destitute  amounted  to  a
    breach of their private life under Article 8.

 7. The skeleton argument was submitted and  this  made  reference  to  the
    position of the respondent who could not return the appellant owing  to
    the lack of diplomatic facilities between  the  UK  and  Iran.  It  was
    argued that the appellant, as a result of the respondent's  refusal  to
    grant him further leave, would definitely become destitute in the UK.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson granted permission to appeal in one
    matter,  that  of  whether  the  Judge  should  have   considered   the
    circumstances of the appellant (including the support available to  him
    as a failed asylum seeker) in considering the appeal under  Article  8.
    Mr Reza submitted at the hearing before me that the  respondent  had  a
    duty to act fairly.  The appellant was not asking for settlement but in
    not granting any kind of leave the  appellant  could  not  for  example
    access the National Health System.  The appellant  had  previously  had
    leave and had attended college and worked.

 9.  Mr  Avery  pointed  out  that  the  whole  argument  was  based  on  a
    misconception.  There were consular facilities and these were  outlined
    in the refusal letter, [28].  The appellant had gone through the asylum
    process.  Mr Avery referred to  Marghia  (procedural  fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 00366 (IAC) there is no common law duty for  substantive  fairness
    only procedural fairness.  That was the case here.

Conclusions

10. R v Secretary of State ex parte Limbuela [2005] UKHL 66 does  not  have
    application on this basis because it is with relevance to those  asylum
    seekers who still had an existing  claim.  That  is  not  the  case  in
    relation to this appellant who has had his substantive appeal  examined
    and dismissed.

11. As stated in  Patel  [2013]  UKSC  72,  Article  8  is  not  a  general
    dispensing power and it is not the situation, as indicated by the judge
    in paragraph 29, that the appellant is in "limbo".   The  Secretary  of
    State had set out in the reasons for refusal  letter  at  paragraph  28
    that although the Home Office was unable to obtain travel documents  to
    facilitate the return of Iranian nationals with no legal basis to  stay
    in the UK,  but  Iranian  nationals  were  themselves  able  to  access
    consular services and request travel documents through the Sultanate of
    Oman, Iranian Interests Section in London or through competent  Iranian
    authorities outside the UK.  The judge recorded this at paragraph 27 of
    the decision.

12. It was also possible for the Iranian  nationals  to  apply  through  an
    Iranian Embassy, for example, in Paris,  Dublin  or  in  Tehran.   This
    could be undertaken  by  the  Iranian  nationals  themselves  or  their
    relatives.  The appellant's asylum claim was  assessed  and  dismissed.
    There was no evidence that he had made any attempt to avail himself  of
    the procedures set out in the refusal letter or the judge's decision.

13. As the judge recorded there may be challenges with  regards  government
    policies for  those  in  limbo  (although  it  would  appear  that  the
    appellant's appeal in fact related to complaint of his removal and  his
    possible treatment abroad rather than in the United Kingdom) but,  from
    the decision, it could be seen that the appellant is not in  limbo  and
    it is open to him to take steps to remove himself. This  aspect  of  is
    claim which is the one aspect of the  challenge  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision does not either  engage  or  enhance   his  Article  8
    rights and I find there is no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made no error of law the decision shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
