
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09105/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons promulgated    |
|on 5 December 2017                       |on 11 December 2017               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     FJM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Miss Khan instructed by Greater Manchester Immigration
Aid Unit.
For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge V
        A Cox promulgated on 16 May 2017 in which the Judge  dismissed  the
        appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.






Background


     2. The appellant is a female national of Somalia  born  on  [  ]  1976
        whose immigration history was noted by the Judge. Having considered
        the evidence, the Judge sets  out  findings  of  fact.   The  Judge
        accepts the appellant has two daughters one of whom is now an adult
        and a child born on 15 October 2008 and who was aged  nine  at  the
        date of the appeal hearing.
     3. The Judge noted the  appellant  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom
        bringing her dependent child with her  because  she  wished  to  be
        reunited with her father, sister  and  adult  daughter.  The  Judge
        notes the appellant is a member of a minority  clan  and  finds  at
        [79] that this is not a case in which the appellant will be able to
        rely on any nuclear family in Mogadishu.
     4. The Judge  finds  the  appellant  will  have  access  to  financial
        resources by way  of  remittances  from  relatives  in  the  United
        Kingdom to help support her on return. At [83] the Judge finds  the
        appellant can return to live in Mogadishu but that she  will  be  a
        lone woman with a dependent child.
     5. The Judge considered the extent to which the appellant may be at  a
        disadvantage, in that she is a  lone  woman  and  has  a  dependent
        child, in taking advantage of the  economic  boom  in  Somalia  and
        finds the appellant will be able  to  access  employment  and  this
        together with financial remittances will be sufficient  to  prevent
        her and the dependent child living in conditions  that  fall  below
        those identified for the standard of humanitarian protection.
     6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a  number  of  grounds
        which was granted by another judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
        the basis it was arguable the Judge placed too much weight  on  the
        fact the appellant would have access to remittances from abroad and
        arguably fact failed to consider all the  factors  in  the  country
        guidance case of MOJ.




Discussion



     7. Although the appellant may have a potential means of  support  from
        relatives in the United Kingdom this, as  noted  in  the  grant  of
        permission to appeal, is only one factor.
     8. The core finding made by the  Judge  is  that  the  appellant  will
        return to Somalia as a single woman  with  a  dependent  child.  In
        assessing any risk, the appellant  may  face  the  Judge  fails  to
        adequately examine or reason the submissions made relating  to  the
        Home Office Country Information and Guidance Somalia: Women fearing
        gender-based harm and violence. Version 3.0. 2  August  2016  which
        was provided in the appellant's appeal bundle.
     9. Relevant sections of the guidance include  2.3.5  in  which  it  is
        recognised that in the country guidance case of AMM and others  the
        Upper Tribunal held that 'women travelling without male friends  or
        relatives are in general likely to  face  a  real  risk  of  sexual
        violence', 2.3.6 in which it was held that women  who  are  without
        family/friends/clan connections or without resources are in general
        likely to be at risk of sexual and gender-based violence on return,
        or relocating, to Mogadishu, 2.3.9 in which is stated  that  Female
        Genital Mutilation (FGM) is  always  almost  universally  practised
        throughout Somalia as the very strong cultural belief  persists  in
        its practice, 2.4.2 in which it is stated that in general  a  woman
        fearing sexual gender-based violence is  unlikely  to  be  able  to
        access effective protection from the state, and 2.5.2 in  which  it
        is stated  that  for  single  women  and  female  single  heads  of
        households with no male protection,  especially  those  originating
        from minority groups, internal relocation will not be available  in
        the absence of meaningful support  networks  or  real  prospect  of
        securing access to a livelihood.
    10. The respondent's policy summary,  set  out  at  section  3  of  the
        report, is in the following terms:


             3.   Policy Summary


             3.1.1    Discrimination and sexual and gender-based  violence,
                  including   domestic   violence,   rape,   sexual   abuse,
                  exploitation and  trafficking,  is  widespread  throughout
                  Somalia. Despite this, it  is  unlikely  that  a  proposed
                  return to Mogadishu at the present time will raise Refugee
                  Convention issues.


             3.1.2    However, women without family or clan support and IDP
                  women are in general likely to be at real risk of  gender-
                  based violence or serious harm on return.


             3.1.3    There are very high levels of FGM throughout  Somalia
                  and strong cultural belief in its  practice  although  the
                  practice of FGM is declining in Somaliland  and  Puntland.
                  Unmarried women under the age  of  thirty-nine  years  who
                  have not undergone the procedure, and who can  demonstrate
                  that they are at risk of such mistreatment and  could  not
                  escape the risk by internal relocation, form a  particular
                  social group and should be granted asylum.


             3.1.4    In south and central Somalia  (including  Mogadishu),
                  effective state protection is, in general, unlikely to  be
                  available for women fearing sexual gender-based  violence.
                  However, each case needs to be  carefully  considered  its
                  facts. The situation may be otherwise  in  Somaliland  and
                  Puntland  where  an  assessment   of   whether   effective
                  protection is available needs to be considered in relation
                  to the particular circumstances of the person.


             3.1.5    Internal relocation to Mogadishu to avoid  risk  from
                  gender-based violence may be  viable  in  some  cases,  in
                  particular where the person has a  support  network,  etc.
                  Single women are unlikely to be able to relocate.


             3.1.6    Somaliland and Puntland in general only  accept  back
                  persons who were former residents of those regions and are
                  members of local based clans or sub- clans.


    11. The respondent's country information highlights the extent  of  the
        sexual and gender-based violence in Somalia and notes in particular
        that women living in Internally Displaced Person  (IDP)  camps  are
        particularly vulnerable to rape, abduction and forced marriage, and
        reports documented patterns of sexual exploitation  by  troops,  in
        which sex is exchanged for food and money.
    12. It is clear legal error for the Judge not  to  have  considered  or
        made proper reference to this source of country  information  which
        was relied upon by the appellant.
    13. It has been found the appellant is a female member  of  a  minority
        clan being returned to Mogadishu, a city she has never lived in and
        has no connection with. It has been accepted the appellant  has  no
        family in Somalia and so no family support in Mogadishu and  it  is
        accepted the appellant cannot rely upon her  husband  for  support.
        There is therefore a clear  finding  that  the  appellant  will  be
        returning to Mogadishu as a lone woman with a minor dependent child
        who is a member of a minority clan to a city she  has  never  lived
        in. There is clearly a  finding  that  the  appellant  will  do  so
        without family or clan support.  Even if there are some remittances
        available from the United Kingdom, as noted at [13] of  the  ground
        seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it is difficult
        to see how those remittances can  stop  a  lone  woman  from  being
        subjected  to  gender-based  violence,  rape,  domestic   violence,
        robbery, exploitation and economic discrimination.
    14. The Judge was right to note the need for a detailed examination  of
        all relevant circumstances in accordance with the findings  of  the
        Upper Tribunal in MOJ [2014] UKUT  00442  but  those  circumstances
        include the risk of gender-based violence and the reality of return
        as a single woman.
    15. I find the Judge has erred in law  in  a  manner  material  to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal and set that decision aside.
    16. In light of the real risk faced by the appellant  on  return  as  a
        sole female with a dependent child and  no  male  or  clan  support
        network,  as  identified  above   in   the   respondent's   country
        information and guidance report, I find there is a real  risk  that
        on return the  appellant  will  face  ill-treatment  sufficient  to
        breach her rights under the Refugee Convention and article 3  ECHR.
        The Upper Tribunal remakes the decision allowing the appeal on this
        basis.


Decision

    17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original First-tier Tribunal  Judge.  I  remake
        the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.




   Anonymity.


    18. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008



Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 5 December 2017
