
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09669/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10th August 2014                  |On 24th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                     PV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Iran.   Having  considered  all  the
    circumstances I am satisfied that it is just  and  proper  to  make  an
    anonymity direction .

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C Greasley promulgated on 12th  February  2015,  whereby
    the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    respondent. The decision by the respondent was to remove the  appellant
    from the United Kingdom under section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum
    Act in 1999.

 3. By decision made on the 9th March 2015 leave to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination.

 4. The appellant is seeking asylum on the basis that she has converted  to
    Christianity and as a Christian convert she would be at risk on  return
    to Iran. In support of that the appellant asserts that she has a tattoo
    on her right arm which reads " Jesus is my saviour " and as a result of
    that tattoo she would be viewed as a Christian on return to Iran and as
    such would be at risk on return.

 5. The appellant's representative during the course of submissions  sought
    to argue that the findings of fact by Judge Greasley with regard to the
    appellant's conversion to Christianity and the evidence  of  that  were
    inadequately reasoned and not sustainable.

 6. With that in mind  I  would  draw  attention  to  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to  appeal.  Whilst  in  paragraph  2  there  is  a  general
    challenge that the judge failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  how  the
    appellant is likely to be perceived by the persecutors that does not in
    any detail challenge the findings of fact made by  the  Judge  Greasley
    with regard to the appellant's conversion to  Christianity.  Paragraphs
    3,4 and 5 of the  grounds  in  detail  deal  with  the  fact  that  the
    appellant has a tattoo and how that will be perceived in Iran including
    whether the appellant should cover  up  her  arms  in  order  to  avoid
    alleged persecution.

 7. Whilst I take account of the leave granted it is to be noted  that  the
    leave itself acknowledges that the grounds do not seek  to  reopen  the
    judge's findings. The leave comments upon the appellant's complete lack
    of good faith and the fact that the judge had found that the  appellant
    was lacking in credibility and that her account  had  been  fabricated.
    The  judge  made  serious  adverse  credibility  findings  as  to   the
    appellants claim to have converted to Christianity.

 8. The appellant's representative before me was seeking to argue that  the
    fact that the appellant, who ostensibly has been seeking guidance  with
    regard to Christianity for 4 years, had not been baptised and  did  not
    know the distinction between Catholic church and the Pentecostal Church
    or other  denominations  was  not  material.  Further  given  that  the
    representative appearing on behalf of the  appellant  was  not  of  the
    Christian faith  the  representative  would  not  have  understood  the
    subtleties of the distinction and that the appellant was prejudiced  by
    reason thereof.

 9. Whatever can be said with regard to  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    evidence was given the  appellant  clearly  had  stated  that  she  was
    attending a Catholic church when in point of  fact  it  was  clear  and
    evident that that was not the case. The judge noted that the  appellant
    could not only speak but also read English. The appellant had  come  to
    the United Kingdom ostensibly to study at a high level in  the  English
    language. The judge was satisfied that this was not a simple error  but
    was clear evidence of the appellant's lack of knowledge and  commitment
    with regard to the Christian faith.

10. The judge has gone on to note that the  appellant,  who  had  not  been
    baptised, indicated that she was exploring different  branches  of  the
    Christian  faith.  The  appellant  had  been  studying   or   receiving
    instruction in Christianity for some time from September 2013 a  period
    of approximately 18 months but had alleged joined the church in January
    2011, see paragraph 14 of the decision.

11. The judge noted that in her witness statement the appellant  claim  she
    had never been asked the process by which she had undertaken to  become
    a Catholic. It is clear from the interview record  she  with  had  been
    asked exactly that. She had thereafter given an answer about continuing
    to pray and knowing herself to  be  a  Christian.  The  judge  was  not
    satisfied with the answer giving valid reasons the finding that it  was
    unclear unpersuasive and vague. The appellant  makes  no  reference  to
    material aspects of Christian faith and the judge has assessed  all  of
    the evidence in coming to a conclusion that he was not  satisfied  with
    regard to the conversion of the appellant.

12. The judge has given valid reasons for finding that  the  appellant  was
    not a genuine convert and that her claim to be a convert was fabricated
    and not credible. The judge has also given valid  reasons  for  finding
    that the appellant with regard to circumstances in Iran  were  likewise
    not credible. In the circumstances the judge has  fully  justified  his
    conclusions.

13. The judge has carefully considered the issue of a tattoo and whether or
    not that of itself would bring the appellant to the  attention  of  the
    authorities or others who might be potential persecutors. The judge had
    noted from paragraph 60 onwards that tattoos had become a much  sought-
    after fashion accessory amongst middle-class youths.

14. It was material in that regard  that,  whilst  positively  engaging  in
    evangelical  activity  or  other   public   demonstrations   of   one's
    Christianity in seeking to persuade the  public  to  become  Christians
    will have the  result  of  drawing  attention  of  the  authorities  or
    potential persecutors to an individual, wearing cross itself would  not
    be a problem. The judge had  noted  that  wearing  a  crucifix  a  very
    visible  and  public  demonstration  of  faith  would  not  expose   an
    individual to a risk of persecution or mistreatment from any source. In
    the light of that it was for the appellant to show that a tattoo  would
    attention to her and expose her to a risk.

15.  If a symbol of Christianity such as  a  cross  would  not  necessarily
    expose an individual to a risk of persecution, the judge is entitled to
    conclude that more immediately less visible forms  of  evidence  of  an
    association with Christianity, which may not necessarily be  disclosed,
    would likewise not expose an individual to a risk.

16. In the circumstances the judge was entitled to come to the  conclusions
    that he did. The judge was entitled to come to the conclusions that the
    appellant's conversion was not  genuine.  Even  if  the  appellant  had
    converted the appellant was not one of  those  individuals  that  would
    engage in  publicly  promoting  the  Christian  faith.  The  judge  was
    satisfied in the circumstances that otherwise the tattoo itself had not
    been shown to be such a symbol as would draw a risk of  persecution  to
    the appellant.

17. In the circumstances the judge has carefully considered all  the  facts
    and giving valid reasons for coming to the conclusions that he  did.  I
    find that there was no material error of law in the determination and I
    uphold the decision to dismiss this matter on all grounds.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
