
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09113/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th January 2016                  |On 27th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     A s
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Nelson-Iye, Duncan Lewis solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  29th
    October 2014 to refuse his application for asylum in the UK.  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Wylie dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against
    that decision.  The appellant  now  appeals  with  permission  to  this
    Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the appellant arrived in  the  UK
    on 9th October 2014 hidden in  the  back  of  a  lorry.  He  was  found
    unconscious on a road and taken to hospital. He was  detained  on  10th
    October 2014 and claimed asylum that day and he underwent  a  screening
    interview that day. He was accepted onto the Detained Fast Track  (DFT)
    process on 12th October 2014 and  had  his  asylum  interview  on  28th
    October 2014. His application was  refused  on  29th  October  2014.  A
    hearing was fixed for 11th  November  2014  and  adjourned  until  20th
    November 2014. At that hearing a  direction  was  made  to  remove  the
    appeal from  the  Fast  Track  because  the  appellant  had  a  medical
    assessment with the Helen Bamber Foundation on 9th December 2014 and it
    was decided that the appeal could not be justly determined  within  the
    Fast Track process. The appeal was fixed for  5th  June  2015  and  the
    appellant  attended  the  hearing  and  gave  oral  evidence.  He   was
    represented at that hearing by Mr Nelson-Iye.

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim for asylum is that he claims that he
    was a butcher and from around October 2013  he  stored  boxes  for  his
    brother, a politics student who worked part time in a  print  shop,  in
    his butchers shop. He claims that he did not know what was in the boxes
    and that his brother came and went over  time  taking  some  boxes  and
    leaving others. He claims that on 28th August 2014  his  brother  asked
    him to burn the boxes marked yellow and that when he  was  burning  the
    boxes plain clothes intelligence service men came and arrested him. His
    father was also arrested.  He claims  that  when  he  was  blindfolded,
    kicked, punched, beaten with sticks,  branded  with  an  iron  bar  and
    threatened during his detention and released after a week upon agreeing
    to find his brother for the authorities. His uncle treated  his  wounds
    and arranged for the appellant to leave Afghanistan.  He  travelled  to
    the UK and collapsed after  getting  off  a  lorry  and  was  taken  to
    hospital.

 4. At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    rejected the appellant's explanation that the inconsistency between the
    screening interview, where he said that his captors threatened to  hang
    him, and his asylum interview, where he said  that  he  was  threatened
    with rape, was because the screening interview took place with a  Farsi
    interpreter whereas he speaks Dari. The judge found that  it  does  not
    seem credible that  the  authorities  would  not  have  questioned  the
    appellant about the contents of the  boxes  if  they  contained  papers
    adverse to the government as claimed. The judge considered the  medical
    report from Dr Arnold of the Helen Bamber Foundation and found that the
    report does not support the appellant's claim that he  was  injured  by
    being burned on the back when he was in detention from 28th  August  to
    3rd September 2014. This is because, whilst Dr  Arnold  concludes  that
    the scars numbered S1 and S2 are typical of  torture  by  branding,  he
    also states that all the scars were 'quiescent' and that this indicated
    that all  of  the  scars  were  caused  at  least  a  year  before  his
    examination (on 9th December 2014). The judge noted that  although  the
    appellant was treated in hospital in the UK on 10th  October  2014  and
    these scars were noted, there was no reference to the  scars  being  of
    recent date. The judge concluded that the  appellant's  credibility  is
    called  into  question  and  did  not  accept  that  his  evidence   of
    apprehension and detention is genuine.





Error of Law

 5. In his Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal the  appellant  contends
    that the judge made five errors of law. It is  firstly  contended  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in her finding at paragraph 27 that
    she did not accept the appellant's explanation that  the  inconsistency
    between his screening interview and his  asylum  interview  as  to  the
    threats  made  by  his  captors  was  because  of  problems  with   the
    interpreter and that it seemed  unlikely.  It  is  contended  that  the
    uncontentious evidence shows that the appellant was interviewed with  a
    Farsi interpreter which was the  wrong  language  and  that  there  was
    therefore a problem with the interpreter.

 6. In my view there is no substance in this ground. The  judge  noted  the
    appellant's claim at paragraph 21 of the decision and dealt with it  at
    paragraph 27. According to the record of the  screening  interview  the
    appellant was interviewed through a Farsi  interpreter  and  it  states
    that he also speaks Pushtu. The appellant confirmed that he  understood
    the interpreter and confirmed at the outset  and  at  the  end  of  the
    interview that he understood all of the questions asked. The  appellant
    answered a number of questions giving a reasonable  amount  of  detail.
    There is no evidence that any issue regarding interpretation was raised
    after the screening interview. At the asylum  interview  the  appellant
    was accompanied by his solicitor  and  was  asked  at  questions  17-21
    whether he had given accurate answers at the  screening  interview  and
    whether he wanted to make any amendments to that interview  record  and
    he made no mention then of any problem with interpretation or any other
    problem with the screening interview. In light of this evidence I  find
    that it was open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  reject  the
    appellant's claim that he had a problem with  the  interpreter  in  the
    screening interview and to take account of the discrepancy between  the
    screening interview and asylum interview as  damaging  the  appellant's
    credibility.

 7. The second ground contends that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in
    concluding at  paragraph  39  that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant faces a  real  risk  of  persecution  in  Pakistan  when  the
    appellant claims to fear persecution in Afghanistan. I find that  there
    is no material error here as it is clear from reading the decision as a
    whole that the judge was aware that the appellant's claim  is  that  he
    fears return to Afghanistan, as set out in paragraphs 1, 10, 11 and 38.
    The only mention of Pakistan is in paragraph 39.  I  find  that  it  is
    cleat that this is a typographical error and is  not  material  to  the
    judge's consideration of the appeal or her conclusions.

 8. The third ground of appeal contends that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    erred in her approach to Dr Arnold's report. It is contended  that  the
    judge misdirected herself in relation to the scars marked S1 and S2.  I
    indicated to Mr Nelson-Iye at the hearing that  I  consider  that  this
    ground is misleading.  It  is  contended  that  the  judge  'completely
    misdirected herself' as  to  Dr  Arnold's  treatment  of  these  scars,
    however it is very clear that the judge did not.

 9. In the report Dr Arnold describes 10 scars and states at  paragraph  26
    "All of the above scars are quiescent". Dr Arnold goes on to  give  his
    opinion in relation to the  scars  at  paragraph  37-44.  Paragraph  37
    states that scars S1 and S2 have the characteristics of  second  degree
    contact thermal burns and that their location excludes  self-infliction
    and concludes that these lesions are "typical of torture by  branding".
    The report went on to conclude that scar S11 was of recent  origin  and
    was due to infection of the superficial  tissues  related  to  a  small
    abscess. The Doctor noted that the appellant did not attribute scars S3-
    S10 to any malign cause. The Doctor concluded at paragraph 44;

         "The quiescent  nature  of  the  above  scars  indicates  that  the
         causative  injuries  occurred  at  least   one   year   before   my
         examination.  There  currently  exists   no   method   of   medical
         examination or scientific investigation by which the ages of  scars
         resulting from injuries more than one year prior to assessment cane
         be established with confidence".

10. It is contended in the grounds of appeal, and by Mr Nelson-Iye  at  the
    hearing, that Dr Arnold had concluded his consideration of scars S1 and
    S2 at paragraph 37 of the report and that the conclusion  at  paragraph
    44 about the timing of the causes of the scars related to  scars  S3  -
    S11. However this cannot be right. It is clear to me that  Dr  Arnold's
    conclusion at paragraph 44 relates to all of the  scars.  Paragraph  44
    has to be read along with by Dr Arnold's opinion at paragraph  26  that
    all of the scars (S1-S10) are 'quiescent'. Further, even if Mr  Nelson-
    Iye is right in his submission then Dr Arnold reaches no conclusion  as
    to the timing of the infliction of the wounds which caused scars S1 and
    S2 whereas he has given an opinion as to the timing of all of the other
    scars. There is nothing in the report to indicate that the  Doctor  had
    any information as to the timing of the scars S1 and S2 as the  history
    section does not indicate a date or period when they were said to  have
    been inflicted. So, even if Mr Nelson-Iye is right  in  his  submission
    that paragraph 44 does not apply to scars S1 and S2  (which  I  do  not
    accept), then there is nothing in Dr Arnold's report  to  indicate  any
    time for the causative wounds for scars S1 and S2.

11. I find that it is the grounds of appeal and not  the  judge's  decision
    which disclose a misreading of Dr Arnold's report as to when  scars  S1
    and S2 were inflicted. I therefore find that the judge was entitled  to
    conclude as she did that the medical report was not consistent with the
    appellant's claim that he was injured by being burned on his back  when
    in detention from 28th August until 3rd September  2014,  around  three
    months before Dr Arnold's report.

12. The third ground of appeal contends  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    weight to the notes from Maidstone & Tunbridge Wells  Hospital  A&E  at
    pages 74-85 of the appellant's bundle. It is contended that these notes
    show that the appellant had fresh  injuries  when  he  arrived  at  the
    hospital. It is contended that the note  that  the  two  scars  on  the
    appellant's back were black suggested that there were  fresh  and  that
    the notes show that the appellant was in pain and  was  given  repeated
    doses of morphine.

13. The judge referred to the hospital records at paragraph  32  so  it  is
    clear that she considered them. The judge observes  that  the  hospital
    records note the burn scars but that there was  no  reference  to  them
    being of recent date.  Mr  Nelson-Iye  submitted  that,  short  of  the
    reference at paragraph 32 to page 80 of the bundle, the judge  did  not
    mention whether she accepted some or all of the notes  on  that  point.
    However there is nothing else in the notes about the burn scars.  I  do
    not accept Mr Nelson-Iye's submission that the note that the scars were
    black indicated that they were recent. There is nothing in the notes to
    that effect and no medical evidence to  support  this  submission.  The
    notes show that the appellant had injuries to his sternum, shoulder and
    femur which may have been caused by him falling off a lorry  (page  74,
    79, 83) or by an assault (page 81). The only reference to the scars  on
    his back is at page 80  where  it  is  stated;  "2  burn-??mark  (black
    colour)". The judge was right to conclude  that  the  burn  scars  were
    noted but there was no reference to them being of recent date [32].

14. The final ground contends that the appellant has been disadvantaged due
    to his detention under the Detention Fast Track procedure and that  his
    asylum claim should be considered de novo. The grounds of  appeal  rely
    on the case of Detention Action  v  First-tier  Tribunal  (IAC)  &  Ors
    [2015] EWHC 1689 (Admin). Mr Nelson-Iye submitted  that  the  case  law
    says that cases such as the appellant's should  be  considered  by  the
    Secretary of State de novo.  He submitted  that  the  decision  in  the
    Detention Action litigation supported this submission  and  that  there
    had been an order which states that all cases that had been in the  DFT
    process should be considered afresh. He did not have authority for this
    submission at the hearing and I allowed  him  to  submit  any  relevant
    authorities after the hearing and I gave Ms Savage 7 days in  which  to
    make any submissions in response to anything lodged by Mr Nelson-Iye.

15. Subsequent to the hearing Mr Nelson-Iye submitted a number of documents
    including a statement  made  on  2  July  2015  by  James  Brokenshire,
    Minister for Immigration; a press release from Detention Action dated 9
    July 2014; a letter from the Home Office in relation to  the  Detention
    Action dated 7 July 2015; a general  draft  letter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal; and an extract  (paragraph  30-222)  from  the  judgement  in
    Detention Action v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2245 (Admin). Ms  Savage  submitted
    written submissions by email dated 13th January 2016.

16. In her submissions Ms Savage submitted that, as the appeal in this case
    was not processed under  the  Fast  Track  Rules  2014  but  under  the
    principal Rules as the appellant had been removed from the  fast  Track
    process on 11th November 2014, the Detention Action judgement does  not
    support the appellant's submission that the matter should  be  remitted
    to be considered de novo.

17. Despite his indication at the hearing that there was authority for  his
    submission that this case should be considered de  novo  Mr  Nelson-Iye
    did not produce any such authority. The appellant in this case  was  in
    the DFT process when he attended his  screening  interview  and  asylum
    interview but had been removed from the process before his  appeal  was
    heard in the First-tier Tribunal. I have not been shown  any  authority
    to  indicate  that  everyone  in  the  appellant's  position   suffered
    unfairness to the extent that their cases should be  reconsidered.  The
    grounds of appeal considered  above  do  not  disclose  any  unfairness
    suffered by this appellant in the interview process such as to indicate
    that his particular claim should be reconsidered.

18. Accordingly considering all of the grounds of appeal set out above I am
    satisfied that the judge made no material error of law in consideration
    of this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The judge made no material error of law in relation to this appeal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date: 25th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 25th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

