
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09229/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th January 2016                 |On 17th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between


                                     W J
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, Milestone Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant a citizen of Pakistan born on 12th December 1983, appeals
    with permission  against  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Oxlade made on 30th September 2015 when  the  judge  dismissed
    his appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated  15th  June
    2015 to remove him.  That decision followed  a  refusal  to  grant  him
    asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  protection  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 2. The background history is that on 25th July 2011 the appellant made  an
    application for leave to enter the  UK  as  the  spouse  of  a  British
    national present and settled in the UK and to whom he  was  married  in
    July 2010 in Pakistan.  He entered with leave on 28th November 2011 and
    his leave expired on 28th December 2013.

 3. That marriage broke down and as a result of the  receipt  of  a  letter
    dated 21st December written by the appellant's wife to the  respondent,
    the Secretary of State curtailed the appellant's leave on 4th July 2013
    and a decision was made to remove him.

 4. The appellant made an appeal against that decision which was heard  and
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert, whose  applications  to
    the Upper Tribunal were ultimately refused  and  the  appellant  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 28th October 2014.  It is important to  note
    that throughout his claim the appellant maintained that he  had  chosen
    to marry his wife and that after he came to the  UK  his  marriage  was
    consummated and that a job that had been promised by his  father-in-law
    did not materialise so he left to seek work and the  family  froze  him
    out.  He maintained that he wished to reconcile with his wife.

 5. Following his failed attempt to  secure  leave  on  the  basis  of  his
    marriage, the appellant on 4th March 2015 made an appointment to  claim
    asylum and was interviewed on 12th March and 10th  June  2015.   It  is
    relevant to note that there was a copy of a nullity  petition  on  file
    dated 31st July 2013 and also a judicial separation petition  filed  by
    the appellant's ex-wife dated 27th April 2012 which  merely  relies  on
    the fact that "the respondent has  behaved  in  such  a  way  that  the
    petitioner cannot reasonably be expected to live with the  respondent".



 6. Filed in support of the appellant's  claim  was  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's gay  partner,  HB,  dated  25th  June  2015  and  also  the
    statement of a friend, the name  of  SG,  dated  25th  June  2015.   SG
    attended and gave oral  testimony  at  the  hearing  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oxlade and the contention and challenge  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision is that there is a failure to engage with that
    evidence.

 7. It was asserted by the appellant in his  grounds  for  application  for
    permission to appeal that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  not  paid
    account to the detailed evidence given by the appellant and his partner
    which was mutually consistent as to the course of  their  relationship,
    the events within it and the life they lead together.   The  judge  did
    not state  why  she  rejected  the  evidence.   In  addition  a  former
    neighbour of the appellant gave evidence that she  knew  the  appellant
    was in a homosexual relationship and observed the couple frequently  on
    occasions.  It was submitted that the judge rejected  the  evidence  of
    the partner and witness because she had already rejected  the  evidence
    of the appellant.  That amounted to an error of law.

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Jones relied essentially on the grounds  as
    stated above. Paragraph 44 was the crucial section of the decision  and
    despite the extensive evidence including oral evidence  the  judge  had
    not taken this into account.

 9. Ms Sreeraman pointed out that the appellant's account differed  sharply
    between his two hearings and there were  manifest  discrepancies.   The
    context was that the appellant's account was fabricated.

Conclusions

10. Between paragraph 37 and 38 the judge set out the  differences  in  the
    appellant's version of events particularly in relation to his  marriage
    before Immigration Judge Herbert in 2014 and before her in 2015.  Judge
    Oxlade went on to find at paragraphs 40 to 43  that  there  were  still
    some inconsistencies in his final position, namely that  the  appellant
    stated that he knew he was gay by November 2011 and that  he  told  his
    wife he had relationships with men in 2013 at which point he  had  also
    learnt he had been rejected by his family.  The judge essentially found
    that his account was largely fabricated and that he  was  advancing  on
    the one hand a case before the First-tier Tribunal in 2014 that he  was
    heterosexual and hoping to reconcile with his wife, whilst on the other
    hand pursuing  a  seriously  gay  relationship  with  his  partner  and
    pursuing an altogether different claim before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in 2015.  The judge at paragraph 39 identified further discrepancies in
    the appellant's account, rejected the idea of  having  consummated  the
    marriage and noted that he was not seeking a  reconciliation  with  his
    wife at all.  In short, the judge found that the  appellant's  accounts
    differed so widely that he struggled to maintain  consistency  even  in
    his latest account.

11. The judge took into account that  a  person  can  struggle  with  their
    sexual identity but noted that in  interview  he  told  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in 2014 that he wanted to reconcile with his wife  because  at
    the time he did not know  he  was  gay,  [AIR  question  223].    This,
    however, conflicted with his claim that he told his wife in  2011  that
    he could not consummate the marriage because he was gay.  In  interview
    he said that to hide one lie he had to tell so many lies  and  that  he
    chose his lawyer for the first hearing because he was a good liar.

12. What seriously undermined the appellant's case in the eyes of the judge
    was that he knew that he was gay in November 2011 and if it was true it
    must have been obvious to him  that  he  could  not  have  returned  to
    Pakistan but considerable time had passed during  which  the  appellant
    could have made an asylum claim and  yet  he  continued  to  advance  a
    largely fabricated account.

13. The critical passage of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    is at paragraph 44 where the judge states as follows:

         "The Appellant, partner, and witness say that the Appellant is  now
         in a genuine relationship.  That does mean that the  Appellant  was
         advancing one case before  the  Tribunal  until  late  2014  (being
         heterosexual and seeking a reconciliation with his wife) whilst  at
         the same time pursuing a serious gay relationship with his partner,
         in which he was openly expressing  his  relationship  with  a  male
         partner in public.   I  have  had  the  benefit  of  hearing  their
         evidence, and together with the Appellant's  evidence,  considering
         the appeal in the round with the other evidence I do not  find  his
         claim to be gay to be credible and reliable".

14. I can appreciate the disquiet that the judge had  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's evidence. That is  understandable.   I  note  that  in  his
    asylum interview the appellant stated between  questions  172  and  188
    that he was openly gay (prior to the hearing before Judge Herbert)  and
    indeed told his friends at the post office.

15. Nonetheless it is incumbent upon the judge to assess  the  evidence  of
    each witness in particularly when considering  credibility and  as  set
    out in SA (Iran) [2012] EWHC 2575 (Admin) at [16]

         "On any view, the First Tier  Tribunal  judge  had  reached  strong
         adverse findings against the Claimant, rejecting  her  credibility.
         It was appropriate that that be taken as the starting point. But  a
         starting point is just that; it does not imply that the  end  point
         must be the same'

     and further at [21]

         "Mr Mandalia argued that because the Claimant  had  given  evidence
         about her husband's  conduct  and  membership  of  the  Basij,  the
         evidence of her son added nothing, and could not make a difference.
         That approach by  Mr  Mandalia  (which  echoes  that  of  the  Home
         Secretary)  is  one  which  a  moment's  reflection  will  show  is
         unarguable, if advanced as some rule  of  general  application.  In
         cases where credibility is in  issue,  the  fact  that  a  witness'
         account is corroborated by that of another witness can add  to  its
         credibility. Were it otherwise, prosecutors in criminal  cases,  or
         parties in personal injury actions, would not seek to call as  many
         eye (or other) witnesses of events as can give  relevant  evidence,
         nor would Defendants in criminal cases advancing a defence of alibi
         be keen to call any supporting witnesses if they can do so"

16. AK Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00230 also emphasises that it  is  important  to
    summarise the evidence properly  and  to  make  an  assessment  of  the
    credibility of that evidence and give  reasons  for  arriving  at  that
    assessment.  The judge in this case merely referred to the  benefit  of
    hearing the witnesses'  evidence  and  together  with  the  appellant's
    evidence did not find his claim to be gay credible and  reliable.   The
    difficulty is that the judge does not summarise or engage  specifically
    with the other two witnesses' evidence.  It would also appear that  the
    partner and neighbour attended the hearing of 25th June  2015  to  give
    oral evidence.

17. I can accept that the  judge  was  viewing  the  evidence  against  the
    background of the appellant's credibility but there was a need to  make
    clear findings in respect of the evidence of the witnesses and not just
    give a passing reference to that evidence and as AK Turkey finds

         "[10]    ... Save in those exceptional  cases  where  the  material
         facts are not in issue between the parties, it is an essential part
         of an adjudicator's responsibility to make clear findings  of  fact
         on the material  issues,  and  to  give  proper,  intelligible  and
         adequate reasons for arriving at those findings. An adjudicator who
         fails to do  so  is  liable  to  find  that  his  determination  is
         vulnerable to challenge on appeal at the suit of the  losing  party
         ..."

18. Despite an otherwise lucid and well reasoned decision,  the  judge  has
    not adequately addressed the evidence of the appellant's witnesses  and
    as such I find there is an error of law.  As such I find that there  is
    an error of law and the appeal, as  the  credibility  findings  are  in
    issue, should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 10th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

