
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09771/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent:        |
|On 14th February 2014                           |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     N P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Soma & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms P Hastings, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Sri Lanka born on 3rd December 1972.
     The Appellant arrived in the UK in January 2001 when  he  applied  for
    asylum.  The Appellant absconded, and his application was  not  finally
    decided until 15 October 2013 when it was refused for the  reasons  set
    out in the Respondent's letter of that date.  The  Appellant  appealed,
    and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Halliwell
    (the Judge) sitting at Newport on 27th November 2013.   He  decided  to
    allow the appeal on asylum grounds for  the  reasons  set  out  in  his
    Determination dated the following day.  The Respondent sought leave  to
    appeal that decision, and on  19  December  2013  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeal because he found the  Appellant  to  be  a
    truthful witness.  His findings of fact were  that  the  Appellant  had
    been a member of the LTTE as a combatant for a period  of  seven  years
    from 1987.  The Appellant had been detained on two  occasions  in  1995
    and in 2000 when he had been severely ill-treated in a manner amounting
    to persecution.  The Appellant had attended  demonstrations  in  London
    which had taken place during a  visit  of  the  Sri  Lankan  President.
    Applying this matrix of facts to the country guidance case  of  GJ  and
    others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC), the Judge found that there was a real risk  that  the  Appellant
    would be persecuted on his return to Sri Lanka.  The  Judge  took  into
    account the Appellant's past persecution, and found  that  as  the  Sri
    Lankan  authorities  had  a  sophisticated  security   apparatus,   the
    Appellant's sur place activities in the UK would be known to them.  The
    Judge found that the Appellant came within the risk category identified
    at paragraph 7(a) of the headnote to GJ.

 4. At the hearing, I heard submissions from both  representatives.   Those
    submissions are recorded in the Record of Proceedings and I  will  give
    only a summary of them below.

 5. Ms Hastings referred to the grounds of application and  submitted  that
    the Judge had erred in law in coming to his decision.   The  Judge  had
    given insufficient reasoning for his conclusion, and had not taken into
    account the passage of time since the Appellant's  experiences  in  Sri
    Lanka, and the fact that the Appellant upon his own evidence had only a
    low profile.  The  Judge  had  failed  to  apply  the  decision  in  GJ
    correctly.  He had not explained why  an  Appellant  with  such  a  low
    profile came within the risk category identified at paragraph  7(a)  of
    GJ, and the Judge had  failed  to  consider  the  caveat  contained  in
    paragraph 8 whereby the Appellant's past history would only be relevant
    to the extent that it was perceived by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  as
    indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan State  or  the  Sri
    Lankan government.

 6. In response, Mr Nicholson referred to the  Rule  24  Response  and  his
    Outline Submissions.  He argued that there was no error of law  in  the
    Judge's decision.  The Judge's decision had been based upon findings of
    fact which had not been challenged in this appeal.  Those findings were
    that the Appellant had been an active combatant for  the  LTTE  for  as
    long as seven years who had been detained and tortured twice.  In  more
    recent times, the Appellant had engaged  in  sur  place  activities  in
    demonstrating against the President of Sri Lanka, and it was  known  as
    decided in GJ that the Sri Lankan authorities took  great  interest  in
    diaspora activities.  It therefore could not be said that the Appellant
    had a low profile.  In any  event,  the  risk  category  identified  at
    paragraph 7(a) at GJ did not require a significant profile.  There  was
    good reason for the Judge to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    considered to be a present risk by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.   The
    Appellant's sur place activities indicated that he wished  to  continue
    the struggle against the Sri Lankan State.  The important issue was how
    the Appellant would be perceived by those Sri Lankan authorities.

 7. I find no error of law in the Judge's decision.  The Judge  made  clear
    findings of fact which have not  been  disputed  in  this  appeal.   He
    applied those facts to the current country guidance case and came to  a
    decision which was open to him.  I find  no  misinterpretation  of  the
    decision in GJ.  It was not perverse of the  Judge  to  find  that  the
    Appellant came within risk category given at paragraph  7(a).   It  was
    not disputed that the Appellant's sur place  activities  in  protesting
    against the visit of the President of Sri Lanka  to  the  UK  would  be
    known to the authorities in Sri  Lanka,  and  bearing  the  Appellant's
    history as an LTTE combatant who had been detained and tortured on  two
    occasions, regardless of how long ago those detentions had been, it was
    open to the Judge to find that the Appellant would be perceived to be a
    continuing Tamil separatist and therefore a threat to the integrity  of
    Sri Lanka as a single State.  It was open to the  Judge  to  find  that
    those sur place activities, coupled with the Appellant's history,  gave
    him  a  sufficient  profile  to  be  of  concern  to  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities.  In any event, following the recent comments of the Senior
    President of Tribunals, Sullivan J, it would not have been an error  of
    law for the Judge not to confine himself to a strict interpretation  of
    the risk categories given in GJ.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
