
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09935/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 October 2014                           |On 17 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE DAVIS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                               Ms Ken Kah Low
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is Ken Kah Low.  She  is  a  citizen  of  Malaysia.   She
    appeals against a decision to remove  her  to  Malaysia.   She  claimed
    before the First-tier Tribunal that she was a refugee and  entitled  to
    international protection, alternatively that  she  was  entitled  to  a
    grant of humanitarian protection by reference to paragraph 339C.

2.   The case resulted in the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal  and
    she now appeals with leave of Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb in relation to
    the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

3.   When giving leave Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb said this:

         "It is arguable that in applying Section EX.1 in  Appendix  FM  the
         judge applied the wrong  test  for  'insurmountable  obstacles'  by
         asking himself whether it was 'not possible'  for  the  appellant's
         partner to live permanently in Malaysia.  That is not  the  correct
         test."


4.   Our preliminary view having read the papers was  that  the  proposition
    was not merely arguable, it was unanswerable and  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had indeed applied the wrong test.  Happily the  Secretary  of
    State entirely agrees with that  proposition.   Today  Mr  Richards  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State referred us to  the  response  to  the
    grounds of appeal that was lodged as long ago as 7 July which indicates
    that that part of the decision was the subject of an error of  law  and
    cannot stand.

5.   Therefore we must set aside that  part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination.  It will be necessary for the case to be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a different judge in order  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to determine whether the appellant does  indeed  on
    the facts of the case satisfy Appendix FM.

6.   We do not need to rehearse the  facts  upon  which  that  assertion  is
    made.  The First-tier Tribunal who rehears this case will have to reach
    its own view as to the facts though it is apparent from what  has  been
    said before us that the primary findings of fact as to the  appellant's
    sexual status and other matters will not be in issue.

7.   However, what is not conceded by the Secretary of  State  is  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in dismissing the appeal on  asylum  grounds.
    It was identified that the asylum  claim  depended  upon  demonstrating
    that there was a risk either of  criminal  prosecution  or  persecution
    because of the appellant's sexual orientation or a risk that she  might
    be harmed by members of her own family and if the  latter  whether  she
    could avoid such a risk by internal relocation.

8.   The appellant before us argues that the  reasoning  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was inadequate and that the finding in relation to asylum also
    should be set aside.  The Secretary of State argues that it should  not
    and she argues that it is a discrete issue  that  we  should  determine
    now.  To that extent that there is an agreement between the parties.

9.   The factual basis on which the risk was asserted in relation to  family
    was a threat by one of the appellant's uncles, an uncle who  considered
    that the appellant's sexuality was a disgrace to the family, that uncle
    being somebody with a criminal conviction for threatening somebody with
    a knife.

10.  The First-tier Tribunal first concluded  that  there  was  no  evidence
    that this particular uncle would become aware of her presence or indeed
    would any particular members in her family.  The primary finding of the
    Tribunal was that there was no such  risk.   If  that  finding  can  be
    maintained then the further arguments of  the  appellant  fall  by  the
    wayside since, if there is no risk,  issues  of  relocation  and  undue
    hardship in relocating simply do not arise.

11.  We are satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  the  material  to
    reach the conclusion that it did in relation to asylum  simply  on  the
    basis of the absence of risk.  We conclude  that  the  finding  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in relation to asylum cannot  be  impugned  and  it
    will stand and therefore any rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal  will
    relate simply to the issue in terms of insurmountable obstacles.

12.  We note that there is a potential issue  as  to  where  the  burden  of
    proof lies in relation to Appendix FM and in particular in relation  to
    insurmountable obstacles.  It does not seem to  us  that  it  would  be
    helpful for us to offer a view.  We are not  having  to  determine  the
    issue given that that issue has been the subject  of  an  agreement  as
    being something that must be redetermined by the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The guidance that there is in existing case law will have to be  placed
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal  will  take  a
    view on where the burden of proof lies.  If it is  wrong,  there  would
    have to be some further appeal but it is not for us to reach a view  on
    it today.



Signed                                  Date 29 October 2014

Mr Justice Davis

