
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09748/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 March 2016                              |On 13 April 2016               |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     Y L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C McWatters instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The anonymity order imposed by the Upper Tribunal in its error  of  law
    decision of 18 December 2015 remains in force.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Republic of China who was born on  27
    February 1988.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 April 2007  and
    claimed asylum.  The  basis  of  her  claim,  at  that  time,  was  her
    involvement with the Falun Gong.

 3. On 9 October 2013, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and,   in   a
    determination dated 13  December  2013,  Judge  Britton  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.  That decision was subsequently set  aside  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in a decision dated 27 March 2014.  The remitted  appeal
    was heard in the First-tier Tribunal by Judge Povey on 28 January 2015.
     In a decision dated 16 February 2015, Judge Povey also  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  He rejected the  appellant's  claim
    based upon her involvement with the Falon Gong.  However, before  Judge
    Povey, the appellant also relied upon the fact that since  arriving  in
    the UK she had become a Jehovah's Witness and now claimed to be at risk
    because of her faith on return to  China.   Judge  Povey  accepted  the
    appellant's evidence that she was a Jehovah's Witness but dismissed her
    claim based upon the country guidance case of QH  (Christians  -  risk)
    China CG [2014) UKUT 86 (IAC) on the basis that she had not established
    a well-founded fear on return.

 5. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal and, in a  decision  dated
    18 December 2015, I concluded that Judge Povey's decision involved  the
    making of an error of law on the basis that he had failed  properly  to
    consider the  background  evidence  in  relation  to  the  position  of
    Jehovah's Witnesses in China.  As a  consequence,  I  set  aside  Judge
    Povey's decision and the appeal was re-listed before me on 9 March 2016
    in order to remake the decision.

The Hearing

 6. At the hearing,  I  admitted  without  objection  from  Mr  Richards  a
    consolidated bundle of documents  including  documents  previously  not
    before the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698  as  amended)  (the
    "bundle").  In addition,  the  appellant  briefly  gave  oral  evidence
    before me and adopted her statements dated 15 January 2015 (at A1-2  of
    the bundle) and dated 26 February 2016 (at E1-2 of the bundle).

 7. I heard  oral  submissions  from  both  parties'  representatives.   Mr
    McWatters, who represented the appellant, also relied upon  a  skeleton
    argument dated 8 March 2016.

The Appellant's Evidence

 8. Mr Richards, on behalf of the respondent accepted  that  the  appellant
    was a witness of truth in respect of her faith and,  therefore,  I  can
    briefly deal with her written and oral evidence.

 9. In her evidence, the appellant told me that she had become a member  of
    a Jehovah's Witness congregation since she has been  in  the  UK.   Her
    involvement is supported by a number of letters of support  by  members
    of that congregation in Section E of the bundle.  The appellant told me
    that she has not yet been baptised but that is likely  to  happen  this
    year.  In cross-examination, the appellant said that she  had  not  yet
    been baptised because she did not think that at the moment her level of
    knowledge of the religion was enough and that she needed to  know  more
    about it before she was baptised.

10. The appellant said that once she is baptised she would be  accepted  as
    someone who could preach the Jehovah's Witness faith.   She  said  that
    she could go out and preach to other people and introduce her  religion
    to others.  It was not possible for  her  to  do  that  until  she  was
    baptised.  She said that it was accepted that all  Jehovah's  Witnesses
    would do their best to preach to others.   She  said  that  this  could
    involve knocking on doors and distributing leaflets and explaining  and
    discussing the religion to the occupants or it could  involve  standing
    on streets, for example outside post offices  or  train  stations  with
    leaflets on a cart  which  were  handed  out  to  those  passing.   The
    appellant said this was what she would  do,  as  a  baptised  Jehovah's
    Witness, if she were returned to China.  The appellant  said  that  she
    would do this even if she was not allowed to preach  in  China  because
    that was her religion.

The Law

11. In this appeal, the appellant relies upon the Refugee Convention.   The
    burden of proof is upon the appellant to establish that she has a well-
    founded fear of persecution on return to China for a Convention reason,
    namely her religious belief.  The appellant must establish a real  risk
    of  persecution,  namely  serious  ill-treatment  for  that  Convention
    reason.

The Issues

12. The appellant relies upon  the  Refugee  Convention.   No  reliance  is
    placed upon Art 8.

13. The issue is whether the Appellant  has  established  a  real  risk  of
    persecution because of her religious beliefs if returned to China.

14. On behalf of the appellant, Mr McWatters submitted that  the  Appellant
    has established such a risk based upon her faith in the  light  of  the
    background evidence and the country guidance  decision  of  QH  dealing
    with the risk to Christians  who  choose  to  worship  in  unregistered
    churches and to  conduct  themselves  in  such  a  way  as  to  attract
    attention.  He drew my attention to a number of background documents in
    Section C of the bundle and at E23-36.  He submitted that the appellant
    belonged to an unregistered church, her faith required her to preach or
    proselytise and, as a consequence, she would be at risk of  persecution
    or serious ill-treatment.

15. Mr Richards, accepted that the appellant was a Jehovah's  Witness  and,
    indeed, as regards her faith he accepted that  she  was  a  witness  of
    truth.  He did not specifically accept the appellant's evidence  as  to
    how she would behave - by preaching, etc. - if returned  to  China  but
    also he did not make any positive submissions  to  the  effect  that  I
    should not accept her evidence.

16. Instead, Mr Richards submitted  that  the  objective  evidence  on  the
    treatment of Jehovah's Witnesses in China was  extremely  limited.   He
    accepted that there were Jehovah's Witnesses in China but not  a  great
    many.  He submitted that the evidence failed  to  establish  that  they
    were persecuted.  The material related only to Christians in general in
    China.  He referred me to the Home Office's policy  document,  "Country
    Information and Guidance China: Christians" (13 June 2014) at D11-26 of
    the bundle.  This, he submitted,  in  the  "policy  summary"  (at  D16)
    reflected the CG case of QH.  He submitted that the appellant  had  not
    established that she fell within a category of Christian who  would  be
    at risk on return given the lack of objective evidence  that  Jehovah's
    Witnesses were persecuted in China.

Discussion

17. In his submissions, Mr  McWatters  placed  reliance  upon  the  country
    guidance decision of QH and, in particular, para (iv) of  the  headnote
    which reads as follows:

         "There may be a risk of persecution, serious harm, or ill-treatment
         engaged  in  international  protection   for   certain   individual
         Christians who choose to worship in unregistered churches  and  who
         conduct themselves in such a way as to attract a local authorities'
         attention to them or their political, social or cultural views."

18. On the basis of the evidence, and indeed the concession by Mr Richards,
    I accept that the appellant is a Jehovah's Witness who will shortly  be
    baptised into the faith.  An integral part  of  the  Jehovah's  Witness
    faith is that they should preach to others.  I accept  the  appellant's
    evidence that she would do so in China.  That this is part of the creed
    of a Jehovah's Witness is supported by the  background  evidence  (see,
    Refugee Review Tribunal, Australia research report  dated  14  November
    2005 at C6 of the bundle referring to Jehovah's Witnesses engaging  "in
    persistent door-to-door proselytising...".  I  accept  the  appellant's
    evidence that it is  part  and  parcel  of  her  faith  to  preach  and
    proselytise her faith in the way she described in her  evidence  either
    by knocking on the doors of individuals' homes and speaking to them  or
    by displays in public seeking to spread their faith.

19. Mr Richards did  not  seek  to  argue  that  there  were  no  Jehovah's
    Witnesses in China.  Their presence, albeit as a  small  community,  is
    noted in the background documents dating back to 2000 (see  Immigration
    and Refugee Board of Canada, "China: status and treatment of  Jehovah's
    Witnesses, particularly in Fuqing, Fujian (1999 - 2000) at  C1  of  the
    bundle").  That report also notes that: "Jehovah's Witnesses are  still
    not permitted to register and  have  in  the  past  been  arrested  and
    detained for participating in prayer study ...".

20. Likewise  the  Refugee  Review  Tribunal  research  document  dated  14
    November 2005 (at C3 of  the  bundle)  also  records  the  presence  of
    Jehovah's Witnesses in China up to 2005.

21. A "Forum 18 News Service" report published in Oslo (dated 16  September
    2013 at C23 of the bundle)  states  at  C24  that  a  range  of  faiths
    including Jehovah's Witnesses "certainly exist among foreign  nationals
    working in China, as well as  possibly  some  local  people,  but  have
    little visible presence so far."  That  document  continues  to  state:
    "Any religious practice they undertake similarly entails risk."

22. Finally,  on  this  matter,  I  have  found  particularly  helpful  the
    Australian Refugee  Review  Tribunal,  "Country  Advice  for  China  in
    relation to Jehovah's Witnesses" (dated 4 February 2011) (at C11-C16 of
    the bundle) particularly helpful as it contains the most  detailed  and
    up-to-date information relevant to this appeal.

23. At the outset, that document sets out the presence of a small community
    of Jehovah's Witnesses as follows (at C11):

         "While several sources refer to a  small  population  of  Jehovah's
         Witnesses existing in the People's Republic of China (PRC), limited
         recent information was found on their geographical distribution and
         treatment.  Practicing Jehovah's Witnesses do not follow  a  state-
         sanctioned religion  and  as  such  their  practice  is  considered
         outside   the   'normal'   activity   of    registered    religious
         organisations.  Chinese authorities remain  active  in  controlling
         unregistered religious activity, including  in  Shandong  Province.
         Western  sources  express  concern  for  small   and   unregistered
         communities in China,  explicitly  including  Jehovah's  Witnesses.
         Nevertheless,   access   to   Jehovah's   Witnesses   were   found.
         Nevertheless, access to Jehovah's Witness websites do not appear to
         be blocked in China and only  limited  reports  of  suppression  of
         Jehovah's Witnesses were found.

         Sources indicate that there is  a  small  population  of  Jehovah's
         Witnesses in China, although exact numbers were not  found  outside
         of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, where the United States
         Department of State estimated that there  were  4600  followers  in
         2009.  The Watchtower statistical report for 2010 does not  contain
         a  section  for  China  but  reported  5156  followers  across   64
         congregations in Hong Kong."

24. The report goes on to note that their ability to worship is  restricted
    and their ability to proselytise is prohibited (at C11):

         "The small community and  scant  statistical  information  are  not
         surprising  given  that  as  discussed  below,   congregations   of
         Jehovah's Witnesses are not able to register on mainland China, and
         also given that China does not allow  proselytising  in  public  or
         unregistered places of worship."

25. The document confirms (at C11) that:

         "Jehovah's Witnesses are  not  covered  on  the  list  of  approved
         religions and are therefore not able to register."

26. The report (at C12)  notes  the  systematic  religious  suppression  of
    certain groups in China but notes that:

         "The reports  do  not  contain  specific  examples  of  suppression
         relating to Jehovah's Witnesses."

27. The report goes on to note that Jehovah's  Witnesses  are  not  on  the
    officially banned "cult" list in China but that they remain  unable  to
    register their church and report, albeit from 2000 and 2005,  incidents
    of  arrest  and  detention  of  Jehovah's  Witnesses  in  China  as   a
    consequence of practising their faith (at C13):

         "Jehovah's Witnesses are not on China's list of  officially  banned
         'cults'  and  sources  did  not  report  any  specific  mention  of
         Jehovah's Witnesses by the Chinese representative at the  committee
         meeting.  Nevertheless it  is  noted  that  under  Article  300  of
         Chinese  Criminal  Law,  use  of  'superstitious  sects  or  secret
         societies or weird religious organizations' to undermine the  state
         carries a penalty of three to seven years' imprisonment.

         Sources  suggest  that  practicing  Jehovah's  Witnesses  may  face
         resistance from the state by virtue of falling outside the list  of
         recognised religions, as noted above.  In 2006, Forum  18  proposed
         that church unity, or religious hegemony within allowed  religions,
         was important for the Chinese state in  maintaining  social  order.
         Therefore the state was 'unlikely to look  favourably'  on  smaller
         religious communities, including smaller  Christian  denominations,
         attempting to formalise their existence:

             This political logic also means that the state is unlikely  to
             look favourably toward  any  attempt  to  introduce  and  seek
             recognition for religions such as Jews, Baha'i,  Hare  Krishna
             devotees, and Jehovah's Witnesses  -  all  of  whom  exist  in
             China.   Without  a  fundamental   relaxation   of   controls,
             recognition of other religions would require the commitment of
             additional state resources - which are already over-extended -
             to "manage" these  religions.   At  the  very  least,  if  the
             existing approach to control is maintained, recognising  "new"
             religions such as Judaism and the Baha'i Faith  would  require
             new patriotic religious organisations, similar to the TSPM for
             Protestant Christianity and the Catholic Patriotic Association
             (CPA) for Catholicism.

         An Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada  response  dated  6
         September 2000, quoting advice from the Watch Tower Bible and Tract
         Society of Canada, did report that  Jehovah's  Witnesses  were  not
         able to register with the government and that incidents  or  arrest
         and detention of Chinese Jehovah's Witnesses for  participating  in
         prayer study had occurred.  In November 2005 the Australian  branch
         of the Jehovah's Witnesses advised the Tribunals that to  the  best
         of their knowledge this information was still correct."

28. At C14, the report notes an incident in 2010 when a  Jehovah's  Witness
    from Malawi was turned down for a  full  scholarship  in  the  Shandong
    Province.

29. Mr McWatters also referred me to the evidence in  the  "Forum  18  News
    Service" report (C23-27 of the bundle) that (at C23) :

         "Unregistered Protestant and Catholic groups ...  always  face  the
         prospect of state crackdowns."

30. Mr McWatters referred me to the documents at E23-36  reporting  on  the
    presence of Jehovah's Witnesses world-wide and the absence of any being
    recorded in China.  He submitted that this was due both  to  the  small
    size of the population and the fact that  they  do  not  wish  to  draw
    attention to themselves as an unregistered church. This is supported by
    the  evidence  (at  C12)  where,  a  February  2006  report  from   the
    Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada is cited.  In that  report,  it
    is noted that in correspondence with the general counsel of  Watchtower
    Bible Tract Society of Pennsylvania it is reported that he stated that

         "it would be imprudent to disclose  statistical  information  about
         Jehovah's  Witnesses  in  China,   including   their   geographical
         representation across the country".

31. The appellant must establish that there is a real risk of serious  ill-
    treatment as a  result  of  her  following  her  faith  in  China.   To
    establish that risk it must be "real, as opposed  to  merely  fanciful"
    (see R v SSHD ex p Adan, Subaskaran and Aitseuer [1999] Imm AR  521  at
    537 per Laws LJ).  It is well recognised that  the  standard  is  lower
    than that in civil proceedings generally.

32. As I have said, I accept that there is a small community  of  Jehovah's
    Witnesses in China.  The  appellant  would  form  part  of  that  small
    community if she returned to China.  I accept that she  would  seek  to
    worship and preach (proselytise) on her return.  She  will  shortly  be
    baptised and that is a fundamental tenet of her faith.  Her  church  is
    unregistered and, in my judgment, her legitimate manifestation  of  her
    religion would expose her to adverse interest and consequences from the
    Chinese authorities.  In my judgment, she  falls  within  the  category
    contemplated by the Upper Tribunal in the country guidance decision  of
    QH at (iv) of the headnote.  The attitude of the Chinese authorities to
    unregistered  churches  and  its  members  who  openly  proselytise  or
    practise their faith is identified in QH.  It was not suggested  by  Mr
    Richards that if the appellant were of interest to the  authorities  in
    China that any risk to her  would  not  fall  within  the  category  of
    "persecution" or "serious ill-treatment".  Whilst there are no  current
    reports of ill-treatment to Jehovah's Witnesses  in  China,  there  are
    past reports  and  I  accept  that  the  absence  of  such  reports  is
    explicable on the basis of the relatively small community  that  exists
    in China and the possible need to act "prudently"  in  reporting  their
    presence.

33. Applying QH, the background evidence though limited is, in my judgment,
    sufficient in the context of the attitude of the Chinese authorities to
    those who belong to unregistered churches and preach or proselytise  in
    public (and not just worship privately in homes) to  satisfy  the  real
    risk test - the risk is more than merely fanciful or speculative  -  it
    is actual and discernible from the background material.

34. It was not suggested by Mr Richards that  the  appellant  could  safely
    internally relocate within China.

35. For these reasons, on the basis of  the  background  evidence  and  the
    position as set out  in  QH  in  respect  of  Christians  belonging  to
    unregistered churches, I am satisfied that there is a  real  risk  that
    the appellant would be subject to persecution or serious  ill-treatment
    for a Convention reason if she returned to China.

36. For these reasons, the appellant has established that her removal would
    breach the Refugee Convention.

Decision

37. For the reasons set out in my decision  dated  18  December  2015,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
    was set aside.

38. I remake  the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

39. No other grounds are relied upon.




                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Upper Tribunal Judge       |Dr A Grubb                            |
|issuing approval:                  |                                      |
|Appellant's Name:                  |Y L                                   |
|Case Number:                       |AA/09748/2013                         |

Oral decision (please indicate)


I approve the attached Decision and Reasons for promulgation

Name:

Date:


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |


