

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09222/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|On 8 April 2014                               |On 20 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                             MR MOHAMMED HAYDARI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms L Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent: Mr C Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1) Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Duff dismissed this appeal on asylum,
      humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.   The  asylum  claim
      was found lacking in credibility.  The Appellant claimed  in  addition
      that his removal would be a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
      private and family life.

   2) The Appellant is a national of Iran and was born on 2  February  1983.
      The judge found that since  his  arrival  in  the  UK  he  has  had  a
      relationship with a Polish woman and they had a child  together.   The
      relationship broke down and the Appellant took proceedings to maintain
      contact with his child.  He was not granted direct contact but he  was
      granted indirect contact in the form of sending cards on two occasions
      each year.

   3) Following the breakdown of this relationship the Appellant has entered
      into a new relationship with a Latvian national, Laime Mikelsone,  who
      works in the UK and resides here with her two children,  aged  10  and
      13.  It appears the couple are living together as  partners  and  have
      been doing so since 2012.  The judge accepted that the  Appellant  and
      Laime Mikelsone are in a genuine relationship.  So far as Article 8 is
      concerned, the judge found that the best  interests  of  the  children
      would be served "just as well by being with their mother in Latvia  or
      some other country" as  they  would  by  being  in  the  UK.   If  the
      Appellant and Ms Mikelsone wished to continue their family  life  they
      could do  so  in  Latvia  or  Iran.   The  removal  decision  was  not
      disproportionate.

   4) The decision on asylum and humanitarian protection was not  challenged
      in the application for permission to appeal.  The challenge was  based
      on the judge's assessment of family life.  It was submitted  that  the
      children fell within paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.  In addition,  the
      children were EEA nationals and it  was  crucial  to  ask  if  it  was
      reasonable to expect them to leave the UK or the  European  Union  and
      reside in Iran.  There was no guarantee that family life  could  carry
      on in Lativia.  The rights  of  the  Appellant's  partner  as  an  EEA
      national should have been considered.   The  judge  did  not  properly
      assess proportionality.  He did not consider the effect on the  family
      of any separation if the Appellant  was  required  to  return  to  his
      country of origin to make a further application.

   5) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the Judge failed to
      take  proper  account  of  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a
      relationship with an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the UK.

   6) A Rule 24 notice dated 18 March  2014  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
      stated that the grounds of appeal contained no mention of  any  rights
      the Appellant sought to maintain in terms of the EEA Regulations.  The
      relationship between the Appellant and Ms Mikelsone was  presented  to
      the First-tier Tribunal entirely on the grounds of Article 8.

   7) The point raised by the Rule 24 notice is factually  correct  in  that
      the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal did not  mention  any
      rights that the  Appellant  might  have  as  the  partner  of  an  EEA
      national, or any rights the  partner's  children  might  have  as  EEA
      nationals.  At the hearing, however, once it became  apparent  to  the
      Judge that the Appellant was in a relationship with  an  EEA  national
      and her children, it should have been apparent that EEA  rights  would
      come into consideration.  To this extent the Appellant was entitled to
      raise these matters in  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal.
      Furthermore, the status of the Appellant's partner and her children as
      EEA nationals were relevant to the balancing exercise under Article 8.

   8) At the hearing I asked Mr Dewison  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  to
      address me on the potential  significance  of  the  judge  not  having
      considered  the  implications  of  the  Appellant's  partner  and  her
      children being EEA nationals.  Mr Dewison acknowledged that the  judge
      did not specifically take account of this but he submitted  that  this
      was not a material error.  The Appellant could claim  to  be  no  more
      than an extended family member under Regulation 8(5) and to qualify in
      this regard he had to show that he had been in a durable  relationship
      with an EEA national for two years, by analogy with paragraph GEN  1.2
      of Appendix FM.  Although the Appellant had fathered a Polish child it
      appeared that this child had been taken by the mother back to  Poland.



   9) In response Ms Brakaj said that she was not aware of the existence  of
      a two year rule in the EEA Regulations of 2006.  She further submitted
      that the assessment under Article 8 was flawed because  the  Appellant
      could not move to Latvia.

  10) I find that the judge's reasoning in relationship  to  Article  8  was
      flawed and contained an error of law.  Once the  judge  accepted  that
      the Appellant is in a genuine relationship with an  EEA  national  and
      her two children, this should have been  taken  into  account  in  the
      balancing exercise under Article 8, even if the  Appellant  could  not
      rely directly  on  the  EEA  Regulations.   The  judge's  decision  on
      proportionality was based to a large extent  on  his  assumption  that
      family life could be continued either in Latvia or  Iran.   The  judge
      failed to take account of the  difficulty  in  assuming  that  an  EEA
      national with two children could  reasonably  be  expected  either  to
      leave the European Union altogether or to return to her  home  country
      when she was exercising Treaty rights in the UK.  In effect the  Judge
      of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to   consider   the   potential
      consequences of the Appellant's partner and children's status  as  EEA
      nationals on the Article 8 assessment.

  11) Although the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was satisfied  that  the
      Appellant was in a relationship with Laime Mikelsone, before a  proper
      assessment of proportionality can  be  carried  out  further  specific
      findings are required, in particular, to confirm the nationality of Ms
      Mikelsone and her children, to ascertain her  employment  history  and
      exercise of Treaty rights in the UK, and  to  examine  the  depth  and
      duration of the relationship between Ms Mikelsone and  the  Appellant.
      In addition, further findings should be made, preferably based on more
      detailed and up-to-date evidence, as to  the  best  interests  of  the
      children.

  12) For these reasons I consider that the decision of  the  Judge  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal should be set aside but in respect  of  Article  8
      only and not in respect of  the  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
      grounds, where no error of  law  has  been  found.   In  view  of  the
      detailed fact finding which requires to be carried out in  respect  of
      Ms Mikelsone and her children, and the Appellant's  relationship  with
      them, I consider it is necessary in order for the decision to  be  re-
      made under Article 8 for the appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal under Practice Direction 7.2(b).  The appeal should be listed
      for hearing in relation to Article 8 and any application  of  the  EEA
      Regulations before a judge other than Judge Duff.

Decision

  13) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on a  point
      of law such that it is set aside and will be re-made.

Directions

  14) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on grounds  relating
      only to Article 8 and to the EEA Regulations to be heard  by  a  judge
      other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Duff.






Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


