
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09204/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On: 6th December 2016                      |On: 8th December 2016          |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     HFM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Haughian, Broudie Jackson Canter
For the Respondent:           Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting
                       Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Eritrea born in 1992.  He  appeals  with
    permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge G.D Tobin)
    dated 3rd March 2016 to dismiss his appeal on asylum and  human  rights
    grounds.




    Anonymity Order

 2. This case concerns a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Matters in Issue before the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The Appellant claimed a well-founded fear of persecution in Eritrea for
    reasons of his political  opinion.  He  claimed  to  be  an  opposition
    activist who did not want to perform military service and who had  left
    the country illegally.


 4. His claim was refused on the 3rd June  2015.  The  Respondent  accepted
    that the Appellant was Eritrean  but  found  his  evidence  as  to  his
    political activism vague and inconsistent. The refusal letter noted his
    claimed desire to avoid military service but relied upon  the  evidence
    provided by  the  Danish  Immigration  Service  in  a  report  entitled
    'Eritrea - Drivers and Root Causes of Emigration, National Service  and
    the Possibility of Return' (the 'Danish report') to argue that in  fact
    draft evaders are not viewed as traitors and that they  can  avoid  any
    problems simply by paying the diaspora tax  and  signing  a  letter  of
    apology.

 5. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal it too accepted the
    Appellant's claimed age (at  that  point  23)  and  nationality.    The
    Tribunal did not believe  that  he  had  been  involved  in  opposition
    activities as claimed. As to the  possibility  of  serious  harm  as  a
    result of having  evaded  the  draft,  the  Judge  wrote  "despite  the
    criticism of many in the human  rights  industry,  I  find  the  Danish
    Immigration  Service's  report  and  ensuing  United  Kingdom   country
    guidance  measured  and  helpful".   Apparently  accepting   that   the
    Appellant had not yet completed his military service, the determination
    goes on to find that conscription does not amount to persecution.   The
    Tribunal further found that although the Appellant had left the country
    illegally he would not  be  at  risk  as  a  result.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 6. The grounds of appeal are that the Tribunal erred in failing to provide
    any reasons as to why he was prepared to place so much reliance on  the
    Danish report. The Appellant's representative had provided  a  detailed
    explanation of the problems with that report, not  least  in  the  fact
    that one of the main researchers had publicly  distanced  himself  from
    the conclusions as published. There was no cogent reason to depart from
    the country guidance in MO (illegal exit - risk on return)  Eritrea  CG
    [2011] and MA (draft evaders;  illegal  departures;  risk)  Eritrea  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00059.   It was further submitted that  the  determination
    is flawed for lack of reasoning and/or findings made unsupported by any
    evidential foundation.



    My Findings

 7. I need not address the grounds in any great detail since the Respondent
    now accepts that in light of  the  decision  in  MST  &  Ors  (national
    service - risk categories) CG [2016] UKUT 443 (IAC) the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal could not stand. Although I was not aware  of  this
    prior to the hearing, the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    had in fact written to the Upper Tribunal, on the 30th  November  2016,
    to request permission to withdraw her decision as she intended to grant
    refugee status to the Appellant.   Before me  Mrs  Aboni  renewed  this
    application. It was opposed  by  Ms  Haughian  for  the  Appellant  who
    expressed concern that withdrawal (in her experience) frequently  leads
    to long delay. With that in mind, and the fact that both  parties  were
    in attendance, I refused permission to the Respondent to  withdraw  her
    decision and indicated that I would instead issue a short determination
    setting the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside, and substituting
    the decision with one allowing the appeal on asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.


 8. My brief reasons are  as  follows.   In  its  decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal declined to follow the established country guidance in MO  and
    MA in favour of the conclusions in the Danish report.  In doing  so  it
    failed to give  adequate  reasons  as  to  why  that  report  justified
    departure from the country guidance.  The comment as to the  criticisms
    made of that report by the "human rights industry" does not  amount  to
    analysis;  the  finding  that  the  Danish  report  was  "measured  and
    credible" is made with no explanation at all.  In MST & Ors  the  Upper
    Tribunal expressly rejects the conclusions of  the  Danish  report  [at
    334]: "we do not accept  that  the  evidence  goes  anywhere  close  to
    establishing that the payment of the tax and the signing of the  letter
    would enable draft evaders and deserters to reconcile with the Eritrean
    authorities".  The  country  guidance  in  MO  and  MA   is   expressly
    reconfirmed.  I should add that even if MST had not been framed in  the
    terms that it is, I would have very likely set this decision aside.  It
    is bereft of reasoning and makes no attempt  at  all  to  evaluate  the
    competing evidence that was before it.


 9. It being accepted that the  Appellant  is  today  a  24  year-old  male
    Eritrean who left the country  illegally  and  who  has  not  completed
    military service, applying the findings in MST & Ors, this appeal  must
    be allowed.




    Decisions


10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside in its entirety.


11. The decision in the appeal is re-made as follows:

    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he  is
    a refugee.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds."


12. There is an order for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                  6th
                                December 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidge on the 12th
April 2016

