
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09166/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th July 2016                              |On 14th July 2016             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     HJ
                           (ANONYMITY Order MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Lane of Counsel, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of Judge Wedderspoon  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 10th June 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a female Iranian citizen who claimed  asylum  on  20th
    May 2014.  The basis of the claim was the Appellant's fear that if  she
    returned to Iran she would  face  mistreatment  due  to  her  political
    opinion  and  her  religion.   She  had   converted   from   Islam   to
    Christianity.

 3. On 16th October 2014 the Respondent decided that the Appellant was  not
    entitled to a grant of asylum or humanitarian protection, and  that  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom would not breach any  of  her  human
    rights protected by the 1950 European Convention on Human  Rights  (the
    1950 Convention).

 4. The Appellant appealed pursuant  to  section  82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) and her appeal was heard
    by the FtT on 18th May 2015.

 5. The FtT did not accept the Appellant's  account  as  to  her  political
    activity in Iran.  It was accepted that she had set up a  blog  website
    but it was not accepted that this would  be  of  any  interest  to  the
    Iranian authorities.  It was not  accepted  that  a  summons  had  been
    issued requiring the Appellant to attend at The  Islamic  Revolutionary
    Court of Tehran.

 6. The FtT accepted,  as  did  the  Respondent,  that  the  Appellant  had
    converted to the Christian faith.  The FtT did not however accept  that
    the Appellant would practise her Christian faith in Iran,  or  practise
    to such an extent to be of interest to the  Iranian  authorities.   The
    FtT dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission to appeal was granted by Judge Osborne of the FtT in the
    following terms;

         "3.  In a relatively concise decision and reasons it  is  at  least
             arguable that the judge whilst accepting  that  the  Appellant
             has converted to the Christian faith, and whilst not accepting
             that the  Appellant  would  practise  the  faith  in  Iran  or
             practise  to  such  an  extent  to  be  of  interest  to   the
             authorities, it is at least arguable that the judge failed  to
             correctly apply the guidance provided by HJ (Iran).  That case
             is pertinent to the Appellant's appeal and is included in  the
             Appellant's bundle.  It is arguably an error for the judge  to
             have failed to properly consider the HJ (Iran) principles in a
             case where the Appellant is agreed to be a  Christian  convert
             and whose evidence is that she  will  practise  her  Christian
             faith upon return to Iran.  It is arguable  that  the  judge's
             finding that as the Appellant has not told her family in  Iran
             of her conversion that she would not  practise  her  faith  in
             Iran or would not do so  as  to  raise  the  interest  of  the
             authorities is inadequately reasoned.

         4.   As this arguable error of law has  been  identified,  all  the
             issues raised in the grounds are arguable."





Error of Law

 8. On 7th March 2016 I heard submissions from both parties in relation  to
    error of law.  It was conceded on behalf of the Respondent that the FtT
    had materially erred in law as contended by the Appellant, in  relation
    to consideration of the risk that the Appellant would face if  returned
    to Iran as a convert from Islam to Christianity.  It was accepted  that
    the FtT decision must be set aside in relation to this  aspect  of  the
    appeal, and re-made.

 9. It was not accepted that the FtT had erred in making findings upon  the
    summons relied upon by the Appellant.

10.  Full  details  of  the  application  for  permission,  the  grant   of
    permission, the submissions made by both parties,  and  my  conclusions
    are contained in my decision dated 7th March 2016, promulgated on  18th
    March 2016.   I  set  out  below  paragraphs  18-28  which  contain  my
    conclusions and reasons for setting aside the FtT decision;

         "18.     As conceded by the Respondent, I find that the  FtT  erred
             materially in considering the risk on return to the  Appellant
             as a convert from Islam to Christianity.

         19.  The Appellant's evidence to the FtT was that she had joined an
             Evangelical Church, and the church leader, A Martin, confirmed
             the evangelical  nature  of  the  church.   It  was  also  the
             Appellant's  case  that  she  had  encouraged  other   Iranian
             citizens in the United Kingdom to attend church and adopt  the
             Christian faith, and therefore  she  had  proselytised.   This
             evidence was supported by a witness, J Baillie.

         20.  It was accepted by  the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant  had
             genuinely converted to Christianity.  In  the  light  of  that
             evidence, the FtT did not adequately explain in paragraph  28,
             why it was found that the Appellant  would  not  practise  her
             Christian faith in Iran, or not practise to such an extent  to
             be of interest to the authorities.

         21.  There  appears  to  have  been  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
             activities both within and on behalf  of  her  church  in  the
             United Kingdom, which appeared not to  have  been  taken  into
             account by the FtT, who based its entire  reasoning  upon  the
             fact that the Appellant had not yet told her family in Iran of
             her  conversion.   The  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  given
             evidence that she did not wish to worry  her  family  at  this
             stage, does not feature in the  FtT  findings,  although  this
             evidence was given to the FtT, as confirmed in paragraph 12 of
             the decision.

         22.  The FtT does not give any adequate reasons for concluding that
             the Appellant would not practise her faith in Iran, and  fails
             to consider or refer to the guidelines  in  HJ  (Iran)  [2010]
             UKSC 3, which confirms that if it is found that an  individual
             would in fact live discreetly and so  avoid  persecution,  the
             Tribunal must go on to ask itself why this would be the  case.
             If it was that the Appellant would not practise her  Christian
             faith because of a fear of persecution, then this should  have
             been assessed and considered.  The FtT decision on this aspect
             of the appeal is set aside.

         23.  However, I find no error of law in the  consideration  of  the
             FtT of  the  summons  that  was  produced  on  behalf  of  the
             Appellant.

         24.  As contended in Mr Lane's skeleton argument, if the Respondent
             alleges that a document is a forgery then the burden falls  on
             the Respondent  to  prove  this.   However  I  set  out  below
             paragraph 38  of  Tanveer  Ahmed,  referred  to  both  by  the
             Tribunal and Mr Lane;

             38.  In summary the principles set out in  this  determination
                  are:

                  1.   In asylum  and  human  rights  cases  it  is  for  an
                      individual claimant to show that a document on  which
                      he seeks to rely can be relied on.

                  2.   The decision maker should consider whether a document
                      is one on which reliance should  properly  be  placed
                      after looking at all the evidence in the round.

                  3.   Only very rarely will there be the need  to  make  an
                      allegation of forgery, or evidence strong  enough  to
                      support  it.   The  allegation  should  not  be  made
                      without such  evidence.   Failure  to  establish  the
                      allegation on the balance  of  probabilities  to  the
                      higher civil standard does not show that  a  document
                      is reliable.  The decision maker still needs to apply
                      principles 1 and 2.

         25.  The FtT was aware of the Tanveer Ahmed  principles  which  are
             summarised in paragraph 23, and in my view  correctly  applied
             them.  The FtT considered the evidence in the  round  and  did
             not consider the summons in isolation.  I do  not  accept  the
             Appellant's submission that no clear finding has been made  in
             relation to the genuineness of the summons.  The  FtT  made  a
             clear finding in paragraph 27 that it was  not  accepted  that
             the summons  had  been  issued  by  the  Etalaat  against  the
             Appellant.

         26.  The FtT, in giving reasons, referred to the vague  wording  in
             the document and was entitled to consider that.  The  document
             gives as a reason for having to attend court;

                  'To provide an explanation of some issues, if you  do  not
                  attend a verdict will be issued in your absence.'

         27.  The FtT noted, and was entitled to  place  reliance  upon  the
             Appellant's evidence that despite the warning in the  document
             that a verdict may be issued in her absence  if  she  did  not
             attend, she had made no attempt to find out if such a  verdict
             had been pronounced.  The FtT was also entitled to  note  that
             the Appellant's family had made no effort to  contact  her  to
             let her know whether a verdict  had  been  pronounced  in  her
             absence.

         28.  The Appellant's grounds on this point display  a  disagreement
             with the conclusion reached by the FtT, but do not disclose an
             error of law, and the FtT finding that the summons  cannot  be
             relied upon is preserved".

11. The error of law hearing was adjourned so that the decision could be re-
    made by the Upper Tribunal after  hearing  further  evidence.   It  was
    confirmed, that the findings made that the Appellant operated a weblog,
    that she  had  genuinely  converted  to  Christianity,  and  joined  an
    Evangelical Church, were preserved.

Re-Making the Decision

12. At the hearing on 5th July 2016, Mr Mills on behalf of  the  Respondent
    indicated that it was conceded that the appeal should be  allowed.   Mr
    Mills accepted that the Appellant was entitled to asylum because she is
    a genuine convert from Islam to Christianity, and  she  had  joined  an
    Evangelical Church, and would seek to undertake evangelical activities.



13. I therefore did not need to hear any further evidence, and in  view  of
    the concession, Mr Lane had no submissions to make.

14. In my view the concession was  rightly  made  in  accordance  with  the
    Respondent's own guidance on  Iranian  converts  to  Christianity,  and
    members of Evangelical Churches.

15. I have taken into account the Respondent's guidance which is  contained
    in the Country Information and  Guidance  on  Iran  on  Christians  and
    Christian Converts December  2015.   I  set  out  below  some  relevant
    extracts from that guidance;

         2.2.2    Christians who have converted from Islam are  at  risk  of
             harm from  the  state  authorities,  as  they  are  considered
             apostates - a criminal offence in Iran.  Sharia law does  not
             allow for conversion from Islam to another religion, and it is
             not  possible  for  an  individual  person  to  change   their
             religious affiliation on  personal  documentation.   Christian
             converts  face  physical  attacks,  harassment,  surveillance,
             arrest, detention, as well as  torture  and  ill-treatment  in
             detention.   The  country  guidance  case   of   SZ   and   JM
             (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 00082  found
             that conditions for converts to sacrament-based  churches  may
             be such that they could not reasonably be expected  to  return
             to Iran.  This remains the case.

         2.2.3    Members  of  evangelical/house  churches  are  subject  to
             harassment, arrest, close surveillance and imprisonment by the
             Iranian authorities.  Christians who can demonstrate  that  in
             Iran or in the UK they have  and  will  continue  to  practise
             evangelical  or  proselytising  activities  because  of  their
             affiliation to Evangelical  Churches  or  who  would  wear  in
             public outward manifestations of their faith such as a visible
             crucifix, will attract the adverse notice of  the  authorities
             on return to Iran and will be at risk of persecution.

         3.1.3    Members of evangelical and house churches, and  those  who
             actively  seek  to   evangelicise   others   and   engage   in
             proselytising activities are at real risk  of  persecution  in
             Iran and a grant of asylum is likely to be appropriate.

         3.1.4    The right of Muslims  to  change  their  religion  is  not
             recognised under Sharia  law.   The  religious  conversion  of
             Muslims is illegal in Iran.   Christians  who  have  converted
             from Islam are at real risk of  persecution  in  Iran,  and  a
             grant of asylum is likely to be appropriate.

16. Therefore, because of the concession made, and the guidance referred to
    above, I find it  is  appropriate  to  allow  the  appeal  because  the
    Appellant is a genuine convert from Islam to Christianity,  and  is  an
    evangelical Christian.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I allow the appeal on human rights grounds in relation to Article 3  of  the
1950 Convention.

Anonymity

I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 8th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.





Signed                              Date 8th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
