
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09930/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 22nd July 2016                             |On 25th August 2016            |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                  MRS SNPM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N S Ahluwalia of Counsel instructed by A J
Paterson, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We continue the anonymity direction made by the  Upper  Tribunal  under
    Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  in  the
    error of law decision in this appeal sent out on 8th November 2015.

Background

 2. In the error of law decision by The Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge in this
    panel, the conclusion was reached that Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    G J Ferguson erred in law in his decision to dismiss the appeal against
    the decision of the respondent taken on 26th February  2012  to  refuse
    asylum, humanitarian and human rights protection to  the  appellant,  a
    female citizen of Sri Lanka.  The relevant part of the decision states:

         "2.  Judge Shimmin granted permission because  he  thought  it  was
             arguable that the credibility assessment, having regard  to  a
             previous judge's decision and fresh evidence, was flawed.   He
             also considered it arguable that  the  judge  had  failed,  in
             relation to  the  Article  8  assessment,  to  attach  any  or
             sufficient weight to the question of whether  the  appellant's
             British citizen husband could be expected to go to  Sri  Lanka
             with the appellant.

         3.   At the hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  before  me  Mr  McVeety
             agreed that Judge  Ferguson  was  wrong  to  assume  that  the
             Medical Report by a Dr Beeks was before the first  Immigration
             Judge who had found the appellant to be credible.   He  agreed
             that there had actually been no medical evidence  of  scarring
             before the first judge on the basis alleged in  paragraph  6.2
             of the grounds of application.  However, Mr McVeety  suggested
             that paragraph 15  of  the  present  decision  suggested  that
             Counsel for the appellant may have conceded that the appellant
             was not in any  of  the  risk  categories  identified  in  the
             country guidance decision,  GJ  and  Others  (Post-civil  war:
             returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 and so the judge was
             not wrong to dismiss the  asylum  appeal.   In  particular  he
             referred to paragraph 126 of GJ in which it was suggested that
             scarring was not a significant factor but  may  contribute  to
             arousing suspicion.  He suggested  that  a  statement  may  be
             needed from Counsel at the time,  Ms  Rutherford,  to  confirm
             whether or not she had made the concession.

         4.   Mr McVeety also submitted that, even if the judge had erred in
             his consideration of the findings of  the  first  judge,  that
             should not be regarded as material because he thought that the
             judge had  shown  that  he  had  given  consideration  to  the
             scarring in reaching his conclusions in paragraph 27.

         5.   Mr Ahluwalia intervened to indicate that he had  in  front  of
             him  the  report  made  by   Ms   Rutherford   following   her
             representation of the appellant  before  Judge  Ferguson.   He
             said this did indicate that he had made the  concession  which
             features in paragraph 15 that the appellant did not  fit  into
             any of the current risk categories set out  in  GJ.   On  this
             basis Mr Ahluwalia fairly conceded that there was no basis for
             him pursuing  the  application  in  relation  to  the  judge's
             dismissal of the asylum claim.  However, he  argued  that  the
             error in failing to consider the scarring report could be seen
             to taint the judge's findings on human rights issues including
             Articles 2 and 3.

         6.   Mr Ahluwalia also maintained that  the  judge  had  failed  to
             consider Article 8 issues adequately in relation to the  issue
             of whether or not it was reasonable to expect the  appellant's
             husband to go to live with her in Sri Lanka  bearing  in  mind
             his British citizenship and his medical  condition.   This  is
             more  fully  set  out  in  paragraph  8  of  the  grounds   of
             application.

         7.   After considering the  submissions  I  announced  that  I  was
             satisfied that the decision of Judge Ferguson showed an  error
             on a point of law in relation to the human rights claim  only.
             My reasons for that conclusion follow.

         8.   It is clear that, having regard  to  the  concession  made  by
             Counsel at the hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  it  was
             accepted that the appellant could not benefit from any of  the
             risk categories set out in the current country guidance of GJ.
              Although the judge was in error in assuming that the Scarring
             Report by Dr Beeks had also been before the first judge,  that
             error is not material when considered  in  the  light  of  the
             concession.  Thus, the judge's conclusion that  the  appellant
             is not a refugee can stand.

         9.   However, the human rights decision also shows an error because
             of the evident failure on the part of the judge to  take  into
             consideration relevant medical  evidence  when  assessing  the
             Article 8 claim.  Although paragraph 40 of the decision  shows
             that the judge did consider whether it would be reasonable for
             the husband to live with his wife in Sri Lanka,  there  is  no
             reference to the medical condition of the appellant's  husband
             which  was  before  the  judge  in  his   witness   statement.
             Additionally, there is no consideration of the husband's full-
             time employment position and the future prospect of employment
             required to maintain both parties in Sri Lanka  having  regard
             to any medical treatment which may also  be  required  by  the
             appellant.

         10.  Although the re-making of the decision on human rights grounds
             can take into consideration Article 2 and Article 3 issues  in
             the light of medical evidence, I repeat my conclusion that the
             finding that the  appellant  is  not  entitled  to  asylum  or
             humanitarian protection can stand."

 3. Owing to an administrative error this appeal was set down for a resumed
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
    on 30th March 2016 when it should have been  before  the  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge in  this  panel.   Because  of  that  error  the  matter
    proceeded to a CMR hearing on 3rd May 2016 when the present  panel  was
    sitting.  At that hearing Mr Ahluwalia made it clear  that  the  appeal
    would continue on  human  rights  issues  only  which  would  encompass
    Articles 2 and 3 in relation to risk on return to Sri Lanka in addition
    to Article 8 family and private life issues.

 4. The appeal then came before us  for  a  substantive  hearing  on  human
    rights issues on 22nd July 2016.

The Hearing

 5. Mr Ahluwalia helpfully identified the documentary evidence which was to
    be relied upon.  This is: the appellant's original bundle of 246  pages
    containing the items listed in the index; the indexed bundle  submitted
    by representatives on 23rd March  2016;  and  a  supplementary  indexed
    bundle submitted on 20th July 2016.  We were also handed signed  copies
    of the statements which the supplementary bundle contains.

 6. Mr Ahluwalia informed us that the appellant  would  not  give  evidence
    having regard to her state of  mental  health.   The  witnesses  to  be
    called would be the consultant psychiatrist, Dr  Mala  Singh,  and  the
    appellant's husband, SM, although, for the reasons which follow, it was
    unnecessary for him to give oral evidence.

 7. Mr Ahluwalia also handed to us a comprehensive skeleton argument which,
    both representatives confirmed, identified  the  main  issues  for  our
    consideration as:

      i) the appellant's removal would be contrary to Articles 2  and  3  of
         the  ECHR  arising  from  a  serious  and  appreciable  risk  of  a
         significant deterioration in the appellant's mental health and  the
         result and risk of suicide; and that

     ii) her removal would amount to a  disproportionate  interference  with
         her right to respect for family life contrary  to  Article  8  ECHR
         outside the Immigration Rules.

 8. The skeleton also emphasises that, although it had been accepted  at  a
    previous First-tier hearing that, taken at its highest, the appellant's
    claim does not fall within the current risk categories identified in GJ
    and Others (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC), to make out a claim to refugee status on return, the appellant's
    account of her torture by the Sri Lankan security forces during 2009 is
    credible.

 9. Dr Mala Singh gave evidence with reference to her report which is to be
    found on pages A114 to A138 of the bundle submitted on 23rd March 2016.



10. She said that she had seen the appellant on four occasions including on
    the morning of the hearing before  us.   She  confirmed  that  she  had
    reached the conclusion that the appellant suffered from  post-traumatic
    stress disorder and major  depression  with  psychotic  symptoms.   She
    agreed that her conclusions were not fully in  line  with  the  earlier
    Psychiatric Reports of Professor Katona although she pointed out  that,
    in his update report of  26th  February  2016,  he  had  diagnosed  the
    appellant as suffering from both PTSD and a major  depressive  episode.
    That accorded with her own conclusions.

11. Dr Singh explained that the appellant hears voices telling her that she
    has no right to live, is worthless and guilty of what has  happened  to
    her.  She believed these feelings were the result of historic trauma in
    the form of rape, torture and fear of death.  Dr  Singh  said  she  was
    aware of, and had read, the documents which she lists on pages A115 and
    A116 of her report, some of which had indicated  that  the  appellant's
    claims were regarded as incredible.   Despite  that  evidence  she  had
    concluded that the appellant's symptoms and the accounts she had  given
    to support those symptoms had been consistent and were not  the  result
    of losing a child or having an uncertain immigration status.   She  had
    reached that conclusion because the appellant's symptoms were  unlikely
    to have causes outside the incidents claimed.  She  said  that,  having
    seen the appellant that morning, she was concerned that,  if  she  gave
    evidence,  she  might  have  a  "catastrophic  reaction".    She   also
    emphasised that, if the appellant were to be removed to Sri Lanka there
    would be a severe deterioration in her condition  with  "severe  recall
    and an aggravation of PTSD".  She  stated  the  appellant  would  "kill
    herself, I have no doubt".  She added that the appellant  "would  react
    to even routine questions on return by becoming very anxious".

12. As to the possibility of the appellant being treated in  Sri  Lanka  Dr
    Singh explained that the appellant would suspect  psychiatric  services
    in Sri Lanka  as  being  associated  with  the  authorities  and  would
    therefore believe she would be at risk of arrest  and  torture,  again.
    Even if she were to get through immigration control and return  to  her
    former home, the risk, in that situation, would remain the same because
    of her attitude.  She emphasised that it was the appellant's perception
    that was important to her and not what  was  actually  happening.   The
    appellant would still believe that she was at risk.

13. Dr Singh then spoke to us about the report by Dr Beeks on  page  96  of
    the original bundle.  Dr Singh said that she had noted  the  suggestion
    by Dr Beeks that there was evidence of post-traumatic  stress  disorder
    when the appellant was examined on  11th  February  2012  at  Yarlswood
    Detention Centre.  This had led her, Dr Singh, to the  conclusion  that
    the appellant was,  actually,  suffering  from  PTSD  at  the  time  of
    arrival.  Because of that she surmised  that  the  appellant  would  be
    incapable of recalling events accurately.

14. Dr Singh also commented on the effects  of  the  appellant's  husband's
    medical condition as a sufferer from diabetes.  She had concluded  that
    the appellant would feel guilty about  her  husband's  condition  which
    will add to a situation of desperation in turn leading to the appellant
    killing herself.  The availability of private or  public  medical  help
    would make no difference as the appellant would also  feel  ashamed  of
    her condition.

15. At the conclusion of her evidence-in-chief Dr Singh said that  she  was
    "certain" that the  appellant  was  not  feigning  her  evidence.   She
    thought she could not have deceived so many  people,  particularly  the
    medical practitioners who had examined her.  She also pointed out  that
    the appellant had been truthful in admitting to an improvement  in  her
    condition at one stage which, Dr Singh thought, was something a  person
    feigning their condition would not do.  She pointed out that there  had
    been an occasion where she had found  an  asylum  seeker  who  was  not
    telling the truth.  She  did  not  regard  the  appellant  as  in  that
    category.  She had "no doubt" that the  appellant  had  been  truthful.
    She had noted that thoughts of the trauma which the  appellant  claimed
    to have suffered had returned to her on the morning of the hearing.

16. During cross-examination Dr Singh was asked if she  was  aware  of  the
    previous decisions concluding that the appellant was  unreliable.   She
    said she had considered that  but  believed  that,  at  the  time,  the
    appellant was in a state  of  confusion  and  wanted  protection.   She
    confirmed that she was aware that the appellant had tried to enter  the
    United  Kingdom  fraudulently  before  the  events  of  which  she  now
    complained.  However, she was aware that, at that time, the appellant's
    family were harassed.  Her view was not  affected  by  the  appellant's
    earlier behaviour.

17. Dr Singh was asked if she was aware of the appellant  harming  herself.
    She said she had seen a bruise on the appellant's head and chest on the
    second occasion she saw her.  Having asked about  this,  the  appellant
    informed her that she had injured herself because of a nightmare.  When
    questioned about her conclusion that the appellant  was  frightened  of
    the authorities in Sri Lanka, Dr Singh  indicated  that  this  was  not
    unusual in the appellant's culture.  She emphasised her diagnosis  that
    the appellant suffered from PTSD caused by trauma.   If  questioned  by
    the authorities, even  in  a  neutral  manner,  this  would  cause  the
    appellant to react.

18. As to the appellant's husband, Dr  Singh  conceded  that  she  had  not
    examined him but noted that he had been seen by Dr Mahmood whose report
    commences on page C73 of the second bundle.  She also stated  that  she
    had asked the appellant's husband  about  his  intentions  and  he  had
    indicated that he did not want to return to Sri Lanka as he was  now  a
    British citizen. She thought he was devoted to his wife as  illustrated
    by his attending to her during the night and  helping  her  with  other
    requirements.

19. Dr Singh's attention was then drawn to the report by Joanne O'Sullivan,
    nurse practitioner at South  Staffordshire  and  Shropshire  Healthcare
    NHS, concerning the risk  of  suicide  for  the  appellant.   Dr  Singh
    asserted that, at present, the appellant is  at  "very  high  risk"  of
    suicide because of her depression  with  psychotic  symptoms  added  to
    which is PTSD.

20. During re-examination Dr Singh reasserted her view that the appellant's
    current symptoms were consistent with her suffering  as  claimed.   She
    said it was quite possible for the appellant to have lied in  the  past
    but to be truthful now.  She emphasised that, regardless of whether  or
    not the appellant had been raped and detained by the  LTTE,  she  still
    had two major symptoms of mental illness.  However she pointed out that
    she did not believe that any suggestion of ill-treatment by the LTTE as
    opposed to  the  authorities  would  be  right  as  the  appellant  had
    described her attackers to her as speaking in Sinhalese and not  Tamil.
    She reiterated her knowledge of the appellant's husband's reluctance to
    go to Sri Lanka and pointed out that this was another  reason  for  the
    appellant feeling guilty.

21. At this point in the hearing we adjourned  for  a  few  minutes  as  we
    wished to consider the consequences of an acceptance of the psychiatric
    evidence put before us by Dr Singh.  On returning we announced that  we
    found the expert evidence of Dr Singh to be credible particularly as to
    the high risk of suicide. We had found that Dr Singh's conclusions were
    materially consistent with  previous  expert  evidence.   We  therefore
    offered representatives a further adjournment  for  a  few  minutes  to
    enable them to consider the future progress of  the  case  particularly
    having regard to the Articles 2 and 3 claims.

22. On return Mr Avery indicated, on behalf of the respondent, that he  had
    no further comments or submissions to make.  We then announced that  we
    were satisfied that the appeal could be allowed on human rights grounds
    particularly bear in mind the high risk of suicide  identified  in  the
    medical evidence.  We indicated that the  reasons  for  our  conclusion
    would follow.

Conclusions and Reasons

23. In human rights claims the burden of proof is  upon  the  appellant  to
    show, to the lower standard, that  his  or  her  ECHR  rights  will  be
    infringed as a consequence of the respondent's decision. Where that  is
    shown it is for the respondent to  show,  where  the  relevant  Article
    permits, that the decision was proportionate in the public interest.

24. We consider, first, the appellant's claims that her  Article  2  and  3
    rights will be infringed if she is returned to  Sri  Lanka.  These  are
    absolute rights unlike the qualified right to family and  private  life
    under Article 8. Articles 2 and 3 rights do not feature specifically in
    the Immigration Rules unlike article 8  rights  which  are  covered  in
    paragraph 276 ADE and appendix FM. Thus we are  able  to  consider  the
    application of Articles 2 and 3 without the pre-requisite  to  consider
    the application of the Rules or any intermediate test before  assessing
    the claim outside the Rules and section 117B of the 2002 Act.

25. Mr Ahluwalia's skeleton  argument  has  assisted  us  to  identify  the
    relevant legal issues which  we  set  against  the  background  of  the
    medical evidence, notably Dr Singh's conclusion that the  appellant  is
    at very high risk of suicide if removed to Sri Lanka.

26. We are satisfied that the opinions of Dr Singh can be relied  upon  for
    the reasons we now give.

27. The skeleton, from page 4, identifies past expert  medical  opinion  in
    the form of reports from  Dr  Beeks,  Dr  Limb  (concerning  scarring),
    Professor Katona  and  Dr  Singh.   Dr  Beeks  Report  pointed  to  the
    appellant suffering from PTSD which, Dr Singh not unreasonably thought,
    could suggest that the appellant was suffering from  that  disorder  at
    the time of her arrival in the country.  Whilst,  initially,  Professor
    Katona was not satisfied that the appellant  suffered  from  full-blown
    PTSD when he first saw her in 2015  he  was  able  to  conclude  in  an
    addendum to his report on 19th June 2015 that the appellant was  likely
    to relapse into PTSD upon return with a  significant  increase  in  the
    risk of suicide.  His additional report of  26th  February  2016  noted
    that the appellant's condition had deteriorated  "very  significantly".
    He acknowledged that the appellant suffered from PTSD and was suffering
    a major depressive episode.  He, too, was not satisfied  the  appellant
    was feigning or exaggerating her symptoms and her removal would  result
    in a "severe sense of threat and danger".

28. Following the evident deterioration in the appellant's mental state  Dr
    Singh's Report brings matters up-to-date and is,  we  find,  consistent
    with those earlier reports both as to diagnosis and the  likelihood  of
    the appellant having told the truth about her symptoms and causes.   We
    do not believe there is any room to  criticise  Dr  Singh's  conclusion
    that the risk of suicide if returned is now high.  Indeed, Dr Singh has
    gone so far as to state bluntly both before us and in her  report  that
    the appellant would kill herself if sent back.  There is also  evidence
    to suggest that the appellant has self harmed.  The risk of suicide  is
    identified as either before or after removal and  "needs  to  be  taken
    very seriously".

29. In view of our comments we find that we can rely upon Dr Singh's Report
    as an indication of the real risk of serious harm to the  appellant  if
    returned or even if the appellant is made  aware  that  she  is  to  be
    returned.  She is reasonably likely to commit suicide.  Both consultant
    psychiatrists confirm that the appellant's subjective state of mind  is
    such that she will not  accept  the  medical  treatment  she  needs  if
    returned  to  Sri  Lanka  because  of  her  subjective  fear   of   the
    authorities.  We take this to mean that any event, whether  routine  or
    intrusive, relating to the circumstances of  her  return  will  provoke
    suicidal thoughts which are likely to be implemented.

30. We agree with Mr Ahluwalia's arguments in paragraph 36 of his  skeleton
    that this case is analogous of the situation set out in  the  Court  of
    Appeal decision in Y & Z  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362  which  is  quoted  as
    follows:

         "47. The subjective reality of fear has to be given its full -  and
             sometimes overwhelming - weight.

         61. The upshot of the material findings and of the expert evidence
             which (for reasons I have  given)  stood  unshaken,  is  that,
             although some psychiatric care  is  available  in  Sri  Lanka,
             these two appellants are so traumatised by their  experiences,
             and so subjectively terrified at the prospect of return to the
             scene of their torment, that  they  will  not  be  capable  of
             seeking the treatment they need ..."

         62. None of this reasoning  represents  a  licence  for  emotional
             blackmail by asylum-seekers.  Officials and immigration judges
             will be right to continue to scrutinise  the  authenticity  of
             such claims as these with care.  In some cases the Home Office
             may want to seek its own or a joint report.  But there comes a
             point at which an undisturbed finding that  an  appellant  has
             been tortured and raped in captivity has to be conscientiously
             related to credible and uncontradicted  expert  evidence  that
             the likely effect of the psychological trauma  (aggravated  in
             the present cases by the devastation of home and family by the
             tsunami), if return is enforced, will be suicide."

31. In Y the Court of Appeal also  held  that,  although  the  humanitarian
    consequences of returning a person to a country where their health  was
    likely to deteriorate terminally did not normally place  the  returning
    state in breach of Article 3, the anticipated harm to Y would not be of
    a naturally occurring illness, but would be the consequence of the acts
    of the Sri Lankan security  forces;  N  v  United  Kingdom  ([26565/05)
    [2008] 47 E.H.R.R. 39 was distinguished.

32. The illness of the appellant in this  case  is  not  on  account  of  a
    naturally occurring illness but the torture and rape  suffered  in  Sri
    Lanka which both consultant psychiatrists believe are the cause of  the
    appellant's severe mental state. In that  respect  we  should  indicate
    that the medical evidence has also enabled us to conclude that the  ill
    treatment which the appellant claims she suffered in Sri Lanka  at  the
    hands of the authorities is believable even if that conclusion does not
    bring her within the risk categories identified in GJ and Others. Thus,
    the high threshold test in N does not  apply.  Whether  the  state  has
    available medical facilities for those suffering PTSD is  not  relevant
    when the appellant's subjective fears mean that  such  facilities  will
    not be accessed and attempts at suicide or a significant  deterioration
    in mental health will follow.  We therefore conclude that  there  is  a
    real risk of harm contrary to Articles 2 and  3  if  the  appellant  is
    removed.

33. Mr Ahluwalia argues that, in the alternative, the  appellant  can  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules in Appendix FM  by  reference
    to EX.1 or on Article 8 grounds outside the Immigration Rules. For  the
    sake of completeness we considered that aspect  of  the  claim  briefly
    below as our findings in relation to Articles 2 and 3 already point  to
    the appellant also succeeding under EX1.

34. In relation to this aspect of the human rights claim we are  guided  by
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in SS  (Congo)  and  Others  [2015]
    EWCA  Civ  387.   The  court,  in  acknowledging  the  decision  in  MM
    (Lebanon), found that there would generally be no or only a  small  gap
    between the new Immigration Rules and the requirements of Article 8  in
    individual cases.  However where the individual interests at stake were
    of a particular pressing nature there could be consideration  of  human
    rights issues outside the Immigration Rules.  Such  cases  would  arise
    where a claimant could show that compelling circumstances existed,  not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules  and  requiring  the  grant  of
    leave.  The test was  not  as  demanding  as  exceptionality  or  "very
    compelling circumstances".

35. The appellant is in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  her
    husband, a British citizen.  Paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM can apply to
    that situation.  EX.1 states:

         "EX.1    This paragraph applies if

              ...

                (b)     the  applicant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                    relationship with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a
                    British Citizen, settled in the UK or  in  the  UK  with
                    refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there  are
                    insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with   that
                    partner continuing outside the UK."

36. EX.2 defines the meaning of "insurmountable obstacles" as follows:

         "EX.2    For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  'insurmountable
                obstacles' means the  very  significant  difficulties  which
                would  be  faced  by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
                continuing their family life together  outside  the  UK  and
                which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very  serious
                hardship for the applicant or their partner."

37. We conclude, having regard to the matters  to  which  we  have  already
    referred in relation  to  Articles  2  and  3,  that  very  significant
    difficulties would be faced by the applicant and her husband if  forced
    to continue their family life in  Sri  Lanka.  These  are  difficulties
    which cannot be overcome or would entail very serious  hardship.   That
    is because we have already indicated that the  appellant's  removal  to
    Sri Lanka would lead to an infringement of her Article 2 and Article  3
    rights. Additionally her husband is a British citizen who suffers  from
    diabetes which would add to high suicide risk for  the  appellant.   In
    any event, as the appellant cannot be removed to Sri  Lanka  for  human
    rights reasons other than Article 8  this  creates  the  insurmountable
    obstacle envisaged in EX.1.

38. Thus, we are also able to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appellant's  asylum
appeal shall stand.  The decision in relation to human rights  issues  shows
an error on a point of law.  We re-make the human rights  appeal  and  allow
it on Articles 2 and 3 ECHR grounds and under the Immigration Rules.


Signed
                                Date 25th August 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

