
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09917/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2016                   |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MZ
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Haywood of Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Liddington promulgated on 19 October 2015 brought with  the  permission
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge R A Cox granted on 5 November 2015.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant and MZ is the respondent, for  the  sake  of  consistency
    with the decision of the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to
    MZ as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

3.   The Appellant is a Palestinian  national  born  24  September  1990  in
    Lebanon, where he also resided until coming to the United Kingdom.   He
    left the Lebanon, it is  said,  on  26  May  2014  and  then  travelled
    overland via Syria, Turkey, Greece, and France before arriving  in  the
    United Kingdom on 14 June 2014, whereupon he claimed asylum.

4.   The Appellant's application for asylum was refused for reasons set  out
    in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') of 6 November  2014,  and  a
    removal decision was taken in consequence.

5.   The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    allowed  by  Judge  Liddington  for  the  reasons  set   out   in   her
    determination.  The Secretary of State seeks to challenge that decision
    now before the Upper Tribunal.

Consideration: Error of Law

6.   In her grounds of appeal in support of the application  for  permission
    to appeal the Secretary of State identified two areas of challenge: the
    first in relation to the reasons of the First-tier Tribunal Judge;  and
    the second alleging procedural impropriety on the part of the Judge  in
    that  it  was  said  that  the  Respondent's  representative  had  been
    interrupted during the course of the hearing both by the Judge  and  by
    the Appellant's  representative  -  the  Judge  having  permitted  such
    interruptions.

7.   In granting permission to appeal Judge Cox considered  that  the  first
    ground of appeal was arguable.  In respect of the second ground, it was
    said that the supporting reasons advanced by the Respondent in  respect
    of procedural impropriety were sparse, and that if this ground  was  to
    be relied upon the Respondent would require to file further  evidential
    material.

8.   The only material available to the Tribunal in respect of  this  ground
    of challenge is the minute of the  Presenting  Officer,  and  the  only
    passage relevant in that minute is the one  cited  in  the  grounds  in
    respect of interruption.  There is no particular detail provided as  to
    when  those  interruptions  took  place,  or  the   nature   of   those
    interruptions. Ms Fijiwala acknowledges that she is not in  a  position
    to file any further materials,  and  does  not  seek  to  amplify  that
    particular ground of appeal before me - although she does not  actively
    seek to withdraw the ground.

9.   In such circumstances I indicated that Mr Haywood need not  address  me
    in respect of that ground.  Insofar  as  it  might  be  suggested  that
    permission to appeal has been granted on  that  ground,  I  reject  the
    ground as not having been adequately supported by evidence or otherwise
    developed in submissions.

10.  However, I have little hesitation in concluding that there was a  clear
    error of law in respect of the  adequacy  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's reasons.

11.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  sets  out  in  admirable
    detail in its early parts the background to the appeal and the evidence
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal.  It references the documentary
    materials.  It  also  takes  time  to  summarise  at  some  length  the
    Appellant's case.  There is also  reference  to  the  contents  of  two
    experts' reports: a report by Dr Neil Egnall, a clinical  psychologist,
    and a report by Ms Sheri Laizer,  a  country  expert.  The  Judge  also
    details the contents of the Secretary of State's RFRL,  and  also  sets
    out the submissions of the Respondent's Presenting Officer and  Counsel
    for the Appellant.

12.  In doing so - in rehearsing the evidential material, the nature of  the
    Appellant's case and the submissions - the Judge does not at that stage
    make any findings: for the main part the decision is a 'setting out' of
    the evidence and issues that were before her.

13.   Then,  after  paragraph  39  of  the  decision  appeas   the   heading
    "Determination of the Issues".  What then follows is this:

         "40. I find it reasonably likely that the core of  the  Appellant's
             account of the events is credible. Taking the  evidence  as  a
             whole, I find that he did refuse to  fight  for  Hezbollah  in
             Syria and that, as  a  consequence,  he  was  threatened  with
             severe reprisals should he not return to the PIF who  were  at
             that point affiliated with Hezbollah.

         41.  I find it reasonably likely that the appellant's uncle's house
             was attacked. I note that  his  version  of  that  attack  has
             changed on occasion from one which resulted only in one broken
             window to one which lasted for fifteen minutes and riddled the
             house with bullets.  I find it more likely that  there  was  a
             warning attack on the uncle's house which resulted in  minimal
             damage but which represented  the  escalation  of  the  threat
             against the appellant.  At that point, it is most likely  that
             PIF/Hezbollah  were  limiting  themselves   to   threats   and
             intimidation not only to persuade the appellant to return but,
             perhaps  even  more  likely,  to  teach  a  lesson  to   other
             disillusioned recruits.

         42.  It is reasonably likely that the appellant, although he was  a
             fairly low level recruit, was of interest to  PIF  as  he  had
             been assigned to guard one of their  leaders,  Sheikh  Qassim.
             In that position, the appellant would have known the  sheikh's
             routines, habits and movements and as such could pose a threat
             to his security.  Based on the evidence taken as a  whole  the
             Appellant has shown that there  are  substantial  grounds  for
             believing that he has a well-founded fear of persecution for a
             Refugee Convention reason and is unable or unwilling to  avail
             himself of the protection  of  that  country.   I  have  given
             considerable weight to the  country  expert's  report  of  the
             inability or unwillingness  of  the  Lebanese  authorities  to
             challenge the actions of such groups as the PIF or  Hezbollah.
             There would, effectively, be no protection for  the  Appellant
             should he be returned to Lebanon.  I am satisfied  that  there
             is a real risk  that  the  Appellant  would  face  inhuman  or
             degrading treatment or punishment either at the hands  of  the
             PIF or Hezbollah should he be returned to Lebanon.  I  do  not
             find that it reasonably  likely  that  he  would  be  able  to
             relocate  within  Lebanon  given  the  presence  of  Hezbollah
             throughout the country."

14.  In my judgement paragraphs  41  and  42  are,  in  the  main  part,  an
    assessment of risk  premised  on  the  acceptance  of  the  Appellant's
    account.   Accordingly it is paragraph 40 that contains the key finding
    - that is to say the acceptance of the Appellant's evidence as  to  the
    events that had befallen him prior to coming to the United Kingdom.

15.  The judge's finding in this  regard  is,  to  quote  from  the  passage
    again, no more than this: "I find it reasonably likely that the core of
    the Appellant's account of the events is credible."

16.  I am unable to detect from that passage  -  or  anything  else  in  the
    decision - the reason why the Judge concluded that  the  Appellant  was
    credible.  No reason is offered  at  paragraph  40,  or  the  following
    paragraphs, or anywhere else in the determination, for that conclusion.
    It is to be understood that this was  in  the  context  of  significant
    issues being raised by the  Secretary  of  State  with  regard  to  the
    Appellant's credibility. Such matters are referred to not only  in  the
    RFRL but were also amplified in the  Presenting  Officer's  submissions
    that are recorded at paragraphs 30-33 of the Judge's determination.

17.  Mr Haywood has directed my attention to the well-known  decision  in  R
    (Iran) and others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 982, and in particular those passages under Part 4 with regard
    to perversity, the failure to give reasons, and  proportionality.   The
    paragraphs dealing with the failure to give reasons are paragraphs  13-
    15, and in particular Mr Haywood directs my attention to the quotations
    therein from the judgment of Lord Justice  Griffiths  in  the  case  of
    Eagle Trust Company Limited and Piggott Brown  [1985]  3AllER  119.   I
    quote those passages now for completeness:

         "[An adjudicator] should give his reasons in sufficient  detail  to
         show the [IAT] the principles on which he has acted and the reasons
         that have led him to his decision.  They need not be elaborate.   I
         cannot  stress  too  strongly  that  there  is  no  duty   on   [an
         adjudicator], in giving his reasons, to deal  with  every  argument
         presented  by  [an  advocate]  in  support  of  his  case.   It  is
         sufficient if what he says shows the parties and, if need  be,  the
         [IAT], the basis on which he has acted,  and  if  it  be  that  the
         [adjudicator] has not dealt with some particular  argument  but  it
         can be seen that there are grounds on  which  he  would  have  been
         entitled to reject it, [the IAT] should assume  that  he  acted  on
         those grounds unless the appellant can point to convincing  reasons
         leading to a contrary conclusion."

    And further,

         "[I]f the appellate process is to work satisfactorily, the judgment
         must enable the [IAT] to understand why the  [adjudicator]  reached
         his decision. This does not mean that every  factor  which  weighed
         with the [adjudicator] in his appraisal of the evidence has  to  be
         identified and explained.  But the issues the resolution  of  which
         were vital to the [adjudicator]'s conclusion should  be  identified
         and the manner in which he resolved  them  explained.   It  is  not
         possible to provide a  template  for  this  process.  It  need  not
         involve a lengthy judgment. It does require  the  [adjudicator]  to
         identify and record  those  matters  which  were  critical  to  his
         decision.  If the critical issue was one of fact, it may be  enough
         to say that one witness was preferred to another  because  the  one
         manifestly had a clearer recollection of the material facts or  the
         other gave answers which demonstrated that his  recollection  could
         not be relied upon."

18.  I do not consider that the Secretary of State  is  arguing  here  about
    'reasons for reasons'.  In my judgement there is a complete absence  of
    reasoning in respect of the key finding with regard to the  Appellant's
    credibility.  The "issue the resolution of which  [was]  vital  to  the
    adjudicator's conclusion", whilst identified,  lacked  any  explanation
    for its resolution.

19.  In my judgement simply putting the  finding  at  paragraph  40  in  the
    context of recording the evidence  and  submissions  in  the  preceding
    paragraphs does not render it adequately reasoned.

20.  I am  also  troubled  by  the  contents  of  paragraph  41.  The  Judge
    identifies a discrepancy in  the  Appellant's  evidence,  which  was  a
    matter highlighted in the submissions of the Presenting  Officer.   The
    first part of paragraph 41 records that discrepancy  in  the  evidence.
    In my judgement the second part of paragraph 41 does not do anything by
    way of resolving that discrepancy, but simply goes on to  approach  the
    case  as  if  the  event  had  happened  in  some   way   or   another,
    notwithstanding the discrepancy in the Appellant's account of  it.   It
    is unclear why the Judge was satisfied that the event had occurred.

21.  Be that as it may, and in any event, the risk assessment at  paragraphs
    41 and 42 as I have indicated above, is premised on  an  acceptance  of
    the Appellant's credibility and claimed history - an  acceptance  which
    the Judge has singularly failed to explain.

22.  Accordingly in all of the circumstances I find that  the  reasoning  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  inadequate  to  an  extent  that  it
    amounts to an error of law.  The reader of the decision is left with no
    understanding of the basis upon which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    resolved the key issue between the parties in respect of  the  veracity
    of the Appellant's claimed history.

23.  In such circumstances the error of law is material to  an  extent  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge must be  set  aside,  and
    the decision in the appeal requires to be remade.

Remaking the decision

24.   It  is  common  ground  between  the  representatives  that   in   the
    circumstances this is an appeal that requires to be reconsidered with a
    new hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

25.  No specific Directions are required.  I  did  however  raise  with  the
    represntatives a question as to why the focus in the appeal before  the
    First-tier Tribunal had been exclusively in respect of the risk to  the
    Appellant in Lebanon given that he was a national of Palestine and  the
    RFRL had raised the issue of the  Appellant  availing  himself  of  the
    protection of the Palestinian authorities: see paragraph 49. It may  be
    that either or both parties  -  and  perhaps  in  turn  the  First-tier
    Tribunal - will wish to give some further consideration to this  aspect
    of the case.

Notice of Decision

26.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

27.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Liddington.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:  Date: 25 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

