

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/09841/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham   |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 February 2016                      |   On 29 February 2016              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                             mr Lakhwinder singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Lawrence, Counsel instructed by the Law
                    Partnership Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Jeromes sitting in Birmingham on  28  August
    2015) dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to recognise him as a refugee, as  otherwise  requiring
    international human rights protection  and  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's concomitant decision to remove him from the United  Kingdom  by
    way of directions under Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and
    I do not consider that  the  appellant  requires  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 26 October 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins gave  his  reasons  for
    granting the appellant permission to appeal on  a  renewed  application
    for permission to the Upper Tribunal:

         1.   The grounds before me are very much better than  those  before
             Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuell when  he  refused
             permission to appeal.

         2.   I have given  permission  to  appeal  because  the  First-tier
             Tribunal Judge found that  the  appellant's  marriage  is  not
             'genuine and subsisting'.

         3.   One  of  the  reasons  advanced  for  that  conclusion  is  at
             paragraph 37.2(iii) where the Judge says 'I  note  that  there
             are no photographs  of  the  marriage  or  of  any  subsequent
             celebrations'.

         4.   The appellant say that finding is wrong.  If it is wrong (that
             has not been established) then it is arguable that the Judge's
             adverse finding is unsustainable.

         5.   The appellant must understand that even if he shows  that  the
             Judge made a mistake the Upper Tribunal will  not  necessarily
             dispose of the appeal in a way that he  finds  agreeable.   It
             may decide that the mistake was not material or it may  decide
             that the mistake could have made a  difference  and  then  set
             aside the decision, remakes it, and then  dismiss  the  appeal
             for other reasons.

         6.   However it is reasonably arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  as
             alleged and I give permission to appeal on each ground.

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of India, whose date of birth  15  February
    1975.  He arrived in the UK on 28 November 2002 and claimed  asylum  on
    arrival.  He was instructed to  report  back  to  the  authorities  the
    following day, but failed  to  attend.   He  then  absconded  from  the
    immigration authorities until  10  August  2013.   When  the  appellant
    resurfaced, his asylum claim was considered on its merits.

 4. The appellant attended an asylum interview on  12  February  2014.   He
    said he had been educated to level 12 in India.  He had  then  obtained
    employment as a chemist.  All his family were still living in his  home
    village.  He was still in contact with his mum and dad.   He  spoke  to
    them maybe every fortnight or once a week.  He was asked  whether  they
    had experienced any problems since he left.  He said they did not  tell
    him.  Even if there was a problem, they were telling him that they were
    ok.  He was asked what family he had  in  the  UK  (question  19).   He
    answered he did not have any real family here.  He just had friends.

 5. He was asked about his problems in India.  He said he had a  girlfriend
    there, with whom he had an affair.  Her dad was in politics, and he was
    a powerful man.  His girlfriend's father and male siblings objected  to
    the relationship, and started giving him problems in  consequence.   On
    one occasion, her brothers beat him up.  Later on the same day the same
    brothers came to his family home and smashed  the  windows  and  doors.
    They were all at home, and his mum and dad got really worried.  He  had
    mentioned the incident to the police, but no-one  took  any  notice  of
    him.

 6. On 30 October 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing
    to recognise the appellant as a  refugee,  or  as  otherwise  requiring
    international or human rights protection.  On the topic of  Article  8,
    consideration had been given to his rights in  respect  of  any  family
    life that he might have established in the UK.  As he  had  not  raised
    anything to suggest he had a partner or child in the United Kingdom, he
    did not meet the relationship requirements in Appendix FM.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-Tier Tribunal

 7. Both  parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Jeromes.   At
    paragraph [4] of his subsequent decision, Judge Jeromes  recorded  that
    the appellant had withdrawn his appeal against the refusal  of  asylum,
    and that the only ground of refusal which remained in  controversy  was
    the appellant's claim under Article 8.  Mr David of  Counsel  submitted
    on behalf of the appellant that there  were  exceptional  circumstances
    which  would  mean  the  appellant  and   his   family   would   suffer
    unjustifiably harsh consequences if the  decision  to  remove  him  was
    upheld.

 8. The appellant's evidence by way of appeal was he  had  met  Ms  Jaswant
    Kaur, a British national, in 2007 and had started a  relationship.   Ms
    Kaur's brother had sponsored the appellant's father and mother to  come
    to the UK in 2010 to attend the wedding of  Ms  Kaur's  niece.   On  28
    October 2013 the Coventry and Warwickshire Magistrates' Court had  made
    a restraining order against him to protect Ms Kaur.   This  restraining
    order had been discharged on 9  February  2015,  as  evidenced  by  the
    discharge order at page 8 of the bundle compiled for the hearing.   The
    appellant's evidence was that there were problems in their relationship
    in October 2013 but they had got back together about five months  later
    around April 2014.   He  had  not  mentioned  Ms  Kaur  at  his  asylum
    interview because at the time they had been separated for two or  three
    months, and they were not getting on.

 9. The appellant had first intimated that he  was  pursing  an  Article  8
    claim on family life grounds at the CMR hearing which had  taken  place
    on 4 December 2014.  On 15 December 2014 he and Ms  Kaur  attended  the
    Coventry Register Office to give notice of an intention to  marry,  and
    at the same time the appellant submitted his divorce  certificate  from
    India.  On 8 July 2015 the  appellant  and  Ms  Kaur  were  married  at
    Coventry Register Office.

10. Ms Kaur had two grown up children from  a  previous  marriage.   Satnam
    lived with him and Ms Kaur at the marital home in Coventry.  He  was  a
    student, and returning  to  college  in  September.   The  older  child
    Praveen worked in Tesco's, and lived separately from Ms  Kaur  and  the
    appellant.

11. The appellant said that he and Ms Kaur wanted to settled  down  in  the
    UK, and that her sons would be distraught if  he  had  to  go  back  to
    India.  If he was forced to leave it would create a big impact  on  the
    children as meeting the financial threshold and the whole process would
    just take very long and there would be a delay in him returning to  the
    UK.  He understood spoken English, but not fully.  He could speak  some
    English, but not properly and he was attending English classes.

12. In her evidence, Ms Kaur said that she had been born in the UK, but her
    parents were from India and she had visited India five  to  six  times.
    She did not have any relatives there.  When she had  visited  India  it
    was to visit relatives of her ex-husband.  She spoke Punjabi.  She  was
    currently not fit enough to work, and so she was on Employment  Support
    Allowance.  She suffered from various ailments, including psoriasis and
    joint problems.  She would not be able to meet  the  �18,600  threshold
    even if she returned to work.

13. Judge Jeromes noted that the appellant's PNC record showed that he  was
    convicted  on  2  October  2013  of   racially/religiously   aggravated
    harassment/stalking without violence  between  7  August  2013  and  10
    August 2013, having pleaded guilty.  He was  sentenced  on  28  October
    2013 to a community order and to a restraining  order  for  "protection
    from harassment on conviction until further order".

14. At paragraph [33], the judge said  he  had  been  provided  with  three
    photographs.  One photograph was of the appellant and Ms Kaur, date and
    occasion unspecified.  The second photograph was the appellant  and  Ms
    Kaur and  four  others  (including  the  appellant's  parents)  on  the
    occasion of the 14th birthday of Ms  Kaur's  younger  son.   The  third
    photograph was of Ms Kaur and the  appellant  and  a  third  identified
    person on an unspecified date and occasion.

15. At paragraph [37] of his decision, the judge gave detailed reasons  for
    not  being  satisfied  on  the  balance  of  probabilities   that   the
    relationship  between  the  appellant  and  Ms  Kaur  was  genuine  and
    subsisting.  The judge gave a  number  of  reasons  for  reaching  this
    conclusion.  His last reason was  contained  in  subparagraph  (iv)  of
    paragraph [37.2].  He accepted the legal validity of their marriage but
    given its proximity to the hearing date (a matter of a few weeks)  this
    raised suspicion as to the appellant's intent and he had provided  very
    little evidence to allay those suspicions:

         I note  there  are  no  photographs  of  the  marriage  or  of  any
         subsequent celebrations.

16. The judge went on  to  give  detailed  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    appellant did not enjoy family life with  Ms  Kaur's  sons.   The  last
    reason he gave was that he had been provided with just  one  photograph
    of the appellant with the younger son  on  the  occasion  of  his  14th
    birthday, but there were no  photographs  of  the  appellant  with  the
    eldest son.  One photograph in the context of  the  relationship  which
    had allegedly been continuing for seven or eight  years  was  certainly
    not indicative of family life.  Such evidence was generally  ordinarily
    available, and there was  no  explanation  as  to  why  none  had  been
    submitted.

17. The judge concluded at paragraph [37.4] that whilst  there  was  family
    life  between  Ms  Kaur  and  her  sons,  the   appellant   played   an
    insignificant and peripheral role within that family group as a  whole.



18. The judge set out his  conclusions  on  the  law  from  paragraph  [39]
    onwards.  The appellant did not qualify for leave to remain  under  the
    partner route because inter alia he had  found  that  the  relationship
    with the appellant and Ms Kaur was not genuine  and  subsisting.   EX.1
    did not assist the appellant for this reason.  The judge  moved  on  to
    address the private life claim under Rule 276ADE.

19. Having considered Article 8 through the lens of Appendix  FM  and  Rule
    276ADE and having concluded the appellant did not meet the requirements
    of the Rules, the judge said at paragraph [40] that he  had  looked  at
    the evidence to see if there was anything which had  not  been  already
    adequately considered in the context of the Rules which could lead to a
    successful Article 8 claim.  The judge proceeded  to  follow  the  five
    step approach in Razgar.

20. The judge set out  his  conclusions  on  proportionality  in  paragraph
    [40.5].  He found that the appellant spoke limited  English  and  there
    was no evidence before him to indicate that if  allowed  to  remain  he
    would be financially independent.  He also found that Ms Kaur  was  not
    in a position to support him financially.  He was therefore  likely  to
    be a burden  on  the  taxpayer.   To  the  extent  that  he  was  in  a
    relationship  with  Ms  Kaur  and  her  sons,  this  relationship   was
    established  when  his  immigration  status  was  either  unlawful   or
    precarious and little weight should be given to  this  element  of  his
    family or private life, which could be continued in any event by modern
    communication means.  Ms Kaur could visit the appellant in  India,  and
    she spoke Punjabi.   He  was  not  satisfied  there  were  grounds  for
    believing the decision would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences
    or that it would prejudice the private or family life of the  appellant
    or Ms Kaur or her sons in a manner sufficiently serious to amount to  a
    breach of the fundamental right protected by Article 8.   The  decision
    was proportionate to  the  legitimate  aims  pursued,  paying  specific
    regard to Section 117B(3) of the 2002 Act.

Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

21. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr  Lawrence  raised  a  preliminary  issue  which  had  not  been
    canvassed  at  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  in  the
    application for permission to appeal.  He submitted that, by  the  date
    of decision  at  the  end  of  October  2014,  the  appellant  required
    permission from the Secretary of State to raise a new ground by way  of
    appeal that had not been relied upon in the application  to  which  the
    appeal related.  As his lay client had not relied on an asserted family
    life with Ms Kaur and his sons in his application, he  queried  whether
    the requisite permission had been obtained.  Although the matter he was
    raising  was  potentially  adverse  to  his  lay  client,  Mr  Lawrence
    indicated that he felt it was his professional obligation  to  draw  my
    attention to this matter.

22. Having regard to the procedural history outlined by  Judge  Jeromes  in
    his decision, I ruled that the First-tier Tribunal had jurisdiction  to
    entertain the appellant's family life claim, even though  it  had  only
    been raised after the decision under appeal.

23. I explored with Mr Lawrence the limited grounds upon  which  permission
    to appeal had been granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins.   As  a
    result of comparing what was in my file (and  hence  what  was  in  the
    possession of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge)  with  the  documents  in
    possession of the parties, it  emerged  that  the  judge's  bundle  was
    incomplete.  Instead of having an  appellant's  bundle  running  to  30
    pages, he had an appellant's bundle that only ran to  some  ten  pages.
    As a result, the judge  had  inadvertently  "overlooked"  a  number  of
    additional photographs beyond the three photographs to  which  he  made
    reference in his decision.  He had also  not  seen  copies  of  utility
    bills at pages 25 to 30 of the bundle  evidencing  recent  cohabitation
    (from March 2015).

24. Mr Lawrence submitted that  failure  to  provide  the  judge  with  the
    correct bundle was not the appellant's fault, and so he  had  been  the
    victim of procedural unfairness.

25. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Ms Pettersen  submitted  that  the
    alleged procedural unfairness did not affect the outcome.  Firstly, the
    judge had given adequate reasons for finding that the appellant had not
    discharged the  burden  of  proving  that  he  was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with Ms Kaur, and the additional  documents  in
    the appellant's bundle did not  salvage  the  appellant's  credibility.
    Secondly, the case was bound to fail in any event under the  Rules,  as
    the evidence did not demonstrate that  there  would  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life  between  Ms  Kaur  and  the  appellant  being
    carried on in India.

26. In reply, Mr Lawrence said that if cogent  medical  evidence  had  been
    presented relating to Ms Kaur's medical conditions,  there  would  have
    been an arguable case  that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life being carried on in India.  But in the  absence  of  cogent
    evidence on the point, he conceded that the appellant was bound to fail
    under EX.1 in any event.  He submitted that the  procedural  unfairness
    arising from the judge not taking into account the additional documents
    in the  appellant's  bundle  affected  the  proportionality  assessment
    outside the Rules.

Discussion

27. It is important to recognise that only one of the two factual  "errors"
    made by the judge relate to the issue of whether there is a genuine and
    subsisting relationship between the appellant and Ms Kaur.

28. On this topic, the judge simply observed that there were no photographs
    of the marriage or the celebrations which  followed  the  marriage.   I
    accept that the full appellant's bundle  contains  photographs  of  the
    marriage ceremony and of the celebrations which followed. But given the
    judge's other, and more cogent, reasons for finding  (in  effect)  that
    the marriage was one of convenience,  it  is  very  doubtful  that  the
    photographic evidence would have salvaged the  appellant's  credibility
    on the issue of the relationship being genuine and subsisting.

29. In any event, satisfying the relationship requirement  was  not  enough
    for the appellant to succeed under the partner route  in  Appendix  FM.
    He also had to show there were insurmountable obstacles to family  life
    with Ms Kaur being carried on in India.  With commendable  candour,  Mr
    Lawrence rightly accepts that the evidence placed before the First-tier
    Tribunal was not capable of establishing this.

30. Turning to the appellant's Article 8 claim  outside  the  Rules,  I  am
    wholly unpersuaded that the judge's adverse finding on  the  status  of
    the relationship between Ms Kaur and the  appellant  had  any  material
    bearing   on   the   outcome   of   the   proportionality   assessment.
    Notwithstanding  his  primary  finding  of  fact,  the  judge  assessed
    proportionality on the alternative premise that the  appellant  enjoyed
    family and private life with Ms Kaur and her two sons.  Hence  he  held
    at paragraph [40.5(i)(b)] as follows:

         To the extent that he is in a relationship with  Ms  Kaur  and  her
         sons, this was established when his immigration status  was  either
         unlawful or precarious...

31. The judge's deliberations on proportionality thus cover the contingency
    that the appellant is in a genuine and subsisting marital  relationship
    with Ms Kaur, just as they cover the contingency that his  relationship
    with Ms Kaur is something rather less.  In short, even if the appellant
    is in a genuine and subsisting marital relationship with Ms  Kaur,  the
    judge has given adequate reasons for finding that  the  decision  under
    appeal will not result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
    appellant or Ms Kaur, or that it prejudices the private or family  life
    of the appellant or Ms Kaur  or  her  sons  in  a  manner  sufficiently
    serious to amount to a (disproportionate)  breach  of  the  fundamental
    rights protected by Article 8. On  the  hypothesis  of  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marital relationship, the couple face a  reasonable  choice:
    settlement together in India or  the  appellant,  who  has  an  adverse
    immigration  history,  returning  to  India  in  order  to  seek  entry
    clearance as Ms Kaur's spouse.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


