
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09935/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2nd August 2016                         |On 2nd August 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         MRS THURAYA ALI AHMAD KENAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Medley-Daley (Broudie Jackson & Canter,
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of  State
    against  a  judgment  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   Judge   Ransley,
    promulgated  on  12th  November  2015  in  which  she   dismissed   the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    her asylum claim but allowed the appeal against the decision to  refuse
    her humanitarian protection.

 2. For the purposes of continuity and clarity I will continue to refer  to
    Mrs Kenan as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent
    in this decision.

 3. The Appellant is a national of  Libya  born  on  22nd  June  1974.  She
    claimed asylum on the basis that she had married outside her own  tribe
    and would be at risk, if returned to Libya, due to fighting between her
    own and her husband's  tribe.   Secondly,  she  claimed  that  she  had
    separated from her husband in 2014 in the UK and feared return to Libya
    as a single female with four dependent children. It was also  her  case
    that her home area, Sabratha, has become a  training  ground  for  ISIS
    militants and she  feared  the  associated  risk  to  herself  and  the
    children from violence and forced recruitment.

 4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant  had
    fabricated her claim that her husband belonged  to  the  Hetheri-Blazza
    tribe in order to support her claim. She found that her  claim  on  the
    ground of imputed political opinion was not well founded. In  terms  of
    her claim on the basis of being a member of a particular  social  group
    as a lone woman  with  four  dependent  children,  the  Judge  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant had separated  her  from  her  husband  as
    claimed and thus would not be returning to Libya  as  a  single  mother
    with four dependent children. She found that there was no truth in  the
    Appellant's asylum claim. However  when  looking  at  the  question  of
    Humanitarian Protection she correctly identified, at paragraph 45, that
    she was considering the case on the basis of a return to  Sabratha  via
    Tripoli. She was provided with country information in relation to  that
    area which indicated that Sabratha contains an ISIS training  base  and
    concluded at paragraph 50, on the basis of the country materials,  that
    returning her to Libya would expose her and the children to a real risk
    of indiscriminate violence due to fighting between the militias and the
    risks posed by ISIS. She found that the Appellant  had  discharged  the
    burden of proof and was entitled to Humanitarian Protection.

 5. Having so found the Judge then went on to consider  Article  8  and  in
    considering the best interests of the four  children  concerned,  found
    that their best interests would be seriously prejudiced if they were to
    be returned to their home area of Sabratha where they would face a real
    risk of violence from ISIS. She therefore also allowed  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was granted by
    Judge Andrew who thought it arguable that the Judge  had not identified
    with any clarity why she was departing from the country  guidance  case
    of AT & Ors (article 15 C risk categories) Libya  [2014]  UK  UTC  0318
    (IAC).

 7. Before me Mr Harrison simply relied upon the grounds. The grounds  also
    argued that the Judge gave inadequate reasons for allowing  the  appeal
    in relation to the best interests of the children and Article 8.

 8. Having read the Decision and Reasons with  care  I  find  it  does  not
    contain a material error of law. The Judge was  clearly  aware  of  the
    country guidance case and referred to it specifically at paragraph  21.
    She carefully assessed the Appellant's asylum claim finding  the  claim
    wholly without credibility.

 9. That the Appellant came from Sabratha was not in dispute. In  terms  of
    humanitarian  protection  she  was  provided  with  background  country
    evidence which  post-dated  the  country  guidance  case.  The  country
    guidance case does not refer to ISIS and  that  situation  has  changed
    significantly. The Judge clearly explained her reasoning,  namely  that
    ISIS was active in the Appellant's hometown and that  would  present  a
    risk for her and her four children. The risk from ISIS does not feature
    in the country guidance  and  for  that  reason  alone  the  judge  was
    entitled to consider it.

10. Internal Relocation did not feature in the Letter of  Refusal  and  the
    Judge's refusal to consider it when it was raised at  the  hearing  did
    not form one of the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. There  has
    been no application to amend the grounds.

11. Mr Harrison did not seek to persuade me that the presence of  ISIS  did
    not represent a real risk of indiscriminate violence.

12. The decision and reasons of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  contain
    material error of law and is upheld.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

There has been no application for an anonymity order and I do not make one




Signed                              Date 2nd August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin






