
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal: AA/09847/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 November 2016                   |On 10 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     SS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, of counsel, instructed by Greater
London solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 21  December  1987.  In
    2001 she moved from Sri Lanka to India with her  grandmother.  She  met
    her husband in India in 2007. Following  problems  with  her  husband's
    family she obtained refugee status in India. She claimed  that  members
    of her family were  members/supporters  of  the  LTTE.  She  wanted  to
    maintain her relationship with her husband. She applied for  a  student
    visa and came to the UK on 14 November  2011  with  her  husband  as  a
    dependent. She returned to Sri Lanka on 25 January 2013 as  her  mother
    was unwell. She was detained and questioned on arrival at  the  airport
    and 3 days later she was detained  for  enquiries  by  the  police  and
    Terrorism Investigation Department. She was seriously ill  treated  and
    raped the following day. Her uncle procured her release  and  contacted
    an agent who obtained a false passport for her in the name  of  Sawarna
    Pandaro. She left Sri Lanka on that passport travelling to Muscat on  8
    February 2013. The agent had arranged for her to  travel  with  another
    woman. The appellant flew from Muscat to Heathrow on the  same  flight.
    She had used her own passport to  travel  from  Muscat  to  the  United
    Kingdom, arriving on 8 February 2013. She applied for  asylum  2  weeks
    later.

 2. The respondent refused the application on 19 June 2015. The  respondent
    did not accept that the  appellant  had  left  Sri  Lanka  on  a  false
    passport as on page 22 it clearly showed a Sri Lankan exit stamp  dated
    8 February 2013. The  respondent  considered  that  the  appellant  had
    attempted to mislead the UK authorities and that this seriously damaged
    the overall credibility of her claim. Furthermore she had not made  her
    claim promptly. The respondent was not of the view that  the  appellant
    would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka and moreover it was  considered
    that she would be able to return to India. There was a  sufficiency  of
    protection for her there. Appropriate medical treatment  was  available
    in Sri Lanka for the appellant. The appellant's application was refused
    on all grounds.

 3. The appellant appealed and her appeal came before a First-tier Judge on
    4 August 2016.

 4. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant, her husband  and  her
    sister. Her claim was supported by medical evidence.

 5. In making his findings the judge considered the medical report that had
    been prepared. The appellant had scars which were typical or consistent
    with the ill-treatment  that  she  had  suffered.  The  judge  reminded
    himself that in accordance with  the  Istanbul  Protocol  "typical  of"
    meant an appearance that was usually found with this type of trauma but
    there were other possible causes whereas consistent meant that the scar
    could have been caused by the trauma described but was non-specific and
    there were many other possible causes. A  psychologist  had  found  the
    appellant to be suffering  from  post-traumatic  stress  disorder.  The
    judge stated he had taken this evidence into account in his  assessment
    of the appellant's credibility. It was accepted that the appellant  had
    attended  a  clinic  for  treatment  in  Sri   Lanka   and   this   was
    circumstantial evidence which tended to support her account but did not
    in itself prove her claim to have been detained and ill-treated.

 6. The judge then turned to  consider  the  issue  of  the  stamp  in  the
    appellant's passport. The judge found that the appellant's  explanation
    for the stamp being in her passport was that the other  woman  who  the
    agent had arranged to travel with her passed through the  controls  and
    obtained the stamp. The judge observed:

         "This means that the immigration and security  officers  must  have
         failed to recognise that photographs of the same person featured in
         two passports on the same flight. I accept that  this  is  possible
         although I find it unlikely given the security concerns existing in
         Sri Lanka at the time. Far less likely is that the agent would have
         been able to find a woman so closely resembling the appellant  that
         she would have passed for her in those circumstances."

 7. The determination continues:

         "35. That is not the end of the matter. The appellant says that she
         travelled on a ticket from Colombo to London.  She  was  unable  to
         recall whose name was on the ticket. If it  was  in  her  name  she
         would have come to the attention  of  the  authorities  in  Colombo
         because it would not have matched the name in the passport she  was
         using. If it was in the other name it would not  have  matched  her
         own passport which she used to travel from Muscat. I find  it  very
         unlikely that her identity would  not  have  been  checked  as  she
         boarded the flight in Muscat. If she was travelling  on  the  false
         passport that name would appear on the passenger itinerary and  not
         her own. In those circumstances I find it very  unlikely  that  she
         would have been allowed to board the flight.

         36. The appellant has not provided a satisfactory  explanation  for
         the presence of the stamp in her passport. I am satisfied that  the
         reason for that is that she used her  own  passport  to  leave  Sri
         Lanka. It follows that you must have passed  through  the  security
         and immigration checks at the airport which is persuasive  evidence
         that she was not of interest to them. I note also that in  her  own
         name she passed through the very security  checks  which  were  the
         catalyst for her detention without adverse consequences. Of greater
         significance is that she has lied in  an  attempt  to  mislead  the
         respondent. I find this to completely undermine her account which I
         reject."

 8. The judge did not accept that the  appellant  had  a  genuine  fear  of
    persecution and there was no need to consider whether such a fear might
    be objectively well-founded. In the light of the country  guidance  the
    appellant would not be at risk as a returned failed asylum seeker.  The
    judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 9. The appellant applied for permission to appeal from  the  decision  and
    permission was granted on 26 September 2016.  In  the  grounds  it  was
    argued that the judge had  failed  to  engage  with  the  core  of  the
    appellant's claim. The judge found the point arguable "inasmuch as  the
    appellant led detailed evidence of torture  and  sexual  abuse  in  Sri
    Lanka, and as the judge did  not  directly  address  or  analyse  these
    allegations..."

10. Counsel submitted that the judge had  made  positive  comments  on  the
    medical evidence. He had erred, however, in disposing of the  whole  of
    the claim which had been supported by detailed medical evidence on  the
    single issue of the passport stamp. It had been argued  by  experienced
    counsel who had settled the grounds of appeal that the judge's  finding
    did not take into account the country guidance on the issue of bribery.
    Reference had been made to GJ and others [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)  at
    paragraph 146 where a lawyer had given evidence that it was possible to
    leave the country using  bribery  with  the  help  of  an  agent:  "the
    security officers and immigration officers at the international airport
    are no exception to the widespread bribery and corruption in Sri Lanka.
    It is always possible for a person to use influence or bribery  to  get
    through the airport without  being  detained  as  an  LTTE  suspect....
    Therefore leaving through the airport either with his/her own  passport
    or false identity does not necessarily indicate a lack of  interest  on
    the part of the authorities." The  tribunal  had  found  this  evidence
    significant commenting at paragraph  275  that  the  evidence  "on  the
    process of bribery was particularly useful."

11. In relation to what had happened  in  Muscat  it  was  the  appellant's
    account that she had been given her own passport  back  there.  It  was
    necessary to show a valid stamp in her passport as she was entering the
    UK as a tier 4 student.

12. Counsel submitted that in considering the appellant's account the judge
    had not opened his mind to  the  issue  of  connivance  rather  than  a
    mistake by officials. Even if she had left on her own passport  it  did
    not follow that her account should not have been properly considered in
    the light of what was said in the country guidance case.

13. Mr Singh relied on the respondent's response. The judge had  found  the
    entire claim to have been  fabricated.  The  appellant  had  given  her
    explanation of what had happened in the screening interview and in  her
    witness statement. She had detailed what had occurred in Muscat in that
    statement. If I was satisfied that the judge  had  erred  it  would  be
    necessary to have a fresh hearing. He pointed out that  the  judge  had
    not  found  it  necessary  in  the  circumstances  to  deal  with   the
    respondent's point that the appellant could be returned  to  India.  In
    the grounds of appeal there had been a reference to background evidence
    but it was not clear whether that had been before the First-tier Judge.
    Accordingly if the matter were to  be  heard  afresh  the  respondent's
    point about the appellant being able to return to India would be open.

14. In response Mr Martin did not wish to add to the  submissions  that  he
    had made but accepted the suggestion that if a material  error  of  law
    were to be found the matter should be remitted for a de novo hearing.

15. This is a difficult and borderline case. It is  of  course  open  to  a
    judge to determine a case on a single  issue  such  as  happened  here.
    However as counsel succinctly put it the judge focused on the issue  of
    mistake by officials rather than corruption or connivance. This  was  a
    case where the appellant claimed to have suffered at the hands  of  the
    authorities and the account was supported by medical evidence. In  such
    a case great care and scrutiny has to be  given  to  the  material  and
    findings needs to be made on the evidence as a whole. I appreciate that
    the judge stated he had taken into account the  medical  evidence  when
    assessing credibility but nonetheless he founded his  determination  on
    the question of the passport stamp. A  subsidiary  matter  is  that  as
    counsel points out it was the appellant's case that she  used  her  own
    passport on the flight from Muscat.

16. I find that the determination was materially flawed in law as argued by
    counsel. In those circumstances both parties  agreed  that  the  matter
    would have to be heard afresh. The point made by the  respondent  about
    return to India would of course remain open at such a hearing.  In  the
    light of the degree of fact-finding required  it  is  appropriate  this
    appeal should be remitted for a fresh  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Appeal allowed. The appeal will be remitted  for  a  fresh  hearing  on  all
issues.

Anonymity Decision

It is appropriate to make an anonymity order in the  circumstances  of  this
case.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and insofar as a fee was paid  or  is
payable it would be inappropriate at this stage to make an award.


Signed
                               G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               4 November 2016

