
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09113/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Sent:          |
|On 8th May 2014                               |On 18h June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                          miss Manijeh Sadat Zargar

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Kerr, Solicitor of Katani & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Mullen, Senior home office presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 21st September 1985.

2.   The appellant left Iran on 12th August  2011  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  She used her own passport with a visit visa.   She  had  been
    granted leave to enter as a spouse to join her husband  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

3.   On 24th July 2012 she claimed asylum and was interviewed in  connection
    with that claim.  In  essence  it  was  her  claim  that  she  was  now
    estranged from her husband and would face violence from  him  and  from
    family members were she to be returned to Iran.

4.   The respondent refused to grant her asylum for the reasons as  set  out
    in the decision of 16th September 2013 and issued  directions  for  her
    removal to Iran.

5.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Wallace on 30th October 2013.

6.   At  that  hearing  the  appellant  repeated  her  evidence  as  to  her
    estrangement from her husband.  Indeed she had  not lived with  him  at
    all in the United Kingdom but discovered upon her arrival that he had a
    girlfriend.

7.   She went to live with relatives in Crawley and then  with  an  aunt  in
    Nottingham and finally with a relative in  Edinburgh.   She  began  her
    studies with no direct contact with her spouse.

8.   They met together in February 2011 at the  Iranian  Embassy  where  the
    appellant  renounced  her  Mehriyeh  rights.   Her  husband  indirectly
    threatened her in that he would let people know in Iran  that  she  was
    sleeping around.

9.   The appellant returned to Iran on two occasions in 2011  initially  for
    five days in March and a further two days in July.   According  to  the
    appellant her father told her that she would be safer in the UK and was
    scared about the family's reputation in Iran.  Following her return  to
    the United Kingdom in September 2011 her husband phoned her on a number
    of occasions.

10.  The appellant also maintained that her husband's family were  harassing
    her family in Iran.  It was after her father died in June 2012 that she
    decided to claim asylum.

11.  In November 2012 she met her current partner, Mark Davidson, a  British
    citizen.  They started living together shortly  thereafter.   They  had
    been hoping to get married but that was not possible as  the  appellant
    seemingly was unable to obtain a divorce from her husband as it  was  a
    marriage registered in Iran.

12.  Mr Mark Davidson also gave evidence at the hearing and his evidence  is
    set out.

13.  The Judge noted  that  the  appellant  had  first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in May 2010 and on no occasion had she lived with her spouse in
    the United Kingdom.  He was a UK citizen.  The appellant had undertaken
    education studies in the United Kingdom but  at  no  occasion  had  she
    advised the Home Office or made any attempt to advise the  Home  Office
    that she changed her visa type.  The appellant had indicated that  when
    she returned to the UK in July 2011 it was to complete her studies.

14.   The account of  the  appellant  as   to  receiving  threats  from  her
    husband  was not found to be credible and  her  claim  for  asylum  was
    dismissed.  It was the express finding of the judge that the  appellant
    would not be at risk upon return.

15.  The judge did not however deal with the  issue  of  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

16.  Grounds of appeal were submitted contending that  the  Tribunal  failed
    to consider the appeal in the terms of EX.1. of Appendix  FM  or  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  It is contended that there was a good  arguable
    case for the matter to be considered outside the Immigration Rules.

17.  Permission to appeal was allowed on the basis that the  judge  had  not
    fully considered the relationship that the  appellant  now  had  living
    with a British national partner since December 2012.

18.  The matter came before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Macleman  on  11th  March
    2014.  He held that the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wallace should be set aside to the extent only that it  had  failed  to
    deal with issues under Article 8 of the ECHR.  He said that  the  Upper
    Tribunal would reach a decision on such issues  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence which was before the First-tier Tribunal and upon  submissions
    which may be made.

19.  Thus the matter came before me in pursuance of that decision.

20.  It was recognised that the scope of the appeal was  focused  upon  that
    of Article 8 of the ECHR.

21.  Miss Kerr, who represents the appellant, invited my attention to  EX.1.
    of Appendix FM.  The appellant was in a long-term relationship  with  a
    British citizen  but   there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  that
    relationship continuing in Iran.

22.  Miss Kerr accepted, however, that EX.1. did not apply to the  appellant
    because she could not satisfy the other wider requirements as  set  out
    in Appendix FM.

23.  Given that she did not succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  it  was
    necessary under the current jurisprudence for her to  show  that  there
    was a good arguable case for consideration outside the  Rules.   I  was
    invited  to  find  that  in  this  case  there  were  such   compelling
    circumstances that would render her return  to  be  in  breach  of  her
    fundamental human rights with the consequences of her return  would  be
    unduly harsh in all the circumstances both  for  herself  and  for  her
    current partner.

24.  Although the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  seemed  to  have  focused
    consideration upon the evidence  that  had  been  placed  before  Judge
    Wallace, it seemed to me that as I was faced with the task  of  looking
    at Article 8 myself, that the facility to give further evidence focused
    upon Article 8 should be afforded to the appellant and to  Mr  Davidson
    who also attended, should they wish to give further evidence.

25.  Both the appellant and Mr Davidson indicated that  they  would  welcome
    the opportunity to expand on the evidence  which  had  previously  been
    given relating to their relationship.  It seemed in those circumstances
    that the fairness of the case should permit that evidence.

26.  The evidence of Mr Davidson was briefly recorded in paragraphs  16  and
    17  of  the  determination.   Reliance  was  placed  upon  the  witness
    statement that he had submitted.  He was a  British  national  who  had
    worked off-shore in the North Sea, but following an  accident  was  now
    retired and no longer fit to work.  He met the appellant at a  friend's
    birthday party at the beginning of November 2012 and  the  relationship
    developed thereafter very quickly.  The  appellant  moved  in  with  Mr
    Davidson in December 2012 and the  couple  have  been  cohabiting  ever
    since.  It is their intention to  marry  once  the  appellant  has  the
    proper documentation  and  Mr  Davidson  indicated  that  he  would  be
    "totally devastated" if the appellant  were  to  be  removed  from  the
    United Kingdom as he would be unable to leave the United  Kingdom.   He
    has children in the United Kingdom from a previous relationship and has
    to keep in contact with them.

27.  Mr Davidson expanded on that matter before me.  He has three  children.



28.  The first daughter is Hannah  aged  21  years.   Mr  Davidson  and  her
    mother were together for four years, part of that time when Hannah  was
    very small.  Thereafter he left the family  home  and  Hannah's  mother
    married another.  Hannah continued to live with them  but  her  natural
    mother and new husband put  up  barriers,  as  a  result  of  which  Mr
    Davidson had not seen Hannah very much for fifteen years.

29.  Hannah has now got a job in a publishing company in Edinburgh  and  his
    contact with her was re-established some three years ago.  He sees  her
    approximately once a month.

30.  He has a son, Cousis.  He is 15 and stays in  Italy  with  his  mother.
    Mr Davidson goes to Rome about four times a year to see  him.   He  was
    separated from his son's mother about ten years ago.

31.   Mr Davidson also has a daughter, Micu, from another relationship.  She
    is 11 years and also lives in Edinburgh with her mother.  Her mother is
    a citizen of Burundi and she and Mr Davidson split up about four  years
    ago without any animosity.  He sees his daughter three to four times  a
    week.  He picks her up from school and has had a close relationship and
    contact with her throughout her life and continues  to  see  her  on  a
    regular basis.
32.  Mr Davidson himself indicated that he retired  eighteen  years  ago  at
    the age of 54.  He has a work pension.  He owns  his  own  property  in
    Edinburgh which is a two bedroomed flat which he has had for nearly  25
    years.  He maintains his flat and supports himself with his pension.

33.  He has  never  married.   He  hopes  that  his  relationship  with  the
    appellant will break the mould and he wishes to marry her.

34.  He is active within the community helping others,  particularly  in  an
    engineering project for homeless people.  He has been in a  documentary
    concerning homeless people.

35.  He has no connections with Iran and often fears that were  he  to  live
    in Iran he would be a stranger and would in any event lose contact with
    his children.

36.  Micu's mother is a British citizen and had that citizenship  before  he
    met her.  He and the  appellant  agreed  that  before  they  could  get
    married there had to be an annulment of the marriage.  He accepted that
    he and the appellant had taken no legal advice on that issue.

37.  The appellant indicated that were it not  for  her  fear  of  what  her
    husband might do in Iran she would have gone back some  time  ago.   As
    she and Mr Davidson were not legally married they would be open to  the
    accusation of adultery and suffer as a consequence.  The appellant  has
    a brother, a sister and mother living in Iran.   She  has  two  nieces.
    Her sister is an owner of a sports club and her brother runs a business
    which is an expansion of  the  family  business.   Her  family  has  no
    financial or other problems.  She stays in contact  with  them  through
    Viber and Tango which is a Facebook application.  She speaks  with  her
    mother every two days.  The relationship with her family is good.

38.  She said of her husband that he  is  a  British  citizen  but  has  two
    passports.  They met in Iran.  He came to the United Kingdom.  She  has
    been unable to obtain a divorce from him because she will need to go to
    Iran and get the divorce because the marriage is not registered in  the
    United Kingdom.  They married in 2008  according to  the  normal  civil
    procedures in Iran.  They went  to  the  Islamic  Centre.   Apart  from
    speaking to a Mullah in the local  mosque  concerning  the  matter  the
    appellant agreed that she had made no concerted effort to determine how
    to terminate her marriage with him.

39.  Miss Kerr submitted in the light of the  evidence  that  was  presented
    that there was a good arguable case for the consideration of Article  8
    outside of the Rules.  The rights of Mr Davidson are  to  be  borne  in
    mind and those of his children, particularly Micu with whom  he  had  a
    longstanding and close relationship.

40.  She submitted that there were insurmountable obstacles to  family  life
    continuing  in   Iran,   particularly   in   a   seemingly   adulterous
    relationship.
41.  Mr Mullen, who represents the respondent, invited me to find  that  the
    relationship with Mr Davidson was less than two years duration and they
    met when her status was precarious.  Although it was claimed that  they
    intended the relationship  to  be  on  a  permanent  basis  leading  to
    marriage, neither she nor Mr Davidson had to take any  practical  steps
    to determine how a divorce could be implemented.  I was asked  to  bear
    in mind the findings of Judge Wallace that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness as to her intention in coming to the  United  Kingdom,
    nor that she would face any problems or difficulties upon return.   She
    had a  loving  and  supportive  family  and  would  have  no  financial
    difficulties were she to return.  The claimed impediment to  a  divorce
    whilst living in the United Kingdom would no longer be such  a  barrier
    were she able to institute divorce proceedings in Iran.   She  had  not
    lived with her husband in the United Kingdom and clearly he had his own
    life and interests.  It was not the finding of the  Tribunal  that  she
    had cause to fear any threats or he to issue them.

42.  I was asked to find that her return to Iran was entirely  proportionate
    and that if need be  contact  with  Mr  Davidson  could  be  maintained
    through Skype and other means, and indeed by his visiting her.

43.  A starting point for Article 8 lies in the immigration history  of  the
    appellant and the  preserved  findings  in  this  case.  The  appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 31st May 2010 upon a visa in order for
    her to join her husband in the United Kingdom.  At no  stage  did  they
    live together. It was apparent to the appellant at  the  earliest  time
    that the marriage was at an end, she living with relatives  thereafter.
    At no stage did she inform the UK authorities of the change of  status.



44.  Although she claims that she would be at risk  from  her  husband  were
    she to return to Iran she did precisely that on two occasions in  2011.
    On neither of those occasions did she come to any harm.   She  returned
    to the United Kingdom for the last time on 12th August 2011  using  the
    same  visa  without  declaring  any  change  of  circumstances  to  the
    authorities.

45.  Essentially she used her time in the United Kingdom  for  the  purposes
    of study.  At no stage did she seek to change the basis of her leave to
    remain.

46.  Significantly Judge Wallace at paragraph 53 of the  determination  says
    as follows:-

     "The appellant alleges she did not realise that  to  be  on  a  spousal
         visa in the UK, she had to  be  with  her  husband.   That  is  not
         credible.  The appellant is highly intelligent; her maternal  uncle
         came from Iran and is now a British citizen.  The appellant says in
         her own statement  that  she  has  engaged  in  volunteer  work  in
         Edinburgh, including  as  Head  of  the  Persian  Society  (witness
         statement, para 62).  The appellant's family is conversant to  with
         visa requirements for the UK and the appellant has had, through the
         Iranian  community,  the  means  of   accessing   the   appropriate
         information to regularise her status."

47.  The Judge went on at paragraph 54 as follows:-
     "The appellant's spouse is in the UK.  The appellant  however  made  no
         attempt on any occasion to make complaints regarding  her  spouse's
         threats to her.  She on no occasion reported any threats to the  UK
         police.  The appellant merely states that she was  afraid  that  he
         would harass her.  This  is  not  credible  given  the  appellant's
         spouse was  apparently  threatening  to  have  her  stoned  if  she
         returned to Iran."

48.  Essentially therefore the Judge found that the  appellant's  claim  for
    asylum was not credible and that she would face no  risk  upon  return.
    The Judge concluded at paragraph 65 that the appellant appears to  have
    used the spouse visa  route  simply  to  gain  entry  into  the  United
    Kingdom.  Her lack of credibility goes to the core of the claim  so  as
    to deny it.

49.  It was not until 22nd June 2012 that the appellant had  contacted  UKBA
    in Croydon to make her claim for asylum.  She formed  her  relationship
    with Mark Davidson in November 2012 or shortly thereafter.

50.  The appellant in her substantive interview conducted on  9th  May  2013
    makes some reference to her relationship with Mr Davidson.   She  deals
    with her relationship with him in answers to questions 117 to 134.  She
    makes a financial contribution to the expenses.

51.  When asked as to the plans for the future with Mark  she  indicated  as
    follows:-

     "We were hoping to get married on  June  24th  2013,  but  we  had  two
         problems.  First I had no documents.  At night my purse was  stolen
         and my ARC.  My only ID is my student card.  The second problem  is
         I cannot get divorced in Iran because they said my mother  couldn't
         do it.  If I get documents here I can register it in Iran."

52.  She went on to say, "We had  an  Islamic  marriage  which  hasn't  been
    registered here".

53.  She went on to indicate that a reason for not  returning  to  Iran  was
    "No reason other than Mark".

54.  It is a matter of  concern  and  to  some  extent  undermining  of  the
    credibility of the relationship, that both claim that they wished to be
    married, but have taken no steps to verify what needs to be done  other
    than a conversation seemingly with the Imam at the mosque.  It  is  far
    from clear what documentation is required to facilitate such a divorce.
     The appellant has a supportive  family  in  Iran  who  are  themselves
    clearly well-educated and financially capable.  There was no indication
    that they have been requested to make  the  necessary  enquiries  of  a
    lawyer in Iran to clarify precisely what needs to  be  done  to  obtain
    such a divorce.   The  appellant  herself  had  been  in  Iran  on  two
    occasions in 2011 and  seemingly  had  done  nothing  to  further  that
    matter, although clearly by that stage it was entirely obvious that her
    marriage was at an end.
55.  Seemingly she and her husband met at the Iranian  Embassy  for  her  to
    renounce her separation  rights.   There  was  no  reason  at  all  why
    arrangements could not have been made  in  those  circumstances  for  a
    divorce to have taken place shortly thereafter.

56.  Mr Davidson has had a number of long-term relationships that have  come
    to an end.  In neither of those  was  he  married.   He  now  maintains
    however, that the situation as between himself  and  the  appellant  is
    different. I find that it is undermining of  the  credibility  of  that
    long-term relationship that nothing has been done to clarify the  issue
    of divorce.

57.  Miss Kerr seeks to persuade me that the situation of the  appellant  is
    close to criteria set out in EX.1. of Appendix FM.   It  is  said  that
    there  would  be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  Mr  Davidson  and  the
    appellant living in Iran.  I find there is little  evidence  that  that
    would be the case.  The appellant has a loving  and  supportive  family
    and were she to obtain her divorce she would be able lawfully therefore
    to marry Mr  Davidson,  thereby  avoiding  any  stigma  of  an  illicit
    relationship.

58.  I have regard to the decision of the Tribunal in Gulshan (Article  8  -
    new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).

59.  The Tribunal  considered  the  meaning  and  extent  of  insurmountable
    obstacles.  Paragraph 13 of the  judgment  gave  particular  regard  to
    paragraph 3.2.7(c) of the guidance.  There is a need  to  consider  the
    seriousness and the difficulties which the appellant and their  partner
    would face in continuing their family life outside the United  Kingdom,
    whether that would entail something that could not  (or  could  not  be
    expected to) be overcome, even with a degree of  hardship  for  one  or
    more of the individuals concerned.

60.  The Tribunal made it clear that a significant  degree  of  hardship  or
    inconvenience  does  not  amount  to  insurmountable  obstacles.    The
    decision maker is advised to look at whether there is any inability  to
    live in the country  concerned.   As  to  the  cultural  barriers,  the
    guidance explains that these might be relevant in situations where  the
    partner would be so disadvantaged that they could not  be  expected  to
    live in that country.  It must be a  barrier  which  either  cannot  be
    overcome or would present a very  high  obstacle  of  hardship  to  the
    partner, such that it amounts to an insurmountable obstacle.

61.  There has been no evidence as to any  significant   difficulties  which
    Mr Davidson would meet living in Iran.  He has his own means and  as  I
    have indicated the appellant has a caring family.

62.  In paragraph 14 the issue of exceptionality was considered.

63.  Paragraph 15 of the decision is particularly apt in  the  circumstances
    of this case, meaning as follows:-

     "The Guidance continues that  exceptional  does  not  mean  unusual  or
         unique. While all cases are to some  extent  unique,  those  unique
         factors do not generally render them exceptional.  A  case  is  not
         exceptional just because the criteria set out in EX.1  of  Appendix
         FM have been missed by a small margin.  Rather, the Guidance reads,
         exceptional 'means circumstances in which refusal would  result  in
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual or their family
         such that refusal of the application would  not  be  proportionate.
         That is likely to be the case  only  very  rarely.'  The  paragraph
         continues  that  in  determining  whether  there  are   exceptional
         circumstances,  the  decision-maker  must  consider  all   relevant
         factors, such as:

             '(a) The circumstances around the applicant's entry to the  UK
                  and the proportion of the time they have been  in  the  UK
                  legally as opposed to  illegally.   Did  they  form  their
                  relationship with their partner at a time when they had no
                  immigration status or this  was  precarious?  Family  life
                  which involves the applicant putting down roots in the  UK
                  in the full knowledge that their stay here is unlawful  or
                  precarious, should be given  less  weight,  when  balanced
                  against the factors weighing in favour  of  removal,  than
                  family life formed by a person lawfully present in the UK.




             (b)  Cumulative factors should be  considered.   For  example,
                  where the applicant has family members in the UK but their
                  family life does not provide a basis  for  stay  and  they
                  have a significant private life in the UK. Although  under
                  the Rules family life  and  private  life  are  considered
                  separately, when considering whether there are exceptional
                  circumstances private and family life can  be  taken  into
                  account.'"

64.  It is in these  circumstances  that  the  immigration  history  of  the
    appellant is very relevant, particularly when she  has  put  forward  a
    claim for asylum which has been adjudged to be without  foundation.   I
    do not find the circumstance of the appellant's case is one that  meets
    or nearly meets EX.1. of Appendix FM.

65.  Given that the appellant does not meet the Immigration Rules, she  must
    show a good arguable case and other factors which are compelling,  such
    as to give rise to the consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.

66.  As the Tribunal in Gulshan made clear Article 8 must be viewed  in  the
    context of the Immigration Rules and is no longer to be approached on a
    freewheeling basis.  If there were arguably good grounds  for  granting
    leave to remain outside  the  Rules  is  it  necessary  for  Article  8
    purposes  to  go  on  and  consider  whether  there   were   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules.

67.  In this particular case I do not find that such circumstances arise.
     I recognise in fairness to Mr Davidson that under the  Article  8  test
    rather than the Immigration Rule test it may be unreasonable to  expect
    him to relocate to Iran to be with the appellant.  He has close contact
    with one daughter and some contact with his adult daughter.   There  is
    no evidence concerning the emotional dependency  which  Micu  may  have
    upon the father but clearly it is to be recognised that it  is  in  the
    interests of that daughter that such contact be maintained.

68.  That having been said, however, I have to focus upon the nature of  the
    relationship as between Mr Davidson  and  the  appellant  and  consider
    whether the removal of the appellant would have such harsh consequences
    upon the quality of that relationship that it should  not  be  embarked
    upon.

70.  As I have indicated, I do not find that  the  relationship  is  of  the
    depths and quality which is claimed.  In that connection I bear in mind
    the lack of credibility of the appellant's claim and of the  fact  that
    she  embarked  upon  a  relationship  in  the  full  knowledge  of  her
    precarious immigration history.  She has repeatedly  sought  to  attain
    her residence in the United Kingdom notwithstanding  the  inappropriate
    visa which she possesses and took  no  opportunity  when  presented  to
    regularise  her  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom.    I   am   far   from
    persuaded,having heard the appellant  and  having  considered  all  the
    evidence that she presented, including her remarks  in  the  interview,
    that she is not otherwise using Mr Davidson for her own purposes.   The
    lack of application in  seeking  clarification  as  to  the  steps  for
    divorce  is,  as  I  have  already  indicated,  a  significant   factor
    undermining the claimed relationship.

71.    Given   the   appellant's   immigration   history   I   see   nothing
    disproportionate in her removal to Iran.  There she can no doubt obtain
    her divorce.  Such would further open the possibility  of  Mr  Davidson
    joining her or for her to make any further application  upon  a  proper
    footing.

72.  In all the circumstances therefore I do not find that  the  appellant's
    removal from the United Kingdom would be in breach of  her  fundamental
    human rights. I do not find that she  has  a  good  arguable  case  for
    consideration outside  of  the  Rules  or  that  there  are  compelling
    circumstances to enable that to be done.  The findings of the judge  in
    relation to her asylum claim remain.

73.  In the circumstances therefore the appellant's  appeal  in  respect  of
    asylum remains dismissed.  Her appeal in respect of human rights and in
    particular Article 8 is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
