
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/09709/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decisions & Reasons                  |
|On May 6, 2016                       |On May 18, 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              MR BISRAT ASFAHA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain (Legal Representation)
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, citizen of Eritrea,  was  born  on  July  28,  1946.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on June 17, 2014 and  claimed  asylum  on
    June 21, 2014. The respondent refused his application  on  October  21,
    2014 under paragraphs 336 HC 395 and at the same time  a  decision  was
    taken to remove him as an illegal entrant by way  of  directions  under
    paragraphs 8-10 of schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision on November 17, 2014 under section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3.  The  appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Holt
    (hereinafter referred to as "the Judge") on February 3,  2015  and  she
    dismissed his appeal on  all  grounds  in  a  decision  promulgated  on
    February 17, 2015.

 4. The appellant appealed on March 6, 2015 arguing the Judge had erred  by
    failing to have regard to all of the evidence or give adequate  reasons
    for her decision.  Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Shimmin on March 16, 2015  who  found  it  arguable
    firstly, the Judge failed to consider  the  evidence  and  explanations
    advanced by the appellant and secondly, the Judge  failed  to  consider
    and give adequate reasons in respect of the expert's report.

 5. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 6. Mr Harrison  confirmed  it  was  the  respondent's  position  that  the
    appellant was  not  a  draft  evader  and  had  not  left  the  country
    illegally.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Hussain adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted  the  Judge  had
    erred by failing to consider material evidence.  The  Judge  had  found
    that inconsistencies  in  his  recollection  about  journey  times  was
    material but failed to take into account  his  lack  of  education  and
    employment opportunities and the expert evidence  which  concluded  the
    appellant was illiterate. In paragraph [20] of his decision  the  Judge
    made a number of findings about what the appellant claimed he had  done
    in Eritrea but the Judge failed to have regard to his whole account and
    to what he was actually saying. As regards risk on  return  the  expert
    report made clear that it was plausible that persons over the age of 55
    could still be required to undertake military service especially  at  a
    time when there was border between  Eritrea  and  its  neighbours.  The
    appellant was therefore at risk of further conscription and having left
    the country illegally would face persecution  upon  return.  The  Judge
    failed to take into account the evidence on these issues and  erred  in
    law.

 8. Mr Harrison relied on the Rule 24 response and  submitted  this  was  a
    "tightly considered" decision. The expert report had been submitted  on
    the morning of the hearing but the  Judge  considered  the  report  but
    rejected some of the conclusions and  gave  reasons  for  her  decision
    which were open to her. The expert report refers to "conscription"  but
    that was different to someone who had completed  his  national  service
    requirement. It lacked credibility to suggest he was  never  called  up
    until he was over the age of fifty. As regards inconsistencies  in  his
    evidence about when he was called up Mr Harrison submitted  these  were
    important and asked that notice be taken of the appellant's answers  to
    questions 24 and 26 when he confirmed it was 1997 and not  1999  as  he
    later claimed.

 9. Having heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  I  reserved  my
    decision.







    DISCUSSION AND FINDING ON ERROR IN LAW

10. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom when he was  almost  sixty-
    nine years of age. The Judge found the account he had given contained a
    number of  inconsistencies  and  then  having  considered  the  country
    evidence concluded the appellant would not be at risk, if  returned  to
    Eritrea.

11. In considering risk on return the Judge had regard to the  decision  of
    MO (illegal exit-risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT  00190  and  to
    the fact that the Eritrean authorities continue to envisage lawful exit
    as being possible for those who are above national service age.

12. The Judge found the appellant's claim to lack credibility after hearing
    submissions from both parties  and  after  considering  "each  item  of
    evidence" and having reviewed the evidence as a totality.  It  was  the
    Judge's approach to credibility that Mr. Hussain submitted was flawed.

13. The Judge set out the appellant's  immigration  history  in  paragraphs
    [11] and [12] of her decision. At paragraph [17] of  her  decision  the
    Judge found this account to be "very confused and confusing." She found
    his accounts were "significantly different in terms of  the  timing  of
    different parts of his journey" and that these discrepancies undermined
    his credibility generally.

14. The account he gave in his  screening  interview  (as  amended  by  the
    solicitor's letter dated July 1, 2014) differed to the account given in
    his interview and witness statement. However, after  allowing  for  the
    amendment in the solicitor's letter  it  seems  to  me  that  the  only
    significant difference between  the  accounts  was  the  date  he  left
    Eritrea which he claimed  in  his  screening  interview  was  April  15
    whereas in his substantive interview and statement he claimed was April
    8. All other timings of how long he stayed in a particular  place  were
    the same.

15. Bearing in mind his screening interview was conducted in custody a  few
    days after his arrival and the weight that should be attached  to  such
    interviews (see YL (2004) UKIAT 00145)) I find too much weight may have
    been attached to the discrepancy arising from his screening interview.

16. I do not think the Judge's approach to this matter would, on  its  own,
    amount to an error in law because it is not a core issue of his  actual
    asylum  claim.   The  core  issues  were  firstly,  he   was   forcibly
    conscripted into the army in either 1997 or 1999 and secondly, that  he
    would he be viewed as having left Eritrea illegally.

17.  In  his  substantive  interview  he  was  asked  questions  about  his
    involvement with the armed forces and he answered as follows:
         Q24 "So what year did you join the army" he replied, "July 1997"  (
         51 years of age).
         Q26 he was then asked, "Have you completed  your  military  service
         before July 1997" and he replied, "Not before that."
         Q27 he explained why he had not been called up namely, "my  parents
         were deceased, I was helping to bring up my  family."  This  answer
         was reiterated at Q34.
         Q28 He was then asked when he was actually called up and he  stated
         "in 1999 I was rounded up and taken away".
         Q37 He stated he did not have a demobilisation card because he  was
         "still with the army."
         Q62. He was asked "was his job as a soldier the same from  1997  to
         2014" and he replied, "from 1999 to 2014 the same."
         Q123 He was asked whether he attempted to be exempt  from  military
         service and he replied, "yes I requested but not accepted. Now even
         people who are 65/70 years old are in the army". He further  stated
         at Q126 and Q127 that he asked to be released to be discharged  but
         nobody was listening to his request and that he did every year  and
         at Q168 to 173 he explained how he sought to be demobilised.
         Q174 He explained that he left illegally because he  had  not  been
         demobilised.
         Q176 He stated that July 1997 was a "slip of the mouth" and that it
         was "July 1999".
         Q177 He was  challenged  over  his  reason  for  avoiding  national
         service to 1997/1999 and it was put to him  that  looking  after  a
         family would not exempt him. He then stated, "Because  I  was  just
         avoiding it until I was round up at last  I  was  avoiding  it  and
         working with some people who offered me jobs."

18. The Judge considered his account at paragraph [20] of her decision  and
    in particular at sub-sections (i) and (iii) of her decision. Mr Hussain
    submitted the Judge did not have regard to  the  expert  report  of  Mr
    Campbell or the country evidence when assessing his claim.

19. The respondent's case was that it was not credible that  the  appellant
    would not remember when he was called up and the fact he gave two dates
    namely  1997  and  1999  undermined  his  claim.  The  respondent  also
    questioned whether the appellant would have  been  called  up  when  he
    claimed he was as it was contrary to what was contained in the  country
    evidence.

20. Mr Hussain submitted that the Judge paid no  regard  to  Dr  Campbell's
    report but it is clear from the Judge's decision that she was aware  of
    the report but preferred  other  evidence  that  was  before  her.  She
    specifically drew a distinction between what  Dr  Campbell  stated  and
    what was known about the age of a call up. It was this  point  that  Mr
    Harrison relied on when inviting me to find no error.

21. Dr Campbell had been asked to consider whether the appellant's claim to
    have been forcibly conscripted in 1999 (at the age  of  53)  conflicted
    with  objective  evidence.  He  confirmed   that   (1)   the   Eritrean
    Proclamation  on  National  Service  no.82/1995  announced   compulsory
    conscription of all adults between 18 and 50 and  (2)  the  12  months'
    national service component was extended indefinitely in 2002. The  fact
    he was not conscripted between 1994 and 1999, when  the  appellant  was
    aged between 48 and 53 years of age, reflected the effectiveness of the
    authorities in his area of residence. A person would not be exempted to
    look after dependent children or family. He referred  to  reports  that
    people above 50 were conscripted and he referred  to  a  2012  Canadian
    Report and a 2009 Human Rights Watch report. A 2012 US State Department
    report indicated the criteria for demobilisation were unclear.

22. Mr Hussain's submission  is  that  the  Judge  ignored  this  evidence.
    However,  the  Judge's  decision  makes  clear  that  she  found   that
    regardless of whether it was 1997 or 1999, when he was first called up,
    the appellant would have  been  above  the  maximum  age  for  national
    service call up. The Judge had evidence confirming the maximum  age  as
    50 (Operational Guidance Note 3.12.2 and 3.12.3) and she preferred that
    evidence to Dr Campbell's report and that was something that  was  open
    to her. The decision of MO made clear that the appellant's  explanation
    for not being called up was not an  acceptable  reason  and  the  Judge
    effectively did not find the appellant's claim credible.

23. Mr Hussain's submission was that the judge did not have  regard  to  Dr
    Campbell's report but I am satisfied that  she  was  aware  of  it  and
    rejected it.

24. Mr Hussain submitted the Judge  erred  in  paragraph  [20(ii)]  of  her
    decision. In his interview he was asked how long  he  worked  at  Dekem
    Hare and at Q86 he  confirmed  he  worked  there  between  October  and
    December 2012. At Q103 he referred to speaking at a meeting on April 5,
    2013 and in his statement at paragraph [8] he explained he was returned
    back to Dekem Hare in March 2013 from where he was based.  The  Judge's
    finding that this discrepancy was never satisfactory explained  to  her
    does not appear to be supported by the evidence as his explanation  was
    given in his statement. The Judge did not have regard to this  but  the
    issue for me ultimately was whether this amounted to an error.  I  will
    address this later.

25. The final error alleged in regard to  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
    evidence related to her finding that  the  appellant  would  have  been
    arrested earlier if he had been complaining for twelve years. The Judge
    considered Dr Campbell's report on this issue (paragraph  [34]  of  the
    report) but rejected his view and I am satisfied the Judge was entitled
    to reach that conclusion. Dr Campbell's report does not shed  any  real
    light why his account may be credible as he merely stated "it  accorded
    with objective evidence and  his  own  research"  but  he  provided  no
    evidence of this.

26. In summary, I find the Judge placed too much weight on whether  he  was
    first called up in 1997 or 1999 but I do not find that this  materially
    affected the outcome  of  this  decision  because  at  either  age  the
    appellant was over the maximum age of 50 and the Judge simply  did  not
    accept he was called up at either age as it was over the age for  being
    called up for national service.

27. I found that the Judge did not consider  the  evidence  of  Dekem  Hare
    correctly but having rejected his claim  that  he  was  called  up,  as
    alleged, the Judge's error on this issue is not  material  because  she
    rejected his claim of having been called up in 2013 in any event.

28. The appellant claimed he left illegally but as a person over draft  age
    and having made adverse findings the judge was entitled not  to  reject
    his claim of having left illegally and as a 69-year-old male he clearly
    would not be considered suitable for national service upon return now.

29. Accordingly, I do not find the Judge materially  erred  in  her  and  I
    reject the appellant's application.

    DECISION

30. There was no material error. I uphold the original decision.


Signed:                                 Dated: 15 May 2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award as I upheld the decision.


Signed:                                 Dated: 15 May 2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
