

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: aa/09420/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 23 December 2016                           |On 11 January 2017           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                           MR SHORSH RAHIM RAHMAN

                       (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Petterson  (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Choudhry    (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I shall, throughout this determination, refer to the appellant  before
the Upper Tribunal as the  Secretary  of  State.   I  shall  refer  to  the
respondent  before  the  Upper Tribunal  as  the  claimant.   This  is  the
Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with permission,
from a  decision  of  the  First-tier Tribunal  (Judge Robson  hereinafter
"the Judge") allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
State's decision of 10 June 2015,  refusing  to  grant  him  international
protection.

2.    The claimant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.  He  is  from
Mosul in Iraq.  He was born on 6 November 1998.   He  entered  the  UK  on
22 November 2014 and  it  is  recorded  that  he  applied  for  asylum  on
3 December 2014.  In so doing he claimed that Mosul had fallen  under  the
influence of an organisation I shall refer  to  as  "ISIS"  although  it  is
known by other names  including  "Daesh".   He  says  that  ISIS  sought  to
forcibly recruit him and some of his friends and that  two  of  his  friends
were killed for refusing to join.  Fearful for his life he  fled.   He  also
argued that he would be unable  to  live  in  parts  of  Iraq  predominantly
populated by Kurds because of  his  father's  claimed  previous  involvement
with the Ba'ath Party.

3.    The Secretary of State accepted a good deal of what the  claimant  had
had to say.  However, it was  thought  that  he  would  be  able  to  safely
relocate outside of Mosul (its being accepted  that  he  would  be  at  risk
there for the reasons he had claimed) because the risk  of  harm  to  former
Ba'athists (and hence I suppose to the family members of such  persons)  was
to be regarded as minimal and because, in any event, he  would  be  able  to
relocate to Baghdad.  So, the application for asylum failed.

4.    On appeal, the Judge accepted that the appellant would be at risk  in
his home area and also found that he would not be able to take advantage  of
an internal flight alternative.   In  explaining  the  latter  part  of  his
conclusion the Judge said this:

         "52.     The question is then whether or not  the  appellant  could
         relocate safely.

         53.      I accept the evidence that the decision for the  appellant
         to leave Iraq was that of his father.

         54.       The  appellant  was  asked  at  some  length  in   cross-
         examination about which document he had held,  ever,  an  issue  of
         considerable importance in the light of the country guidance  cases
         of AA.

         55.      The only document that the appellant said he had ever  had
         was his birth certificate which was now in Iraq with his family.

         56.      The appellant was particularly asked whether or not he had
         held a CSID which he denied initially.  After it was  explained  to
         him what that document would do, for  example  enabling  access  to
         services, education and the like, he again reconfirmed that he  had
         never held such a document and my view is that he genuinely  seemed
         never to have had the same.  I also accept the submission that  was
         made by Mr Hussain [his then representative], namely that  as  the
         appellant was a minor, such need for services as there  would  have
         been dealt with under the authority of his parents rather  than  on
         the evidence of the appellant himself.

         57.      In relation to Mosul, this is an area where there is still
         indiscriminate violence and that the area  is  still  disputed  and
         there is a significance presence of Daesh.

         58.      I have considered whether or not it is  feasible  for  the
         appellant to return and in particular to Baghdad and in that regard
         I note the evidence of the appellant which I accept that he himself
         is not in possession of his birth certificate,  has  never  held  a
         passport or a CSID.

         59.      There is no evidence before me that the appellant will  be
         able to obtain a CSID were he to be  returned  given  the  lack  of
         communication with his family.

         60.      I  have  noted  in  AA  (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG [2015]
         paragraph 13 which addresses the question of the ability to obtain
         a CSID which it says is likely  to  be  severely  hampered  if  the
         appellant is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of his
         Governorate because it is an area where Article 15(c) serious harm
         is occurring.  As a result of the violence, alternative CSA Offices
         from Monsul Anbar and Saluhaddin have been established  in  Baghdad
         and Kerbala but there was no evidence before me that the  appellant
         could, through his family or otherwise, obtain a  CSID,  given  his
         lack of communication with the family.

         61.       I  have  noted  the  respondent's   acceptance   of   the
         appellant's claim that Daesh attempted  to  recruit  and  brainwash
         young men of age between 16 and 25 and that because  he  chose  to
         flee he would be persecuted on  return  because  of  his  political
         opinion.

         62.      I do not accept the claim that his father had  worked  for
         the Ba'ath Party but even if he had, there was no evidence that he
         had suffered persecution particularly,  as  the  respondent  points
         out, he was able to work and maintain his  family  certainly  until
         the time that the appellant left Iraq.

         63.      However in view of what I have said above I find  that  as
         is said at paragraph 107 of AA (Article 15)(c) Iraq CG [2015]:

             'An Iraqi national's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to  be
             severely hampered if they are unable to go to the Civil Status
             Affairs Office of the Home Governorate because this is an area
             where Article 15(c) (Serious Harm) is occurring.  The evidence
             does not demonstrate that the 'central archive'  which  exists
             in Baghdad is in practice able to provide CSID's to  those  in
             need of them.  There is, however, a National Status  Court  in
             Baghdad to which a person could apply for  formal  recognition
             of identity.  The precise operation of this court is, however,
             unclear.'"

5.    The Judge then went on to indicate he was allowing the appeal.  It is
also pertinent to point out, at this stage, that he had appeared to  accept,
prior to addressing relocation, that he was no  longer  in  touch  with  his
family in Iraq.

6.    The Secretary of State applied for and obtained permission  to  appeal
to the Upper Tribunal.  The first ground, as I understand it,  was  to  the
effect that the Judge had erred in considering the  risk  of  harm  arising
from the absence of  Iraqi  identification  documentation  in  circumstances
where return to Iraq was not feasible in any  event.   Reliance  was  placed
upon what had been said in the case of AA.  The second  ground  was  to  the
effect that the consideration of internal flight had not  been  sufficiently
holistic.   Again,  reference  was  made  to  AA.   An  unlimited  grant  of
permission followed.

7.    At the hearing before me Mrs Petterson did not seek to  take  matters
concerning the first ground any further.  She relied  principally  upon  the
second ground on the basis that there had been no  proper  consideration  of
internal flight to the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) and that the  question  of
internal flight to Baghdad had been dealt with on too narrow  a  basis,  its
being  focused  almost   exclusively   upon   the   question   of   identity
documentation. Ms Choudhry argued that the consideration of internal flight
had been sufficiently sound.

8.    I decided to set aside the Judge's decision insofar as it related  to
internal flight though I preserved everything else  which  he  had  decided.
As to internal flight, though, it seemed to me that  the Judge  had  simply
failed to consider at all the possibility of  relocation  to  the  IKR  (its
having been raised in the reasons  for  refusal  letter  and  its  therefore
being a live issue before him)  and  had  also,  with  respect  to  internal
relocation to  Baghdad,  failed  to  bear  in  mind  the  list  of  relevant
considerations regarding that city as set out  in  AA,  instead  seeming  to
conclude that the claimant's inability to obtain  a  CSID  was,  of  itself,
determinative.

9.    Since directions permitted it, and  since  both  representatives  were
agreeable, I then went on to hear evidence and submissions relevant  to  the
remaking of the decision.  That  was,  in  light  of  the  above,  concerned
exclusively with internal flight.

10.   The claimant told  me,  in  oral  evidence,  that  he  had  been  aged
16 years at the time he had fled Iraq.  He had gone to school but  had  not
worked in Iraq.  He speaks Kurdish Sorani but is not able to  speak  Arabic.
He has no family in Baghdad.  He had last been in touch with his  family  in
Iraq in November 2015.  The telephone rings when he tries to get  in  touch
but nobody answers it.  His father has some family in the IKR but he has  no
contact with them.  That is because of his father's previous  links  to  the
Ba'ath Party.  He has a sister in the UK with whom he lives.   She  has  not
been able to contact the family in Iraq either.  He would  not  be  able  to
travel from Baghdad to the IKR.  He has no documentation and no-one to  help
him.

11.   In submissions, Mrs Petterson argued that the claimant would be  able
to obtain some employment in Baghdad.  He has been doing  some  studying  in
the UK and that would benefit him.  As  a  young  adult  he  would  have  no
problems in Baghdad.  He may have family in the IKR who  would  assist  him.
Further, his sister and her family would be able to send him money  to  help
him in resettling himself in Iraq.  Ms Chaudhry,  submitted  that  internal
flight to Baghdad would not be available given that the  claimant  is  of  a
minority ethnic group, is not  able  to  speak  Arabic  and  would  have  no
support.  As to the IKR the same sorts of difficulties would arise.  He  had
been frank about disclosing the fact that his father has some  relatives  in
the IKR and what he says about there being no contact with them should  also
be accepted.  The claimant would require clearance  to  enter  the  IKR  and
would only be given entry for a limited period.  It is unlikely he would  be
able to secure employment.  He would lack any support network.  Further,  it
would be unsafe for him to seek to make his way  from  Baghdad  (the  likely
point of return) to the IKR.

12.   As to the question of internal flight to Baghdad, it was stated in  AA
that relevant factors were likely to be whether a claimant  has  a  CSID  or
will be able to obtain one, whether such a claimant  he  can  speak  Arabic,
whether such a claimant has family members or friends  in  Baghdad  able  to
accommodate him/her, whether the claimant is  a  lone  female,  whether  the
claimant will be able to find a sponsor to access a hotel room  or  to  rent
accommodation, whether  the  claimant  is  from  a  minority  community  and
whether there is support available for the claimant  bearing  in  mind  that
some failed asylum seekers are provided with the support generally given  to
internally displaced persons.  As to those, it  was  not  argued  before  me
that the Judge had been wrong  in  deciding  that  the  claimant  would  be
unlikely to obtain a CSID.  I accept, and this was not disputed, that he  is
not able to speak Arabic.  I accept the evidence (and in any event this  was
a preserved finding) that he has not been in touch with his  family  members
for some time.  I also accept that  he  does  not  have  family  members  or
friends in Baghdad since his contention  in  that  regard  appears  entirely
feasible there being no evidence  that  he  has  ever  been  there.   He  is
Kurdish and so, therefore, from a minority community at least  with  respect
to the region in and around Baghdad.  There is no  clear  evidence  that  he
would receive  assistance  such  as  might  be  received  by  an  internally
displaced person.  There is no clear  evidence  that  his  UK  based  family
members will be  able  to  afford  him  financial  support.   In  fact,  the
evidence as to that was that the family now appeared to  be  in  receipt  of
benefits given that his sister's husband does not  have  a  job.   The  CSID
issue is, of course, of particular importance given  that,  without  such  a
document, the  claimant  will  have  difficulty  in  accessing  a  range  of
facilities.  Putting all of that together, and bearing  in  mind  his  young
age, I would conclude that it would be unduly harsh to require the  claimant
to relocate to Baghdad.

13.   I now turn to the question of relocation to the IKR.  As to  that,  it
was stated in AA that a Kurdish person who does not originate from  the  IKR
(and this claimant does not) is able to  obtain  entry  for  10 days  as  a
visitor and then renew that entry permission for a further 10 days.  It was
said that if a claimant, having done that,  finds  employment,  then  he  is
able to remain for longer though there will be a need to register  with  the
authorities and provide details of employment.   It  was  also  stated  that
there was no evidence that the IKR  authorities  pro-actively  remove  Kurds
from the IKR whose permits have come to an end.  It was  further  said  that
the IKR is virtually free of violence.  It is necessary to undertake a  fact
sensitive  consideration  with  respect  to  internal  flight  against  that
background.

14.   The claimant does not appear to  have  any  health  problems.   He  is
Kurdish and is able to speak Kurdish Sorani  which  is,  of  course,  widely
spoken within the IKR.  Those are matters which will weigh  in  his  favour.
Against that, however, I would accept his evidence that although his  father
has some relatives in the IKR, specifically he said  in  Suleymania,  he  is
not in touch with them.  His oral evidence before me, as to that, was  clear
and straightforward.  Further, as Ms Choudhry points out, had he wished  to
mislead me about the point he could have just as easily  denied  having  any
relatives in the IKR at all but he chose not to do that.   The  evidence  is
to the effect that he has no particular qualifications  which  would  be  of
use to him in obtaining employment and, further, he  has  no  experience  of
being employed in Iraq.  He would be going to an area of the country  he  is
not familiar with, notwithstanding his ethnicity, and would be  without  any
form of family support or assistance.  Given all of  that,  even  if  he  is
able to undertake the journey from Baghdad to  the  IKR  I  would  conclude,
although this might be finally balanced, that it would be  unduly  harsh  to
expect him to relocate there.

15.   In light of the above, therefore, although  I  have  set  the Judge's
decision aside, in  remaking  the  decision  I  have  arrived  at  the  same
outcome.  The claimant succeeds because, having demonstrated that he  is  at
risk in his home area and that it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  him  to
take advantage of an internal flight alternative in  any  of  the  locations
relied upon by the Secretary  of  State,  he  has  shown  himself  to  be  a
refugee.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  In  remaking  the
decision  I  allow  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of  State  of  10 June 2015  to  refuse  to  grant  him  asylum.
Accordingly, the claimant's appeal succeeds on asylum grounds.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.   None  was  previously  made  and  none  was
sought.


Signed:     Date:

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:     Date:

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

