
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09357/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 29 May 2015                        |                   On 24 June 2015    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                     S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisiri, Counsel, instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Sri  Lanka,  date  of  birth  23  December
    1989, appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 5 November 2014,
    to make removal directions under section  10  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999.

2.   An appeal against that decision came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    A W Khan who, on 19 February 2015,  dismissed  the  appeal  on  Refugee
    Convention, humanitarian protection and Article 3 ECHR grounds.

3.   Permission to appeal that decision was  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R A Cox on 13 March 2015.

4.   The first ground of challenge  is  that  the  judge  did  not  properly
    approach the assessment of injuries to the  Appellant  looking  at  the
    evidence as a whole and assessing it on the basis of  the  claims  that
    had been made.  Rather, it is said, the judge gave a number of  adverse
    findings against the credibility of the Appellant's claim and then used
    those to simply reject the medical evidence  or  to  fail  to  properly
    assess the medical evidence which it is said tended to  show  that  the
    injuries caused to the  Appellant  were  likely  to  have  arisen  from
    proscribed ill-treatment or torture.  There are then a number  of  sub-
    points of criticism as to whether the judge had properly  assessed  the
    risks to the Appellant on return.

5.   The Respondent relied upon two cases  to  assist  in  relation  to  the
    assessment of the medical evidence.  First, the  case  of  HH  (Medical
    evidence; effect of Mbanga) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 164 and KV  (Scarring
    - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT  230  (IAC).   There  can  be
    little doubt that for a range of reasons given the credibility  of  the
    Appellant was rejected in terms of the basis he claimed  to  have  been
    of adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.

6.    The  judge,  as  a  matter  of  form,  laid  out   his   determination
    sequentially and set out on the journey to decide that the  Appellant's
    claim to have been a victim of persecution was not  sustainable.   From
    that it is said he therefore  could  reject  the  medical  evidence  of
    physical injuries sustained by the Appellant.

7.   Mr Avery argued that read as a whole the decision of the judge did  not
    misconsider the  claims  and  the  medical  evidence  relating  to  the
    scarring, and that on a fair reading of the decision it was plain  that
    the judge did have in mind the evidence in the round.   Mr  Avery  then
    argued that the judge was entitled to raise concerns about  the  format
    of the report of Mr Martin, a  consultant  in  accident  and  emergency
    medicine with a specialist interest in victims of  torture,  and  to  a
    degree. It is of note that in the declaration Mr Martin set out that he
    has followed the recommendations considered by the Tribunal in KV.

8.   I do not descend into the minutiae of his decision  but  it  is  plain,
    albeit he may not have intended to give this indication, that  what  he
    has recorded as the history received from the Appellant of  the  events
    is restricted to those aspects which he, Mr Martin, considered relevant
    to the physical findings.  The Appellant claimed to have said to  a  Dr
    Salleh Dhumad, a consultant psychiatrist, in November 2014 that he  had
    been subjected to cigarette burns. Yet it is said Mr Martin was  unable
    to see any evidence  of  cigarette  burns  and  therefore  he  made  no
    reference to either the fact  of  any  claim  of  cigarette  burns  but
    perhaps more importantly, he could  not  see  any  signs  of  those  as
    claimed.

9.   The judge took the point which I do not think  is  open  to  criticism,
    that there was no reference to  cigarette  burns  and  the  absence  of
    cigarette burns or any evidence of their presence given the time  scale
    in which they and other injuries were said  to  have  occurred,  was  a
    matter that at least deserved comment and  some  consideration  in  the
    overall claim of ill-treatment sustained.

10.  A different criticism is raised that in the report of Mr Martin he  did
    look at four other groups or types of scarring relied upon of which  he
    concluded groups 1 and 3 were potentially caused by some  thinner  form
    of blunt instrument being used against the Appellant and groups 2 and 4
    being related to a heavier form of rod  or  instrument  being  used  to
    cause those scars.

11.  What was said by the judge was that the causes  of  the  scarring  have
    not been properly  assessed  and  weighed,  at  lease  in  relation  to
    alternatives, by Mr Martin.

12.  Accordingly, Mr Avery submitted, the outcome of  any  failures  by  the
    judge in this respect made no material difference because they  do  not
    show that had they been differently assessed it was likely to lead to a
    different outcome.

13.  Having considered the submissions made, it seems to me, even  if  there
    is perhaps some criticism of the judge's use of  English,  nevertheless
    he was entitled  to  reach  the  view  he  did  having  considered  the
    evidence, heard the Appellant and considered the extensive material put
    before  him.   The  decision  of  the  judge  satisfactorily  set   out
    sufficient and adequate reasons. I did not find  what  ever  criticisms
    there may be of some of the use of English that  it  demonstrated  that
    there was any material error of law in the judge's conclusion that  the
    Appellant had not been the victim of torture and was  not  in  need  of
    protection against the authorities in Sri Lanka.

14.  I do not speculate in reaching that view, nor it seems to  me  did  the
    judge speculate, on what other cause might there be  for  the  injuries
    sustained but it seemed to me that the judge did look at  the  evidence
    in the round and was satisfied for reasons given why  he  rejected  the
    credibility of the Appellant's claim. I might not agree with the  judge
    but that does not matter. What matters is whether or not the judge  has
    made any material error of law.

15.  For these reasons I am satisfied the Original Tribunal  made  no  error
    of law. The decision stands.
Anonymity order
An anonymity order was made and in the circumstances it seems that ought  to
be continued.
NOTICE OF DECISION
The appeal is dismissed.
I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 1 June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
