



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09563/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28th July 2016                          |On 8th August 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                    Ameen Ali Mejbel Al Azzawi Al-Azzawi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Sultani of Brar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Duff  made
    following a hearing at North Shields on 12th April 2016.





Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 15th October 1990.  He is  a
    Sunni Muslim and his family come from Mosul.  He first arrived  in  the
    UK on 25th July 2013 as a student.  He was granted an extension of  his
    visa until 30th January 2015.  He claimed asylum on 22nd January  2015.



 3. The family fled Mosul when I.S took control there and managed to obtain
    work in Baghdad.  On 22nd October 2015 his  father  was  kidnapped  and
    killed by members of a Shia militia.  At the time of the hearing before
    the judge the appellant's remaining family  were  living  in  the  same
    accommodation as before, although I am told that none  of  them  remain
    there now.  The appellant's mother is a teacher and his  brother  is  a
    doctor.  His younger brother and sister attend school.

 4. The judge found the appellant to be an entirely credible  witness.   He
    did however conclude that he could safely  return  to  Baghdad  in  the
    light of the country guidance case of AA (Article  15c)  Iraq  CG  UKUT
    00544.  On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 5. In very lengthy grounds the appellant challenged the  judge's  decision
    in relation to relocation to  Baghdad.   In  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter the respondent had accepted that he could not  return  to  Mosul
    and considered return to the KRG only.  The  judge  recorded  that  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer resiled from the position set out in the
    reasons for refusal letter, since the  latest  CG  case  law  expressly
    states that relocation to Kurdistan  was  not  possible.   The  grounds
    argue both that the  judge's  conclusions  in  relation  to  return  to
    Baghdad are not adequately reasoned and that the  judge  had  erred  in
    seeking to go behind a concession in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    contrary to the principles set out in the case of Carcabuk  and  Bla  v
    SSHD 00/TH/01426 in which the Tribunal held  that  an  Adjudicator  was
    bound by a concession by a Home Office Presenting Officer.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Ransley  for  the  reasons
    stated in the grounds on 4th May 2016.

 7.  On  20th  May  2016  the  respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Findings and Conclusions

 8. Although Ms Sultani sought to maintain the arguments put forward in her
    grounds and submitted that the judge had not properly got to grips with
    the situation of the family in Baghdad, she could  not  properly  claim
    that the appellant had in any way been  prejudiced  by  the  Presenting
    Officer's  submission  that  return  to  Baghdad  was   feasible.    No
    application for an adjournment was made by the legal representative  at
    the hearing.  There was  no  concession  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter, that the appellant would be returned solely  to  the  KRG,  and
    certainly not that the  appellant  could  not  be  safely  returned  to
    Baghdad.  Whilst it is right that the reasons for  refusal  letter  did
    consider a return to the KRG, the respondent was entitled  to  consider
    an alternative place of relocation in the light of the promulgation  of
    AA which postdated the reasons for refusal letter.

 9. The remaining grounds seek to reargue  the  appellant's  case  that  he
    would be at risk on return in Baghdad, but at the date of  the  hearing
    it cannot be said that the judge erred in his  conclusions  which  were
    entirely in line with the country guidance.

10. In fact the situation there  has  changed  yet  again,  and  since  the
    determination  was  promulgated,  there  have  been  more   atrocities.
    Furthermore the appellant has been found to be entirely credible and it
    appears that his family are no longer in Iraq and would  not  be  in  a
    position to offer him support on return.

11. However that was not  information  before  the  Immigration  Judge  and
    should properly be put to the Secretary of State in the form of a fresh
    application.

Notice of Decision

The original judge did  not  err  in  law  and  his  decision  stands.   The
appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 7 August 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
