
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09351/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 19 August 2016                    |On 25 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                            MANSOOR ABDULLAH SIED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Dewar (counsel) instructed by Peter G Farrell,
solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.     I have considered whether any parties require the protection  of
    an anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

    2.     This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge D'Ambrosio promulgated on 27 November  2015,  which
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

    Background

    3.     The Appellant was born on 12 October 1979 and is a  national  of
    Ethiopia. The appellant entered the UK in October 2007.  On  3  October
    2007 the appellant claimed asylum. On 25 February 2008  the  respondent
    refused that application. The appellant appealed against that  refusal,
    and his appeal was dismissed on 7 April 2008. His rights of appeal were
    exhausted on 4 December 2008.

    4.     The appellant left the UK for the Republic of Ireland  in  2010.
    Whilst there he claimed asylum, but the Irish  Immigration  authorities
    declined  to  deal  with  his  application,  relying  on   the   Dublin
    convention. The appellant returned to the UK in 2011. On 22  June  2011
    the appellant submitted a further asylum claim, which he withdrew on  4
    August 2011. Between 29 August 2011 and 24 September 2013 he  presented
    a sequence of further submissions to the respondent.

    5.     On 10 March 2013 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's
    renewed application for asylum.

    The Judge's Decision

    6.     The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D'Ambrosio ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision.

    7.     Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  20  January  2016  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rintoul gave permission to appeal stating

         "I am, just, persuaded that the reasons  given  by  the  First-tier
         Judge D'Ambrosio for rejecting documents served late, are  arguably
         defective in failing to address why so to do was in  the  interests
         of justice. While what is said at 2.2 is not supported by a  proper
         reading of what was said at paragraph 85, there  is  merit  in  the
         grounds are [2.3] and [2.4].

         Permission is granted on all grounds."

    The Hearing

    8.     (a) Mr Dewar, counsel for the appellant  moved  the  grounds  of
    appeal. He told me that there are four grounds of appeal. The first  is
    an arguable failure of the First tier Tribunal Judge  to  consider  the
    question of the interests of justice  when  excluding  the  productions
    tendered at the bar at the start of the  hearing.  The  second  is  the
    manner in which the Judge dealt with the issue  of  corroboration.  The
    third is an argument that there has been a  failure  to  apply  anxious
    scrutiny to all of the evidence, and the fourth  is  an  argument  that
    there has been common law unfairness.

    (b)    Mr Dewar told me that an Inventory of productions, containing 28
    pages of background materials, together with a report from  Dr  Trueman
    and a letter from OLF (London)  were  tendered  at  the  start  of  the
    hearing. He took me to [11] of the decision  where  the  Judge  records
    that he

         "... accepted the documents into process but refused  Mr  Bradley's
         motions to allow them to be used as evidential productions for  the
         appellant ..."

    The Judge then goes on (at [12]) to accept Dr Trueman's report

         "... as evidence ..."

    (c)    Mr Dewar told me that the only reason given  by  the  Judge  for
    rejecting the materials tendered is that they  are  tendered  late.  He
    told me that that is a material error of law, and  referred  me  to  AK
    (Admission of Evidence- Time Limits) Iran [2004] UKIAT 00103

    (d)    Mr Dewar took me to the second ground of appeal. He reminded  me
    that there is no requirement for corroboration, but took me to  [91]  &
    [97] where, he told me, the Judge bemoans  the  lack  of  corroborative
    evidence produced by the appellant. He told me that the  Judge's  views
    on corroboration must be seen in the light of a refusal  to  accept  an
    inventory of productions containing supportive evidence.

    (e)    The third ground of appeal relates to  common-law  fairness.  Mr
    Dewar told me that at [89] the Judge compares the appellant's  evidence
    with what can be found in  Dr  Trueman's  report,  and  makes  findings
    against the appellant on matters which were not put to  the  appellant.
    He argued that the Judge's failure to give the appellant  a  chance  to
    comment on a matter which the Judge found turns against him is unfair.

    (f)    Finally, Mr Dewar argued that the Judge failed to  give  anxious
    scrutiny to each adminicle of evidence before reaching his decision. He
    referred me to MN v SSHD [2014] UKSC 30. He told me that  the  apparent
    lack of anxious scrutiny lead to finding which are irrational. He  told
    me that the decision is tainted by material errors of law, and urged me
    to set the decision aside.

    9.     (a) For the respondent, Mr Matthews told me  that  the  decision
    does not contain any errors of law, material or otherwise. He asked  me
    to consider  the  documents  produced  in  the  28  page  inventory  of
    productions. He carefully went through each of the documents which  the
    Judge did not consider, and told me that none  of  the  documents  were
    central to this case. He argued that even if the Judge  had  considered
    each of the documents, the same decision would be reached.

    (b)    Mr Matthews took me through the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014, and told me that
    the Judge's decision not to allow late productions is  consistent  with
    the overriding objective set out in rule  2  and  the  case  management
    powers found in rule 4. He also referred to Practice Direction 7(5).

    (c)    Mr Matthews turned to the second ground of appeal.  He  reminded
    me that at  [96]  the  Judge  correctly  sets  out  that  corroborative
    evidence is not necessary, before examining the authorities at [97]. He
    told me that at [98],[99] & [100] the Judge is not rejecting the  claim
    because it is not corroborated, instead he is examining the quality  of
    the evidence and examining gaps in the evidence placed before him.

    (d)    Turning to the question of common law fairness, Mr Matthews told
    me that a fair reading of the determination discloses that the Judge is
    simply not satisfied that satisfactory and sufficient evidence has been
    produced, so that the appellant cannot discharge the burden  of  proof.
    He told me that the Judge has acted fairly and considered  each  strand
    of evidence, setting out the reasons for his conclusions carefully. For
    the same reasons, he argued that the decision shows that the Judge gave
    each strand of evidence careful scrutiny. He asked me  to  dismiss  the
    appeal and allow the decision to stand.

    Analysis

    10.    In AK (Iran) 2004 UKIAT 00103 the Tribunal pointed out that  the
    qualification contained in the closing words  of  Rule  48(5)  (of  the
    earlier procedure rules) relate to good  reasons  for  considering  the
    evidence, not good reasons as to why the  evidence  was  not  filed  or
    served in time.  The Tribunal said that the  understandable  desire  on
    the part of Adjudicators to enforce due compliance with such directions
    and provisions must be balanced against the  competing  requirement  to
    ensure that  justice  is  done  in  a  jurisdiction  in  which  appeals
    routinely require the "most anxious scrutiny" and in which  the  issues
    at stake frequently involve matters of life,  limb  and  liberty.   The
    Tribunal said

         "... whilst there may be individual cases  in  which  it  would  be
         right for  an  Adjudicator  to  exclude  material,  or  potentially
         material evidence on which a party (normally the appellant)  wishes
         to rely by reason of the failure by that party to file or serve the
         evidence  in  time,  nevertheless,  as  a  general  principle,  the
         requirement to ensure that justice is done in appeals requiring the
         most  anxious  scrutiny   will   in   most   cases   outweigh   the
         understandable desire on the  part  of  the  Immigration  Appellate
         Authority to ensure that its directions and the provisions  of  the
         Procedure Rules are not flouted with impunity."

    11.    The procedure rules have  changed  since  AK  was  decided.  The
    procedure in this case was regulated by the Tribunal Procedure  (First-
    tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules  2014,  but  the
    basic principles have not changed. The 2014 procedure rules  deal  with
    the need to deal with cases expeditiously, fairly and justly. There  is
    no specific provision for the admission or  exclusion  of  productions.
    Rule 6 empowers the First-tier Tribunal to waive the requirements of  a
    direction.

    12.     In  R  v  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  ex  parte   Singarajah
    Jeyeanthan [1999] INLR 241 the Court of Appeal stated that

         "...  when  considering  the  effect  of  non-compliance   with   a
         procedural requirement laid down by a  statute  or  regulation  the
         question of whether the requirement was directory or mandatory  was
         at the most a first step.  In the majority of cases  three  further
         questions were likely to arise: (i)  was  a  statutory  requirement
         fulfilled when there  had  been  substantial  compliance  with  the
         requirement and, if so, had there been  substantial  compliance  in
         the case in issue even though there had not been strict compliance?
          ii) was the non-compliance capable of being waived and, if so, had
         it or could it and should it be waived in a  particular  case?  and
         (iii) if it is not capable of being waived or  it  is  not  waived,
         then what is the consequence of non- compliance?"

    13.    At [11] the Judge bears to  accept  the  productions,  but  then
    refuses

         "... to allow them to be used as  evidential  productions  for  the
         Appellant ... "

    The only reason given is that the productions are  tendered  late.  The
    record of proceedings discloses that the Inventory of  productions  was
    tendered as the appellant's solicitor made an  application  to  adjourn
    the hearing for further time to prepare and  to  instruct  an  up-dated
    expert report.

    14.    It was open to the Judge to allow the inventory  of  productions
    to be received or to refuse to allow it to be received. The middle path
    taken by the Judge is wrong. It is hard to see what purpose  is  served
    by receiving the inventory into process, and then ignoring it. Once the
    documentary evidence was received it formed part of the evidence in the
    case. What the  Judge  has  gone  on  to  do  is  ignore  part  of  the
    appellant's evidence. That evidence might have resulted in a  different
    outcome if it had been considered.  The  decision  to  allow  and  then
    ignore evidence is a material error of law.

    15.    There is no merit in the second ground of  appeal.  Counsel  for
    the appellant accepts that [96] is correct in law. At  [97]  the  Judge
    correctly considers ST (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia  [2004]  UKIAT
    00119 in which the Tribunal said that it was a  misdirection  to  imply
    that corroboration was necessary for a  positive  credibility  finding.
    However, the fact that corroboration was not required did not mean that
    an Adjudicator was required to leave out  of  account  the  absence  of
    documentary  evidence,  which  could  reasonably   be   expected:   the
    Adjudicator was entitled  to  comment  that  it  would  not  have  been
    difficult  to  provide  the  relevant  documents  in  this  case.    In
    particular, the Adjudicator was entitled to comment that it  would  not
    have been difficult for the Appellant to provide  a  death  certificate
    concerning his brother or some evidence to support his contention  that
    he had received hospital treatment. These were issues of fact  for  the
    Adjudicator to assess.  The Tribunal noted  that  the  Adjudicator  had
    taken into account the fact that claimants could well  have  difficulty
    in presenting documentation and the provisions of the UNHCR handbook on
    giving claimants the benefit of the doubt.  In the  circumstances,  the
    Tribunal declined  to  intervene  and  said  that  an  appeal  must  be
    determined on the basis of the evidence produced but the weight  to  be
    attached to oral evidence may be affected by a failure to produce other
    evidence in support.

    16.    The Judge also takes account of TK (Burundi) v SSHD (2009)  EWCA
    Civ 40 in which  the  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  where  there  were
    circumstances in which evidence corroborating the appellant's  evidence
    was easily obtainable, the  lack  of  such  evidence  must  affect  the
    assessment of the appellant's credibility.  It followed  that  where  a
    Judge in assessing credibility relied on the fact  that  there  was  no
    independent supporting evidence where there should be and there was  no
    credible account for its absence, he committed no error of law when  he
    relied on that fact for rejecting the account  of  the  appellant.   In
    this case the evidence concerned a partner in the UK.

    17.    Because I find that the Judge materially errs in law by  failing
    to take account of all of the documentary evidence, then the submission
    that there has been an overall failure to give anxious scrutiny to  the
    evidence in this case must be correct.

    18.    Objective background materials and a letter bearing to  be  from
    OLF  (UK)  were  given  inadequate  consideration  by  the  Judge.  The
    appellant should have the opportunity to present his evidence afresh.

    Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

    19.    Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
    Statement of the 25th of September 2012 a case may be remitted  to  the
    First Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a)      the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
         the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity  for
         that party's case to be put to and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

    20.    In this case I have determined that the case should be  remitted
    because of the nature and extent of the fact finding exercise necessary
    to reach a just decision in this appeal. None of the findings  of  fact
    are to stand. A complete re-hearing is necessary.

    21.    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Glasgow
    to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge D'Ambrosio.

    CONCLUSION

    Decision

    22. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  tainted  by  material
    errors of law.

    23. I set the decision aside. The appeal is remitted to the First  Tier
    Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed      Date 24 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
