
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09781/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|Oral judgment given at hearing                |On 21st July 2014            |
|On 27th June 2014                             |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                       Mr Mohamed Insaf Mohamed Illyas

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A. Seehra, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 11th April 1991.   He
    arrived in the UK in June 2010.  He made a claim for asylum  which  was
    rejected by the Secretary of State and a  decision  was  made  on  12th
    October 2012 to remove him as an illegal entrant.

 2. There was an issue that arose during  the  course  of  the  proceedings
    before the First-tier Tribunal in terms  of  whether  he  was  properly
    regarded as an illegal entrant but the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    dealt with that matter and no further issue arises in  connection  with
    it.

 3. His appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal on a previous occasion before  the  proceedings
    with which I am concerned.  The appeal had been remitted by  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the appeal was dealt with on the second occasion by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Molloy on a series of four dates,  starting  on  15
    July 2013 and concluding on 21 January 2014.

 4. Thus the hearing before Judge Molloy took a period  of  six  months  to
    complete.  Judge Molloy ultimately rejected the appellant's  claim  for
    asylum and dismissed his  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian  and  human
    rights grounds in a determination extending to  66  pages,  dated  20th
    February 2014.

 5. The grounds of appeal before the Upper Tribunal challenge the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal in several different respects.   It  is  not
    necessary for me to refer to all of the grounds in this judgment.

 6. Before hearing submissions from Ms Seehra on behalf of the appellant, I
    was addressed by  Mr  Jack  on  behalf  of  the  respondent.   Mr  Jack
    indicated that it was not accepted that all the grounds had  merit  but
    there were aspects of the grounds which had caused him to  accept  that
    there were errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision such  as
    to require that decision to be set aside.

 7. The matters that were conceded on behalf of the Secretary of State were
    as follows.  In ground 2 it is alleged that  there  was  a  failure  to
    consider relevant evidence when making material  findings  of  fact  in
    terms of the appellant's claimed detention in Sri Lanka.   One  of  the
    matters relied on by the appellant is in terms of the  judge's  finding
    that there was no evidence from the appellant's mother to support  what
    the  appellant  had  said  about  his  detention.   At  [513]  of   the
    determination the judge stated that there was no witness  statement  or
    letter or  other  documentation  coming  from  the  appellant's  mother
    relating not only to  the  alleged  disappearance  of  the  appellant's
    father, but also the claim that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  have  a
    continuing interest in the appellant.

 8. It was conceded on behalf of the Secretary of State that there was such
    evidence  and  indeed  there  is  reference  to  it  at  [11]  of   the
    determination where there is reference to a letter from the appellant's
    mother dated 8th June 2013.

 9. Other evidence that it was said was not taken into account by the First-
    tier Judge referred to at [8] of the grounds includes an  extract  from
    an information book held at the police station which is a document that
    is referred to in the written submissions on behalf  of  the  appellant
    before the First-tier Tribunal at 5.3 of those submissions.

10. In ground 3 at [12] the complaint made about the judge's  determination
    is in terms of his having said that the  appellant  could  easily  have
    provided evidence to the Sri Lankan authorities  that  he  was  renting
    property to a person called Mohan, the rental of  that  property  being
    the cause of the appellant's problems.  The grounds  contend  that  the
    authorities were already aware that the appellant had  rented  property
    to Mohan, which is clear from the court documents, and  the  fact  that
    the appellant leased his property to that individual was not in  issue.
    It  is  contended  that   the   judge   speculated   about   irrelevant
    considerations and failed to consider relevant evidence before him.

11. Mr Jack on behalf of the respondent accepted that there was some  force
    in that point although in common with the matters I  have  referred  to
    thus far, those are not the most forceful of grounds.

12. Ground 4 concerns the judge's findings  in  terms  of  the  appellant's
    claim that he was sexually assaulted during detention.  One  aspect  of
    the complaint about those findings is in relation  to  the  appellant's
    claim that he was forced to perform oral sex on one or more members  of
    the security forces.  What the judge said about that  at  [434]  is  as
    follows:

         "The appellant says the officer told him to  remove  his  trousers.
         The appellant would not have to do this if he, the  appellant,  was
         being obliged to perform oral sex on an officer.  Additionally  the
         appellant says that he was told to remove his  trousers  after  the
         officer had pushed him, the appellant, to the floor.  One struggles
         to conceive of oral sex taking place between two males when one  of
         them is on the floor."

13. The grounds suggest that that finding is perverse and/or not  reasoned.
    Mr Jack conceded that that finding was  simply  not  one  that  he  was
    entitled to make, for the obvious reason in terms of its content. In my
    view that concession was rightly made. I cannot see the basis on  which
    the First-tier judge found  that  aspect  of  the  appellant's  account
    inherently incredible, which he clearly  did.  Mr  Jack  did,  however,
    indicate that there are other reasons given by the First-tier Judge for
    not accepting the appellant's account  of  sexual  assault  during  his
    detention.

14. Nevertheless, the grounds at [20]-[22] concern an  alleged  failure  to
    engage properly with medical evidence as to  scarring  and  failure  to
    provide reasons for rejecting that evidence.  Part of the complaint  in
    this respect is that the judge had already made an  assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility before considering the evidence in the  medical
    report of Professor Lingam which refers to  scars  that  the  appellant
    has.

15. It is apparent from the  determination  that  the  judge  had  made  an
    adverse credibility finding in  relation  to  the  appellant's  account
    before coming on at [449] to the medical evidence in  relation  to  the
    scars.  Mr Jack makes the further observation that it  seems  that  the
    First-tier Judge took into account some of the reasons for doubting the
    evidence provided to Professor Lingam as  a  reason  for  doubting  the
    evidence in relation to the scars.

16. At [22] of the grounds it is said that Judge Molloy failed to make  any
    reference to Professor Lingam's conclusion that the scars  were  highly
    consistent with lacerations from beating and  his  clinical  view  that
    they were formed at the same time (as one another presumably).  It  was
    said that the judge provided  no  proper  reasons  for  departing  from
    Professor Lingam's opinion, and it does seem to me to be clear that the
    judge did not engage with that aspect of Professor Lingam's  report  in
    terms of the consistency of the scars with the appellant's account.

17. Paragraphs 33 to 36 of  the  grounds  relate  to  documents  that  were
    provided in DHL envelopes and the judge's conclusion in relation to the
    dates of the sending of those documents with reference to the dates  on
    the envelopes.  The grounds suggest that  the  judge  misunderstood  or
    misinterpreted the dates, for example a date of 7th November  2012  was
    misunderstood as 11th July 2012.  The conclusion the judge came  to  in
    that respect and in another respect in terms of a date of 14th November
    2012 led the judge to conclude that the documents were sent at  a  time
    when the events that the appellant described could not have happened.

18. I agree with Mr Jack that not all  of  the  grounds  have  merit.  Some
    grounds are more meritorious than  others  but  in  the  light  of  the
    acceptance on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that  the  matters  to
    which I have referred reveal an error, or errors, of law in the judge's
    assessment of credibility requiring the decision to be set aside,  that
    is also my conclusion.  I should add that I would  have  in  any  event
    have come to the same conclusion, maybe perhaps for slightly  different
    reasons, but no difference of reasons of substance.

19. I canvassed with the parties what  the  appropriate  course  of  action
    should be if the matter were to be set aside for the decision to be re-
    made.  Ms Seehra submitted that it was appropriate for the matter to be
    remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  notwithstanding  that  there  had
    previously been a remittal because of errors of law by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Mr Jack did not dissent from that view, having no strong view
    one way or the other.

20. Having regard to the practice statement at paragraph  7.2  and  in  the
    light of what I regard as a necessary  wholesale  reassessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility, it seems to  me  to  be  appropriate  for  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de  novo
    with no findings of fact preserved.



                               DIRECTIONS

    1.   The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on a date to  be
       fixed for a hearing de novo  with  no  findings  of  fact  preserved
       except as agreed between the parties.

    2.   The appeal is not to be re-heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
Molloy or Moore.

    3.   Further listing directions can properly be left to the  discretion
       of the First-tier Tribunal, but a time estimate of at least 4  hours
       would seem to be appropriate.

    4.   If possible the appeal should be re-listed having  regard  to  the
       dates of availability of Ms Seehra, although she is aware that  this
       cannot be guaranteed and is a matter that is in  the  discretion  of
       the First-tier Tribunal.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            18/07/14
