

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/09954/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision and Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                         |
|On 6 November 2015                    |         On 18 November 2015        |
|                                      |                                    |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    B E B
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms C Physsas (counsel) instructed by Irving & Co,
solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant and his family. I do so on the basis of the  minority
of the appellant's children.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Samimi, promulgated on  31  July  2015
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds only.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 11 November 1968 and is a national of Algeria.

4. On 3 July 2014 the Appellant applied  for  Asylum  (his  wife  and  three
children were dependent on his application). On 12/11/2014 the Secretary  of
State refused the Appellant's application.


The Judge's Decision

5.  The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  appellant
accepted that his case does not engage the Refugee  Convention,  but  argued
that the  respondent's  decision  breached  articles  3  &  8  of  the  1950
Convention. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Samimi  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the
appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds only.


6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  24  August  2015  Judge  Cox  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "I have carefully considered the decision in relation to the  grounds.
      The grounds in essence contend that the Judge misdirected  himself  in
      law by mentioning but not applying the test in section 117B. Dube  and
      Forman are cited. Secondly, it is said that she failed  to  take  into
      account or address  a  material  issue,  namely  the  availability  of
      psychiatric care in Algeria.


      "3. On consideration, I find both grounds arguable  in  the  terms  in
      which they are advanced and that the judge may have  materially  erred
      in law."

The Hearing

7. Mr Walker, for the respondent, told me that the grounds of  appeal  raise
two points. The first is  that  the  Judge  made  material  misdirection  in
consideration of sections 117A to 117D of the 2002 Act. He  referred  me  to
the cases of Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090  (IAC)   and  Forman  (ss
117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC), and told me that  the  Judge
had failed to carry out an adequate proportionality balancing exercise.  The
second argument for the respondent is that the Judge failed to consider  the
availability of psychiatric care for the appellant and his oldest  daughter,
M, in Algeria. Mr Walker conceded  that  he  did  not  have  copies  of  the
medical evidence that was before the Judge but argued  that  the  Judge  did
not consider what psychiatric care, if any, is  available  in  Algeria,  and
whether or not the appellant or any of his  family  members  had  access  to
that psychiatric care prior to coming to the UK. He invited me to allow  the
appeal and set aside the decision.

8. Ms Physsas, counsel for the appellant told me  that  the  decision  is  a
carefully  reasoned  and  detailed  decision  which  does  not  contain  any
material errors of law. She told me that the Judge's  detailed  findings  in
relation to credibility and findings of fact are not  challenged.  She  told
me  that  the  Judge  had  correctly  directed  himself  in  law  and,  when
considering article 8 ECHR, had referred to the relevant case  law  and  had
manifestly  taken  account  of  section  117A  to  117D  of  the  2002   Act
(specifically referring  to  those  provisions  at  [32],  and  setting  out
section 117B at length at [33]). She told me that between [26]  and  [34]  a
detailed balancing exercise is carried  out  by  the  Judge,  and  that  all
relevant factors are properly weighed before  a  conclusion  is  reached  at
[34]. Ms Physsas argued that the availability of  treatment  in  Algeria  is
irrelevant because, in finding that removal is a disproportionate breach  of
article 8 rights, the Judge assessed the impact of  the  appellant's  oldest
daughter of removal from the UK and return to Algeria,  and  found  that  on
the basis of the  medical  evidence  produced  the  prospect  of  return  to
Algeria have an adverse effect on the mental health  of  the  appellant  and
his oldest daughter. Ms Physsas took me to the medical reports (produced  at
first instance of pages 9 onwards of the appellant's bundle).  She  told  me
that the decision does not contain a material error of law and urged  me  to
dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

9. Ms Physsas relied on a letter dated 4 June  2015  written  jointly  by  a
family and systemic psychotherapist and a consultant  clinical  psychologist
relating to the appellant oldest daughter,  who  was  born  on  22  November
2004.  That  letter  is  reproduced  between  documents  9  to  11  of   the
appellant's bundle (which was before the First-tier Tribunal).  That  letter
narrates that the appellant's oldest daughter was referred  to  the  authors
of the letter in June 2014 by  her  GP.  It  records  that  the  appellant's
oldest daughter is tearful and has expressed suicidal ideation.  The  letter
records that the child has settled remarkably  well  at  school,  where  she
feels safest. The authors of the letter state that the child "....  Met  the
threshold for a diagnosis of post traumatic stress disorder and  generalised
anxiety disorder." The authors of the letter go  on  to  offer  the  opinion
that ".... There is a potential risk of suicide for BEB were the  family  to
be forced to return and that M's psychological state would be highly  likely
to deteriorate."

10. Documents 18 and 19 of the same bundle is a letter  from  the  same  two
authors dated 17 April 2015 addressed to a local authority housing  officer.
In that letter the authors of the report say  of  the  appellant's  daughter
"She is no longer experiencing any suicidal ideation  or  self-harm  and  is
settling at school and making friends"

11.  Document 8 of the appellants  bundle  is  a  letter  from  the  primary
school that the appellant's children attend. That letter  records  that  the
child M was very quiet and lacked confidence when she first went to  primary
school, and it became clear that M worried about  the  prospect  of  kidnap.
The author of  the  letter  says  "over  the  months  she  has  become  more
confident in herself and has shown a particular interest in helping  of  the
children within the school" the author of the letter confirms that  M  still
fears kidnap. It is  clear  from  that  letter  that  M  attends  mainstream
schooling but is provided with support at school

12. There is no challenge to the findings of fact  made  by  the  Judge.  At
[17] the Judge clearly found the appellant and his  sister  to  be  credible
and reliable witnesses. At [20] the Judge found  that  there  was  a  viable
internal relocation option, and the Judge states

      "I do not accept that there is a real risk of harm for  the  appellant
      and his family on return to Algeria within the meaning of article 3 of
      ECHR. I do not find that the  withdrawal  of  psychological  treatment
      respectively  appellant  and  his  daughter  amounts  to  the   highly
      exceptional case that engages the high threshold in article 3...."

13. The Judge then goes on to consider article 8 ECHR and takes  account  of
section 55 of the borders citizenship  and  immigration  act  2009.  Between
[26] and [28] the Judge discusses (and quotes from) the report dated 4  June
2015. At [29] and [30] the Judge specifically states that  the  medical  and
psychological reports  offer  persuasive  strands  of  the  evidence  placed
before her. It is at [33] the Judge sets out the provisions of section  117B
of the 2002 Act. The Judge then commences [34] by stating

      "In the  exceptional  circumstances  of  this  case,  the  appellant's
      daughter M is a psychologically fragile child who has been traumatised
      by the events in Algeria. The prospect of her removal  would  cause  a
      detriment to their psychological well-being to the  effect  that  will
      have a substantially adverse effect (on) her  safety  and  well-being.
      The appellant himself is at risk of suicide."

14. There is logic in the Judge's decision, but that logic is frustrated  by
the  provision  of  section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.  At  [31]  the  Judge
specifically states that the case involves consideration of the  appellant's
private life. Section 117B of the 2002 Act provides at subsections (4 &  (5)
that little weight should be given to the appellant's private  life  because
the appellant is in the UK unlawfully  (and  insofar  as  he  ever  had  any
immigration status, it is precarious). No consideration has  been  given  by
the Judge to the appellant's financial independence. The evidence before  me
indicates that the appellant's entire family had benefited from NHS  medical
treatment and state education. On the facts and circumstances of  this  case
the operation of  section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  mitigates  against  the
appellant and in favour of the public interest, as it  manifests  itself  in
immigration control.

15. I therefore find that  the  decision  contains  material  error  of  law
because  an  inadequate  balancing  exercise  has  been   carried   out   in
consideration of the proportionality of the respondent's  decision.  However
as there is no challenge to the Judge's fact finding exercise, I  find  that
the Judges findings of fact can stand. I proceed to consider the  appeal  of
new and substitute my own decision.

16. The determinative factors in this case are the fragility of  the  mental
and psychological health of the appellant and his  daughter,  M.  The  Judge
found as a fact that the appellant is at risk of suicide.  The  Judge  found
that M is a psychologically  fragile  child  who  has  been  traumatised  by
events in Algeria. The Judge found that M is in mainstream  education  where
she is making progress and that there is both psychological  treatments  for
M and a good network of support for M in the UK.

 Article 3 ECHR

17.   In N v UK Application 26565/05 the Grand Chamber upheld  the  decision
of the House of Lords and said that in medical cases Article 3 only  applied
in very exceptional circumstances particularly as the suffering was not  the
result of an intentional act or omission of a State or non-State body.   The
European court of Human Rights said that Article 3 could not  be  relied  on
to address the disparity in medical care between Contracting States and  the
applicant's state of origin.  The  fact  that  the  person's  circumstances,
including his or her life expectancy, would  be  significantly  reduced  was
not sufficient in itself to give rise to a breach of Article 3.  Those  same
principles had  to  apply  in  relation  to  the  expulsion  of  any  person
afflicted with any serious, naturally occurring physical or  mental  illness
which might cause suffering pain or reduced  life  expectancy  and  required
specialist medical treatment that might not be readily  available  or  which
might only be available at considerable cost.  Notably the court  held  that
no separate issues arose under Article 8(2) in that case and so it  was  not
even necessary to consider the  Claimant's  submission  that  removal  would
engage her right to respect for private life.

18.   I take full account of the case of GS and EO and GS  (India),  but  in
reality, a high threshold is set. Return to Algeria has  no  impact  on  the
life expectancy of the appellant nor the child,  M.  The  real  argument  is
about the quality of life for appellant and his  eldest  daughter,  and  the
services which are available  to  them.  The  argument,  in  reality,  is  a
comparison of the psychiatric, psychological and support services  available
to the appellant and his daughter. The background  materials  indicate  that
the quality of such services in the UK is probably better than the  services
in Algeria, but that is not the test for an Article 3 consideration.

19.   In Nacic and Others v Sweden (Application no. 16567/10)  ECtHR  (Fifth
Section) 2012 it was held that aliens who were subject  to  expulsion  could
not, in principle, claim any entitlement to remain in  the  territory  of  a
Contracting State in order to continue to benefit from  medical,  social  or
other forms of assistance and services provided by the expelling State.  The
fact that an  applicant's  circumstances,  including  his  life  expectancy,
would  be  significantly  reduced  if  he  were  to  be  removed  from   the
Contracting State was not sufficient in itself to give rise to a  breach  of
Article 3. The decision to remove an alien who was suffering from a  serious
mental or physical illness  to  a  country  where  the  facilities  for  the
treatment  of  that  illness  were  inferior  to  those  available  in   the
Contracting State may raise an issue under Article 3, but  only  in  a  very
exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds against  the  removal  were
compelling.  (As I have already indicated, in N v  UK  Application  26565/05
the European court of Human Rights said that Article 3 could not  be  relied
on to address the disparity in medical care between Contracting  States  and
the applicant's state of origin).

20. I have sympathy for the Appellant and his family, but  their  conditions
do not approach the elevated threshold for engagement of Article  3  of  the
1950 Convention.

Article 8 ECHR

21.   In MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]
EWCA Civ 279  the Court of Appeal noted that the courts had declined to  say
that Article 8 could never by engaged by the health consequences of  removal
but they had never found such a breach and had not been  able  to  postulate
circumstances in which such a breach was likely to be established. The  only
cases where the absence of adequate medical  treatment  in  the  country  to
which a person is to be deported would be relevant to Article  8  are  those
where it is an additional factor to be weighed in  the  balance  with  other
factors that engaged Article 8 (paras 17 - 23). This approach  was  endorsed
by Laws LJ in GS(India) and Others 2015 EWCA Civ 40 (para 86).

22.   I consider that this case turns on the  question  of  proportionality.
In determining this issue I  am  bound  to  give  effect  to  the  governing
statutory regime, to which I now turn.  The Appellant's central argument  is
that because he and his daughter suffer from mental  illness  and  have  the
benefit of treatment in the UK,  they  cannot  return  to  Algeria.  I  have
already found that that argument and the facts of this case  do  not  engage
Article 3.

23.   Section 117 of the 2002 Act is a factor to be taken  into  account  in
determining proportionality.  I  appreciate  that  as  the  public  interest
provisions are now contained in primary legislation they  override  existing
case law, Section 117A(2) requires me to have regard to  the  considerations
listed in Sections 117B and 117C.  I am conscious of my  statutory  duty  to
take these factors into account when coming to my conclusions.   I  am  also
aware that Section 117A(3) imposes upon  me  the  duty  of  carrying  out  a
balancing exercise. In so doing I remind myself of  the  guidance  contained
within Razgar.

24.   The weight of reliable evidence in this case indicates that return  to
Algeria would form a period of upheaval for this family  but  that  upheaval
is  outweighed  when  balanced  against  the  public   interests   and   the
Respondent's  interests  in  maintaining  fair  and  effective   immigration
control and keeping a watchful eye on the fragile economy of the UK.

25.   The effect of the Respondent's decision does not cause separation  for
this family. The family will remain together. I am mindful of Section 55  of
the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009,  and  the  case  of  ZH
(Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.

26.   I remind myself of the cases of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
affecting children; onward appeals), [2013] UKUT 00197 and PW  [2015]  CSIH
36.  It is the intention of the SoS to ensure that the Appellant,  his  wife
and their two children stay together. It has long been established  that  it
is  in  the  interests  of  children  to  remain  with  their  parents.  The
Respondent's decision maintains the  unity  of  this  family  and  does  not
separate the children from the parents. The interests of  the  children  are
served because the integrity of the family unit is not challenged.

27.   The impact of the SSHD's decision is that the Appellant, his wife  and
their two children will return to Algeria. The  impact  on  the  appellant's
children is that their education  and  the  help  they  are  receiving  from
health services, care and treatment in the UK all come to an end -  but  the
background materials indicate that education  and  healthcare  is  available
(albeit at a lower level) in Algeria. There is nothing before me from  which
I can draw the conclusion that return to Algeria would result in neglect  or
destitution for either of the children. Housing, healthcare,  education  and
family support are all available to them in  Algeria.   Furthermore,  it  is
well settled that the "better v worse" prism is the wrong approach in law.

28.   New routines will have to be established for  the  appellant  and  his
family. It may take the appellant's children  some  time  to  adapt  to  new
routines and a change of environment  but  there  is  no  reliable  evidence
placed before me to indicate that either of the appellant's children  cannot
adapt; it is a fact of life that  changes  occur  and  individuals  have  to
adapt to those changes. The needs of the appellant's oldest daughter may  be
different to the needs of many other children but, on  the  evidence  placed
before me, she is not deprived of the ability to adapt. She  will  have  the
enduring support of her  parents  and  the  wider  network  created  by  re-
establishment her family's former contacts in Algeria.

29.   I therefore conclude the SSHD'  decision  is  not  a  disproportionate
breach of the Article 8 rights  of  the  Appellant  or  the  other  affected
family members. .

Decision

I dismiss the appeal under Articles 3 & 8 ECHR.


                       Signed:


                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
                                                     Date:  16 November 2015


