
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09404/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 27 May 2015                                |On 9 June 2015                |
|Prepared 27 May 2015                          |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                             MOHAMED AZHAR UDDIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Khan, Counsel, instructed by Universal
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the claimant.

2.   The claimant, a national of Pakistan, date of birth  15  October  1964,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision which is not dated  to  make
    removal directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    1999.  In support of that decision  there  is  a  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter dated 24 October 2014.

3.   The appeal, which included significant arguments relating to Article  8
    ECHR private/family life rights, came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    A Davies (the judge) who, on 10 February 2015, allowed the appeal under
    paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant had shown in excess of twenty years continuous  residence  in
    the United Kingdom.  The judge did not deal with issues relating to the
    Article 8 claim it would seem, in the light of  the  finding  that  the
    Claimant succeeded under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  The judge  did
    deal in part with issues relating to legacy cases  and  they  have  not
    been a feature in this appeal.

4.     The Secretary of State on  13  February  2015  sought  permission  to
    appeal with reference to a single point,  namely  whether  or  not  the
    judge had properly assessed the period  of  unbroken  residence  or  as
    required, under the Rules, continuous residence of twenty years.

5.   It is clear, as the grounds set out, that the Secretary  of  State  was
    arguing that an intervening period where a sentence of  two  years  had
    been imposed broke up the continuous residence and therefore the  judge
    had erroneously concluded the requisite period had been met.

6.   Permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne  on
    26 February 2015.

7.   The matter had originally been listed for 18 April 2015  but  had  been
    adjourned because of the addition of a recent representation  and  time
    was needed for a reply.

8.   At that stage, no one had sought either to serve a Respondent's  notice
    or any Appellant's notice in reply on the issue, which had been  raised
    before the judge, that  the  Claimant  did  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements,  particularly  SLTR1.4:  Where  "the  presence   of   the
    applicant in the UK is not conducive to the public  good  because  they
    have been convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to
    imprisonment for less than for years but at least twelve months".

9.   That was evidently an issue raised with the  judge  and  he  stated  as
    follows:

         "22. There is also the public interest to  consider  which  is  the
             question of whether it might be not conducive  to  the  public
             good for him to remain here.  The  Appellant  (Claimant)  does
             have a criminal record  for  which  he  received  a  custodial
             sentence of less than four years but at  least  twelve  months
             (two years).  However he has not  reoffended.   He  was  frank
             about his conviction in giving evidence.  This  sentence  does
             not automatically mean that if he remained this would  not  be
             conducive to the public good."

10.  Mr Avery sought permission, which was not in writing, but no point  was
    taken on that, to amend the grounds to include the   issue  whether  or
    not the Claimant could succeed under the suitability  requirements  for
    paragraph 276ADE.  This was not a different issue being raised so  much
    as a matter that had been before  the  judge  and  upon  which  he  had
    purported to make a finding.  Mr Khan objected to the amendment on  the
    basis that it was new, only recently  made  and  of  which  he  had  no
    warning.  I have some sympathy with Mr Khan's objection but the reality
    was the point was pursued before the judge, it was not a  new  point  ,
    and it was not leading to a different outcome, that is upon a different
    basis for refusal, that the proper consideration of whether or not  the
    Claimant met the suitability  requirements.   In  the  circumstances  I
    decided de bene esse that it was appropriate to hear argument  on  that
    matter.

11.  Mr Khan through his careful research was able to show  that  continuous
    residence  is  not  broken  by  the  intervention  of   a   period   of
    imprisonment.  Accordingly with reference to the wording of  paragraphs
    276A and 276ADE(1)(iv) the Claimant's period of  imprisonment  did  not
    exclude him from having the  twenty  years  continuous  period:  Twenty
    years was left, out of the total period  he  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom after excluding the period of imprisonment.

12.  In the circumstances the Secretary of State's guidance on  Appendix  FM
    (paragraphS 8.2.3.1 and 8.2.3.5) made it clear that  the  Secretary  of
    State regarded in terms of private life issues  raised  in  the  United
    Kingdom, that continuous residence would not  be  broken  if  they  had
    spent time in prison because time in imprisonment will not  be  counted
    towards the period of residence. The time before and after imprisonment
    can be aggregated to make up the full amount of  time.   There  was  no
    issue pursued before me that as a fact if the  time  before  and  after
    imprisonment was added up, it  did not exceed the required twenty  year
    period.

13.  Accordingly, Mr  Khan's  argument  defeated  the  original  grounds  as
    drafted by the Secretary of State.

14.  Mr Avery produced a copy of the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE; suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 42 (IAC).

15.  The case established  that  the  suitability  requirements  bear  on  a
    person's eligibility to claim under  paragraph  276ADE.  In  particular
    SLTR1.4. noted "the  presence  of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
    conducive to the public good because they have been   convicted  of  an
    offence for which they have been sentenced  to  imprisonment  for  less
    than four years but at least twelve months."

16.  As recited above, it is clear  the  judge's  finding  at  paragraph  22
    misunderstood the relevance of paragraph SLTR1.4. In the  circumstances
    that was an error of law which was material to the  remedy  and  relief
    that was being sought.  Accordingly  I  decided  to  allow  Mr  Avery's
    amendment of the grounds.

17.  As a result of further submissions it became apparent to  me  that  the
    judge never addressed at all Article  8  ECHR  considerations  both  in
    terms of the Appellant's moral  and  physical  integrity  but  also  in
    relation to his private/family  life  rights  being  exercised  in  the
    United Kingdom.  This was an  obvious  point  clearly  and  extensively
    raised in the grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  it
    would seem was noted in part by the judge in the decision at  paragraph
    5.

18.  In the circumstances it seemed to me that the fair  and  just  disposal
    of the appeal required that the  matter  of  the  Article  8  claim  be
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined.

19.  As such I find the Original Tribunal made no error of law  in  relation
    to the original grounds seeking permission but the  judge  had  made  a
    material error of law in seeking to exclude the application of SLTR1.4.

20.  Accordingly I find the  matter  must  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  solely  on  the  issue  of  the  Claimant's  claim  based  on
    private/family life rights outside of  the  Immigration  Rules  because
    clearly this is one of  those cases where the Claimant falling  outside
    the Rules still ought to have a claim based on those rights assessed.

  NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal of the Secretary of State  is  dismissed  under  the  Immigration
Rules in respect of the calculation of twenty years' continuous residence.

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed under the  Immigration  Rules  in
the proper application of SLTR1.4 Appendix FM.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to determine the  Article  8
ECHR claim

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 1 June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

