
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09512/2014
                                                               AA/08043/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford UT                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 22nd May 2017                      |On 2nd June 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                         Mrs S.T. (FIRST appellant)
                        MR W.R.B. (SECOND appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Hussain of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal, on the basis
that the Appellants have two minor children and the decision impacts upon
their welfare.  It is appropriate to continue that direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants, Mrs S.T. and Mr W.R.B., are citizens of Pakistan,  born
    [ ] 1975 and [ ] 1975 respectively.  They  appeal  with  permission  to
    this Tribunal against the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cox)  which  in  a
    decision promulgated on  26th  January  2016  dismissed  their  appeals
    against  the  Respondent's  refusal  to  grant  them  asylum  or  other
    protection.

Background

 2. The Appellants, who are husband and wife, entered the United Kingdom in
    November 2012 in possession of family visit visas  and  accompanied  by
    their two younger children F and H.  Their  eldest  child  remained  in
    Pakistan because she was preparing for her "A" level examinations.

 3. The Appellants remained in the UK outwith the terms of their  grant  of
    leave and on 9th April 2014, were encountered by Immigration  Officers,
    working at a computer shop "Talk and Text".  They were served with IS15
    notices as overstayers.

 4. On 11th June 2014 S.T. claimed asylum, naming her husband and F  and  H
    as her dependants.  By December 2014 however W.R.B.  made  a  claim  to
    asylum in his own right.

 5. The claims of both Appellants were essentially interrelated. In summary
    they claimed a fear of returning  to  Pakistan  firstly  because  their
    lives would be in danger on account of their mixed  religious  marriage
    and secondly on account of W.R.B. having another  relationship  with  a
    woman by the name of T.K.

 6. So far as the first strand of the Appellants' claims is concerned, S.T.
    is a Sunni Muslim and W.R.B. a Shia.  They married in 1992.  They  said
    that their families were unhappy at the match, although  initially  the
    couple lived with W.R.B.'s parents.   It  was  said  that  the  parents
    caused difficulties because they  wanted  their  son  to  divorce  S.T.
    However, the Appellants' eldest daughter was born  in  September  1994.
    They did not divorce.

 7. In 1996 both Appellants together with their  eldest  daughter  went  to
    live with S.T.'s mother.

 8. The second strand to the Appellants'  claim  originated  in  2005  when
    W.R.B. started an affair with T.K.  a  Shia  Muslim  woman.   S.T.  was
    unaware of the affair and unaware that W.R.B. married T.K. as a  second
    wife in 2010. W.R.B. claimed that he and T.K. divorced in 2011.

 9. In September 2009 W.R.B. said he was attacked by four  men  and  formed
    the impression that the attack occurred because he had married a  Sunni
    woman, namely S.T.  He claimed he was again attacked in  2011  by  four
    men who this time accused him of mistreating a Shia woman, namely  T.K.
    Both incidents were reported to the police.  No charges followed.

10. Following the second attack, W.R.B. said that he was scared  of  T.K.'s
    family, and so he went to seek a reconciliation with her (without  S.T.
    knowing).  W.R.B. then confessed his actions to  S.T.,  they  collected
    funds and together paid T.K. 2 lakh rupees to sign divorce papers. T.K.
    did sign divorce papers but continued to harass both Appellants.

11. The Appellants decided therefore to apply for visas to come to  the  UK
    together as a family.  Their  eldest  daughter  remained  in  Pakistan.
    Sadly in January 2013, whilst the Appellants and their younger children
    were in the UK, their eldest daughter became the victim of  a  hit  and
    run accident and died as a  result  of  the  injuries  sustained.   The
    Appellants accused T.K.'s family of  killing  their  daughter  and  the
    police were involved, but no charges resulted.

12. In September 2013 the Appellants bought a computer shop in the  UK  and
    in April  2014  they  were  encountered  at  the  shop  by  Immigration
    Officers.  The Appellants claim that their lives are in danger  because
    of their marriage and they also believe that T.K. intends to harm  them
    through her connections with Shia organisations.

13. The Respondent did not accept the credibility of the Appellants' claims
    as regards the attacks upon W.R.B., nor the credibility  of  the  claim
    that the Appellants' daughter had been targeted by T.K. or  her  family
    through their connections.

14. When their appeals came before the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Cox  made
    several findings.  In particular, for the purposes of this decision, he
    noted that S.T. was  a  credible  witness  [52].   In  addition,  after
    considering expert evidence relating to supporting documents submitted,
    he was satisfied that the Appellants' eldest daughter  had  died  as  a
    result of a hit and  run  accident.  He  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    accident was deliberate targeting of the girl.

15. Judge Cox did not accept was the genuineness of the  First  Information
    Reports (FIRs) which W.R.B. said showed that the police in Pakistan had
    not properly investigated the claimed attacks  upon  him  in  2009  and
    2011.  The judge went on to find that so far as W.R.B.  was  concerned,
    he had great doubts about  his  credibility.   His  doubts  encompassed
    inconsistencies in the second Appellant's story relating to  his  claim
    that he had been attacked twice, firstly on account of his marriage  to
    S.T. and secondly on account of his divorce from T.K.  It is correct to
    note that the Respondent had  always  maintained  that  the  FIRs  were
    fraudulent because a DVR report said they were.  The judge did  not  go
    so  far  as  to  accept  that  assessment  but  did  find   the   FIR's
    unsatisfactory  in  the  general  context  of  the  second  Appellant's
    evidence overall.

16. The judge  then  assessed  the  evidence  holistically.   For  properly
    considered reasons, whilst he accepted  that  S.T.  genuinely  believed
    that there was a threat to her and her husband, objectively he found no
    basis for the Appellants' relocation to the UK and therefore no  reason
    why they could not return to Pakistan.

17. The judge's assessment was reinforced by the fact that W.R.B.  appeared
    less than truthful in giving his evidence about opening up  a  computer
    shop less than a year after his arrival here.  Accordingly, the appeals
    of both Appellants were dismissed.

Onward Appeal

18. Both Appellants appealed  the  FtT's  decision.   The  grounds  seeking
    permission complained of several matters, but permission was granted on
    limited terms only by FtTJ Dineen.  The  relevant  part  of  the  grant
    reads as follows:

         "2.  The notices complain that  the  judge  did  not  consider  the
             evidence in the round, failed to give anxious scrutiny to  the
             evidence and ignored material evidence.

         3.   The judge in fact made comprehensive findings on the  evidence
             at [39-89] At [80] he found on the totality  of  the  evidence
             that he could not attach any weight to FIRs.  He found at [88]
             that on the totality of the evidence he was not  satisfied  to
             the lower standard of proof that the appellants  would  be  at
             risk in Pakistan.

         4.   The appellants' complaints amount to no more than disagreement
             with the order in which the judge considered the evidence.

         5.   However, at [55] the judge began a bulleted list  of  findings
             which on its face is incomplete.  This may be due  to  a  word
             processing  error.   It  is  not  possible  to  say  what  the
             omissions are or whether they might be material.

         6.   Permission to appeal is granted on this ground only".

19. The Appellants, taking issue  with  Judge  Dineen's  limited  grant  of
    permission sought further permission from the Upper Tribunal.  This was
    refused by UTJ Blum and thus the matter comes before me on the  limited
    ground only as set out by Judge Dineen to decide whether the  decisions
    contain an error of law requiring them to be remade.

UT Hearing

20. Before me, Mr Hussain appeared for both Appellants, and Mr Diwnycz  for
    the Respondent.  The first Appellant S.T. was not  in  attendance.   Mr
    Hussain handed in a medical appointment letter  showing  that  S.T.  is
    pregnant and was attending a clinic for a pregnancy scan.  He  made  no
    application to adjourn the proceedings  on  account  of  that  and  was
    content to proceed in her absence.

21. Mr Hussain's submissions centred round  the  omission  in  Judge  Cox's
    decision at [55].  He submitted that it is a long held  principle  that
    an Appellant is entitled to have a decision made whereby he or she  can
    clearly understand why they have won or lost their appeal.

22. In the instant appeals, Mr Hussain did  acknowledge  that  the  limited
    Grounds of Appeal primarily concern S.T.'s appeal, because [55] relates
    to that part of the decision where the judge  is  dealing  with  S.T.'s
    oral evidence.

23. He submitted that the judge had set out a list of his findings but  had
    not completed that list.  This was sufficient to raise  a  doubt  about
    whether the judge's omission was material or not.  He proposed that the
    appropriate course therefore  would  be  to  find  that  this  omission
    amounted to an error sufficient to remit the appeals back to Judge  Cox
    for him to complete the omission at [55]. In the light of that  finding
    the judge should reconsider his decision and re-promulgate it.

24. Mr Diwnycz had not served a Rule 24 response.  However,  he  was  fully
    supportive of the course proposed by Mr Hussain and  agreed  that  this
    would be the most practical way forward. This was in view of  the  fact
    that the judge had made comprehensive findings on the evidence at  [39]
    to [89] and those findings were not open to challenge.

Consideration

25. The point in issue before me is a narrow one.  I find that the decision
    of Judge Cox in many ways is a careful, thoughtful one and one on which
    he clearly has spent considerable time.  However, I do  find  that  the
    omission at [55] amounts to an error and as  the  grant  of  permission
    outlines it is not possible to say what the  omission  amounts  to  and
    whether it could therefore be material.  I reiterate that there  is  no
    sustainable challenge to the judge's  credibility  findings  concerning
    W.R.B.

26. In view of the considerable time spent on this matter by Judge  Cox,  I
    find it is appropriate that these matters should be remitted  to  Judge
    Cox for him to clarify the omission at [55].  It will be necessary  for
    him to re-make and re-promulgate his decision regarding both appellants
    in the light of that clarification.

Notice of Decision

For the foregoing reasons I set aside the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Cox, to the extent that I remit these matters back to  Judge  Cox  for
him to remake the decisions on the terms set out above.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     31 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

