
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09373/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 November 2016                  |On 6 January 2017                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 dondu sanci
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Baztram (Senior Counsel) instructed by Migrant
Law
     Partnership (Hoxton Street)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of  Turkey  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.   In  a
    decision sent on 29 June 2016 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  (FtT)  Judge
    Traynor dismissed her appeal against a decision made by the  respondent
    on 4 June 2015 refusing to grant asylum and to remove  her  by  way  of
    directions as an illegal entrant.

2.   The appellant claimed to have suffered ill-treatment at  the  hands  of
    the Turkish authorities on account of her husband's alleged involvement
    with the PKK.  The judge did not find  her  account  or  those  of  her
    supporting witnesses credible.

3.   The grounds of appeal level a number of criticisms against the  judge's
    reasoning: that he relies  on  speculation  and  conjecture;  fails  to
    address the salient issues and errs in respect of the medical evidence,
    background material and country guidance.  As regards country guidance,
    the grounds point out that in IK [2004] UKIAT 00312  one  of  the  risk
    factors listed in the head note was:

         "(f)     Whether  the  appellant  has  family  connections  with  a
             separatist organisation such as KADEK or HADEP or DEHAP".

    Particular objection is taken to the judge's rejection of the  evidence
    of the appellant's siblings, both of whom were granted  refugee  status
    after winning their appeals.  It is argued  that  the  judge  erred  in
    failing to  observe  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  on  Vulnerable
    Witnesses.

4.   I do not find that the grounds establish an arguable error of law.

5.   As regards the assault  on  the  judge's  credibility  findings,  I  am
    unable to agree that they rely on speculation  and  conjecture  or  are
    otherwise flawed.  The reasons the judge gave for finding the appellant
    not credible were based squarely on a number of identified shortcomings
    in the appellant's evidence including major  inconsistencies  regarding
    her account of having fallen out with her parents, of who the father of
    the child was and of her  having been raped in her parents' house.

6.   The grounds seek to rely on the fact that the appellant's  brother  and
    sister, who both gave evidence at her appeal,  had  been  found  to  be
    refugees by different  constitutions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    appeal.  It was said that they were subsequently granted asylum on  the
    basis of the difficulties they had in  Turkey  with  the  PKK  and  the
    authorities.  It is of course correct that a judge is expected to treat
    findings of fact made by a previous tribunal  as  a  start  point:  see
    Devaseelan.  But as Devaseelan makes clear, it remains a  judge's  duty
    to decide each case according to the evidence  as  a  whole.   In  this
    case, the appellant's representatives did not produce the decisions  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in the case  of  the  appellant's  brother  and
    sister; and, in the absence of being shown what findings of  fact  were
    made in their case, the judge was  certainly  entitled  not  to  accept
    uncritically their evidence as credible.  Further, the evidence of  the
    brother and sister was inconsistent with that of the appellant in  more
    than one respect: see [71]-[72].  In such circumstances it was entirely
    open the judge to find:

    (i)  that their testimony as regards their own experiences was  "simply
         that they were caught between the PKK and the government  and  that
         they were ultimately forced to flee from Turkey ..."; and that

    (ii) he could not give any weight to their testimony in regard  to  the
         appellant's alleged past difficulties with the Turkish  authorities
         or the PKK.

    I shall return below to the specifics of their own experiences.

7.   As regards the contention that the judge fails to treat  the  appellant
    as a vulnerable witness, it is correct that given  the  nature  of  her
    asylum claim (which included an allegation that she had been the victim
    of rape in Turkey), she stood to be treated  as  a  vulnerable  witness
    under the terms of the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note.   However,
    whilst the judge did not expressly identify her as such, I am satisfied
    that throughout the hearing the judge took particular  care  to  assist
    her, to make due allowance for her in  presenting  her  evidence.   The
    issue of the appellant's memory had  been  identified  by  her  at  the
    asylum interview and the respondent had expressly addressed it  in  her
    reasons for refusal, noting that it arose only when the  appellant  was
    asked to explain discrepancies.  The respondent noted at  paragraph  15
    of her decision  letter  that  she  had  not  provided  any  supporting
    evidence to demonstrate how her health affected her ability to  provide
    a coherent account of her experiences.  The judge was clearly aware  of
    the difference between the appellant and the respondent on the question
    of her memory and forgetfulness and noted what she  and  her  witnesses
    said about it in evidence:  see,  e.g.  [25],  [40].   The  judge  also
    summarised the opposing submissions he received on the issue: see [44],
    [45], [53].  The judge  expressly  addressed  the  issue  in  [75].   I
    consider that in that paragraph the judge gave adequate and  sufficient
    reasons for concluding that the lack of coherence in her evidence could
    not be attributed to her memory difficulties.

8.   It is contended in the grounds that  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to
    apply the country guidance set out in IK at paragraph (f) of  the  head
    note in particular.  I am unable to agree.  The grounds are correct  to
    assert that the judge was obliged by his own findings to:

    (i)  assess her claim on the basis that they had  had  to  flee  Turkey
         because they were "caught between the PKK and the government"; and

    (ii) to infer from  this  that  they  were  perceived  by  the  Turkish
         authorities, to be in some way connected with the PKK; and

    (iii)    to consider whether the appellant was at  risk  by  virtue  of
         being their family member.

    However, I do not consider that the judge's assessment  fell  into  any
    material error.  As regards (i) and (ii), it would appear that that was
    indeed the factual basis on which he considered the case.   As  regards
    the question identified in (iii), I would accept,  therefore  that  the
    judge should have addressed it fully, especially since he had cited the
    IK case earlier and said that he considered it ([61]).   Against  that,
    however, it is important to note first of all that the appellant  never
    based her own claim to asylum on connections with her  siblings  -  her
    claim was based on her own experiences  and  her  connection  with  her
    husband, on both of which matters  she  was  found  not  credible.   In
    addition, her Counsel placed no reliance at the hearing on risk arising
    from connection with her siblings; only on connection with her husband.
    More important still, the guidance given in IK does not, as the grounds
    appear to assert, state that persons who have family  connections  with
    separatist organisations (which plainly must include  the  PKK)  are  a
    risk category.  The guidance only lists it  as  one  of  several  "risk
    factors".

9.   Further, the judge did consider the issue specifically in  relation  to
    her siblings and clearly  bore  in  mind  that  family  connections  in
    general were a relevant consideration, noting at [72] that:

         "Similarly, the Appellant's brother's evidence informed me that the
         Appellant had just married when he left Turkey.  He has been in the
         United Kingdom since March 2011 and he stated  that  the  Appellant
         had never been involved with politics, but  claimed  that  she  was
         interested in politics because all of the family were involved.  If
         there is any truth in what the Appellant's  siblings  have  stated,
         then I find the Appellant would have  given  an  account  that  her
         family, that is to say not just her brother and sister who  are  in
         the United Kingdom, but also her parents,  would  have  experienced
         problems with  the  Turkish  authorities  prior  to  the  Appellant
         leaving the family home in 2010/11 in order to marry against  their
         wishes.  However, it is the  Appellant's  testimony  that  no  such
         untoward event occurred and it is particularly remarkable that,  in
         all of her accounts, she did  not  mention  that  her  brother  and
         sister had left Turkey because of similar  problems  with  the  PKK
         and, in particular, the Turkish authorities." (Emphases added)

    Whilst the judge should arguably have considered the family connections
    risk factor more fully, it is  notable  that  there  was  no  objective
    evidence placed before the Tribunal by either  the  respondent  or  the
    appellant to indicate that the  Turkish  authorities  would  subject  a
    person such as the appellant to adverse treatment on return.  The  fact
    that she had failed to establish either a risk profile in her own right
    or one arising from her connection with her husband or parents  coupled
    with the extremely unparticularised evidence  given  by  the  siblings,
    more than justified the judge in concluding that the appellant had  not
    made out her claim in relation to family connections of any kind.

Notice of Decision

For the above reasons, the grounds of appeal  do  not  identify  a  material
error of law. Accordingly  the  decision  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal  to
dismiss the appellant's appeal must stand.


Signed                                  Date
              [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
