
  [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA 09886 2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Date sent                    |
|On 8 May 2013 and 18 June 2013                |On 5 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     V T
                  tHE EXISTING ANONYMITY ORDER IS CONTINUED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     On 8 May 2013 Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel, instructed
                    by Vasuki Solicitors
     On 18 June 2013 Ms A Walker, Counsel instructed by Vasuki Solicitors
For the Respondent:    On 8 May 2013 Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officer
     On 18 June 2013 Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Interpreter:  On 8 May 2013 Mr U Muraleetharan (English/Tamil)
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  She was born on 20 April  1969
    and so is now 44 years old.  She appeals the decision of the  respondent
    on 23 August 2011 to remove her from the United Kingdom.  It is her case
    that she is a refugee or otherwise entitled to international protection.
     The appeal has previously been determined unsatisfactorily.  A decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer
    and Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Pickup  on  24 September  2012.   The
    reasons for that decision have  been  served  on  the  parties  and  are
    appended to this Determination.

 2. There had been an aborted hearing in March and the case came  before  me
    to be decided on 9 May.

 3. Mr Paramjorthy asked me to adjourn the case.  He said that the  Tribunal
    would be assisted by waiting for country guidance which is understood to
    be imminent, the appellant wanted to provide better medical evidence and
    she wanted to obtain a proof of evidence from her husband to call him to
    support her case.

 4. There was no good reason for the appellant not having obtained  evidence
    from her husband on an  earlier  occasion.   The  medical  evidence  was
    potentially interesting because Mr Paramjorthy explained that  he  hoped
    to instruct a medical practitioner who would be able to indicate if  the
    scars that are clearly on the appellant's body were inflicted  when  the
    appellant was benefiting from anaesthesia.  I accept that Mr Paramjorthy
    would not suggest without good  reason  that  in  some  circumstances  a
    medical practitioner could give such evidence.  I recognise that  it  is
    important because it is plain that the appellant  is  scarred.   If  the
    scarring was inflicted under anaesthesia then it is unlikely to  be  the
    result of torture.  If the appellant was not in  any  way  anaesthetised
    when she sustained the wounds that led to the scars then it is, at least
    arguably, easier to believe that the scars were the result  of  torture,
    as she claims, rather than the result of a dishonest attempt to  enhance
    her case.  However there was no good reason for this  not  having  being
    done on any  earlier  occasion.   The  appellant  has  been  represented
    throughout by experienced solicitors and competent counsel, even  though
    Mr Paramjorthy had only been  instructed  shortly  before  the  hearing.
    Further the application  was  essentially  speculative.   There  was  no
    reason why the suggested evidence could not have been done before and it
    is not the function of an appeal to create endless opportunities for  an
    appellant to improve her case.  If, as  I  was  told,  medical  evidence
    could be obtained very quickly and it is helpful to the  appellant  then
    it could support a fresh application if necessary.

 5. There is no knowing when country guidance will in fact be promulgated or
    if it will in fact be helpful in this case.

 6. Putting all these things together I found no just reason to adjourn  and
    I decided to continue with the hearing.

 7. In the end I could not complete the hearing on 8 May.  This was  because
    Mr Paramjorthy wanted to adduce further evidence on a narrow point.   Mr
    Melvin had no objection to the evidence being received but then said  he
    needed at least two weeks to  prepare  a  response.   Having  agreed  to
    receive the further evidence from the appellant it was right to give the
    respondent reasonable  time  to  address  the  points  raised.   I  gave
    suitable directions and arranged for a further hearing.

 8. In accordance with those directions Mr Paramjorthy served a report  from
    "Freedom from Torture" dated 13 September 2012 and part of  the  Country
    of Origin Information Report dated 18 February 2012 and Mr Melvin served
    Written Submissions on 17 May 2013. On 18 June 2013 neither  party  made
    oral submissions.

 9. Mr Paramjorthy made it plain that this is not a case where the appellant
    relied on Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.   Her
    stay in the United Kingdom has been quite short and her husband had been
    refused asylum.  If the appellant does not need international protection
    then removing her would be a proportionate interference with the minimal
    private and family life established in her  short  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was helpful of Mr Paramjorthy to make this concession.   It
    does not assist anyone for my time to be taken dealing with  grounds  of
    appeal that can, at best, be described as extremely optimistic.

10.  It  is  for  the  appellant  to  prove  that  she  needs  international
    protection but it is sufficient if she shows that there is a  real  risk
    of her being persecuted or otherwise seriously ill-treated in the  event
    of her return.

11. It should not be necessary to say but for the avoidance of doubt I  make
    it plain that I have not reached any conclusions about this case without
    having first considered all of the evidence in the round, including  the
    bundles provided by the parties, and if, for example, the order in which
    I consider the evidence or some comment  I  make  when  setting  it  out
    suggests to the contrary then that suggestion is wrong.

12. I have the benefit of a full skeleton argument from Mr  Melvin  as  well
    as the written submissions mentioned above.  Mr Paramjorthy had prepared
    a skeleton argument but it was incomplete.  He was happy to rely on  the
    skeleton argument prepared for the First-tier Tribunal by Miss P  Gandhi
    who represented the appellant at the First-tier  Tribunal  and  his  own
    grounds of appeal.

13. The papers show that the appellant claimed asylum on 4 April 2011.   She
    said that she had entered the United Kingdom on 14 March  2011  using  a
    false passport.

14. I have found it helpful to begin my analysis by considering the  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter dated 23 August 2011 which included a summary of  the
    appellant's claim.

15. The appellant identified herself as an  ethnic  Tamil.   Before  leaving
    Sri Lanka she had lived in Kilinochchi.

16. Between 1996 and 1999 she had worked  for  the  LTTE  teaching  children
    maths and religion and  sometimes  cooking  for  them  but  poor  health
    stopped her working with children.

17. The appellant married in 2000.  Her husband worked as  a  carpenter  for
    the LTTE until 2004 when he stopped because he became ill.

18. In 2007 her husband was arrested by the army on suspicion  of  being  in
    the LTTE.  He was detained for three days before being released.

19. As a  result  of  the  war  the  appellant  and  her  family  adopted  a
    peripatetic  lifestyle.   On  16  May  2009  the  appellant  moved  into
    Ramanathan Army Camp with her children, her mother-in-law and her father-
    in-law. On 31 May 2009 she was arrested with ten to twelve other  people
    on suspicion of being in the LTTE.  She  was  taken  to  Babumaddu  Camp
    where she was held until February 2011.  She was questioned during  that
    stay and burned with an iron bar and cigarettes and she was raped.   She
    signed a statement written in Tamil.

20. In February 2011 she gave the address of  her  husband's  uncle  to  one
    "Sashi" to give to the EPDP who organised her escape.  She said that  on
    the night of 20 February 2011 she told the guard she was  going  to  use
    the toilet but in fact she jumped over a fence where a van  was  waiting
    for her with her children and her husband's uncle.  She  was  driven  to
    Negombo where she remained until 14 March 2011.  An agent then  arranged
    passports for her and the children and on 14 March 2011  she  flew  from
    Negombo to a Muslim country where she stayed for about  an  hour  and  a
    half before flying to the United Kingdom.

21. She said she feared arrest by the army because she had  worked  for  the
    LTTE and had escaped from detention.

22. The respondent found it damaging to  the  appellant's  credibility  that
    she did not claim asylum on arrival.  It  was  her  case  that  she  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 March 2011 but did not claim asylum
    until 4 April 2011.  Nothing had  happened  in  the  United  Kingdom  to
    change her need for international protection and although she claimed to
    have travelled to the United Kingdom with an agent it was her  case  she
    had been reunited with her husband on the day  that  she  arrived.   Her
    husband  had  previously  claimed  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    according to the respondent:

         "it  is  considered  reasonable  to  expect  you  to  have   sought
         international protection at the first opportunity.  Your failure to
         do so is seen as damaging to your credibility."

23. The respondent acknowledged that it was the appellant's  case  that  she
    had been involved in work for the LTTE at an LTTE camp in  Skanthapurram
    in Kilinochchi (interview questions 3-4) but the respondent referred  to
    background  material  showing  that  from  September  1996  until   1998
    Kilinochchi was under Government control.  The respondent did not accept
    that the appellant could have worked at  an  LTTE  camp  in  Kilinochchi
    between 1996 and 1999 because, for most of that time, the LTTE were  not
    in control of Kilinochchi.  The respondent found that  this  (she  said)
    unbelievable claim seriously undermined the appellant's credibility  and
    did not accept that the appellant had worked for the LTTE at all.

24. However the respondent noted that even if the appellant was telling  the
    truth, on her own case she had stopped working for the LTTE in 1999  and
    had had no problems with them when the LTTE resumed control of her  home
    area.

25. The respondent accepted her claim to have been taken to  the  Ramanathan
    Camp in Chettykullam because this claim was inherently plausible in  the
    light of the  background  material.   However  the  respondent  did  not
    believe the appellant's claim to have been  arrested  by  the  army  and
    taken to Babumaddu Camp on 31 May 2009  until  February  2011  when  she
    escaped.  The main reason for this was that, according to the Country of
    Origin Information Report, the  Sri  Lankan  rehabilitation  and  prison
    reforms minister stated that the  last  of  the  female  detainees  were
    released in October 2010.

26. In the circumstances the respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant
    had been detained and ill-treated at all.

27.  The  respondent  was  unimpressed  with  the  photographs  showing  the
    appellant to have burn marks on her chest at the  top  of  her  breasts,
    which she attributed to cigarette burning, and on her  back,  which  she
    attributed to burning with an iron rod.  According to the respondent the
    appellant had given inconsistent evidence about the  occasion  when  she
    was burnt with an iron rod.  According to the respondent  the  appellant
    had said that she was burnt immediately  on  arrival  at  the  detention
    centre in May 2009 and later that she was burnt in October  2009.   This
    inconsistency was seen as a sign of dishonesty.

28. There was no medical  evidence  to  help  date  the  occasion  when  the
    appellant was burnt with cigarettes.

29. The appellant had claimed to have been raped during detention on two  or
    three occasions but was unable to give details of the incidents  or  say
    with any kind of precision when they  occurred.   She  claimed  to  have
    fainted on each occasion.  There was no medical evidence from a  medical
    practitioner in the United Kingdom to  confirm  that  she  had  made  an
    allegation of rape and she was not believed.

30. The respondent did not believe the appellant's account  of  escaping  by
    claiming to need to use the lavatory and then fleeing  from  the  guard.
    It was the appellant's case that the guard did not escort her  from  the
    room where she was detained to the lavatory and did  not  see  her  jump
    over the fence.  The respondent found such casualness inconsistent  with
    the claim that she was kept in a locked room.

31. Neither did the respondent believe that a camp used to detain  suspected
    LTTE activists would be protected solely  by  a  fence  about  the  same
    height as the appellant made from leaves and sticks which  is  what  she
    claimed.  The respondent was satisfied that,  for  example,  Manik  Farm
    Camp was surrounded by barbed wire.  The respondent did not accept  that
    similar protection did not exist at the  appellant's  alleged  place  of
    detention.

32. Further if the  were  any  truth  in  the  appellant's  story  then  the
    respondent did not  accept  that  there  would  be  any  record  of  her
    detention.  It could be assumed that military officials  would  have  to
    explain how a suspected LTTE activist escaped  from  their  custody.  If
    there was any truth at all in the appellant's story  then  it  could  be
    assumed that there was no real interest in the appellant. Whilst bribery
    may have hastened her release the Authorities had no interest in her and
    would not want to create difficulties for themselves by leaving  records
    that identified her as an escaped suspect.

33.  Unsurprisingly,  given  these  findings,  the  respondent   found   the
    appellant had not proved her case.

34. Against this background I consider how the appellant  actually  advanced
    her case.

35. She responded to a screening interview  identifying  herself  as  a  Sri
    Lankan Tamil who followed  the  Hindu  religion.   She  gave  apparently
    straightforward answers about her travel to the United Kingdom  using  a
    passport obtained in a false identity by an agent.  Her fingerprints had
    been taken by the army in Sri Lanka but not by any other organisation or
    person.

36. The appellant identified her husband and confirmed that  they  were  now
    living together in the United Kingdom and that he had applied for asylum
    in 2008.

37. The appellant was interviewed about her application on  13  April  2011.
    I have read the interview.  Some of the answers have  to  be  considered
    with particular care because, Mr Paramjorthy  submitted,  the  interview
    record did not support some of the points taken by the respondent.

38. The appellant said that her husband worked as a jobbing carpenter  doing
    work for the LTTE.  He was arrested by the army in 2007.  She could  not
    remember the month.  He was arrested and detained for  three  days.   In
    May 2009 the appellant with her children and parents-in-law moved to the
    Ramanathan Camp but her husband did not move there with  them.   Someone
    identified the appellant to the army as a person  that  worked  for  the
    LTTE.  She "screamed and cried" when she knew the  army  had  discovered
    her past.  She said the army told her  that  she  was  being  taken  for
    questioning and would be released but they did not  release  her.   They
    tortured her and beat her and wrote a statement  in  Tamil  for  her  to
    sign.  She was told then that she would  be  released  after  two  weeks
    (question 67) but she was not released.

39. She said that she  was  arrested  on  31  May  2009  and  taken  to  the
    Babumaddu Camp where she was detained with five or six other  people  in
    one room.

40. The questions and answers at 79 and 80 had become important  and  I  set
    them out below:

         Question:     "What happened when you first got to Babumaddu Camp?"

         Answer:  "They heated iron rod and burned me on the  back.   People
         who did not sign the statement which they wrote."(sic)

         Question: "So before you were questioned you  were  burnt  with  an
         iron rod?"

         Answer:  "After questioning I was burnt with a heated iron rod."

41. She confirmed at question 81 that the first thing that happened  at  the
    camp is that:

         "We were kicked and  beaten.   They  used  abusive  language,  they
         pulled our hair, I had long hair, they cut it short."

42. She explained that during questioning they suggested  to  her  that  her
    husband was an LTTE activist.  She then explained how she  was  made  to
    look at "dirty photographs  on  a  phone."   If  she  was  reluctant  to
    cooperate she was slapped.  She said that she was raped on two or  three
    occasions and on each occasion one or two  people  were  involved.   She
    fainted.  She received no medical attention in Sri  Lanka  and  did  not
    seek advice when she came to the United Kingdom.  She confirmed she  had
    not been tested to see if she suffered  from  any  sexually  transmitted
    disease.

43. She was asked about the marks  on  her  chest  which  were  shown  in  a
    photograph.  She said in answer to question 93:

         "I refused to behave indecently with  me  so  they  burnt  me  with
         cigarette".

44. She said the marks on her back were the result of burns  inflicted  when
    she was reluctant to sign a document.

45. There was only one occasion when she was burnt with a cigarette and  one
    occasion when she was burnt with an iron rod.

46. She said that "everyone" was asked to sign a document.  In her case  she
    was asked to sign after she had been  in  detention  for  four  or  five
    months.

47. At question 101 the appellant was asked:

         "How long had you been in detention before you were burned?"

         The appellant replied:

         "In January 14, because they were discussing about the Thaipongal."

48. The appellant then confirmed that this happened in  2011.  Mr  Ulageswar
    (the interpreter) explained that Thaipongal is a Tamil word to  describe
    a traditional or religious agricultural festival  on  14  January  every
    year.

49. However in answer to question 103 the appellant said that she was  burnt
    with an iron rod in October 2009.  This, I note, is consistent with  the
    chronology indicated in answer to question 98 when  she  said  that  she
    refused to sign a document four or five months after being  detained  at
    the end of May 2009.

50. The appellant said that she was raped in 2010  but  could  not  identify
    the month.  Asked to describe the rape she said that four or five people
    were present but only one raped her. She described how she was undressed
    by those present and watched.  She said of one  of  the  attackers:  "he
    kissed me everywhere, then he raped me." She said she fainted.

51. She claimed not to notice if the subsequent rapes were  carried  out  in
    the same way on each occasion.  She then explained that the  method  was
    different but she fainted every time.  I  set  out  below  question  and
    answer at 111.

         Question:     "Were you raped in the same way each time?"

         Answer:  "I couldn't notice because already I was sick, my body was
                  very weak.  The rape was different but every time when  it
                  happened I fainted."

52. The appellant had only signed one document.

53. She then explained how she escaped from custody. She explained that  one
    Sashi Accar was a detainee in the camp who said that she  could  arrange
    for the EDDP to help.  Sashi Accar was detained with the appellant.  She
    explained that it was arranged that a van would be waiting for her.  She
    was taken into the van and hidden under a seat and  then  taken  to  the
    forest where another van was waiting.  Her parents-in-law  and  children
    were waiting in the van with her.  She said she did not know her parents-
    in-law's whereabouts but she knew an address where her husband might  be
    and that turned out to be correct.  She said that the EPDP were  working
    for money and other people had been approached.   Sashi  approached  the
    appellant because they were close.  She said they spent  time  together.
    She believed Sashi was more influential than was the appellant.

54. In answer to question 136 the appellant said:

         "There were so many girls but this girl speaks to  me  more  and  I
         also speak to her".

55. I find this answer hard to reconcile with  the  appellant's  account  of
    being in contact only with the small number of  people  who  shared  her
    room or cell.

56. She explained that she escaped on 20 February  2011.   She  claimed  she
    was going to use the separate toilet for detained  people.   The  toilet
    was close to the fence.  The fence was her height and she  was  able  to
    climb and jump the fence.

57. The appellant said it was normal to be allowed to go to  the  toilet  at
    night unaccompanied by a guard.  She claimed that she  jumped  over  the
    fence at a time when no guard was with her so she  was  not  seen.   She
    explained that a van was waiting.

58. The appellant gave details about her  departure  from  Sri  Lanka.   She
    said that she feared return because she would be  arrested  having  been
    identified as a person who escaped.

59. She was asked if she could explain why Sashi had not escaped if she  was
    able to arrange for the appellant's escape.  The appellant said that she
    was able to escape because her family had money.

60. Her husband left Sri Lanka in September 2009.  He had been arrested  and
    tortured and he decided to go.  She could not return to  live  with  her
    family because she had escaped.

61. The appellant made a statement dated 27 September 2011.

62. The appellant said she came to the United Kingdom on 14 March  2011  and
    instructed  her  legal  representatives   on   16   March   2011.    The
    representatives tried to make an appointment for her to claim asylum but
    could not make contact with the necessary  authorities  until  21  March
    2011.  She denied that she had delayed claiming asylum.

63. She did not accept that the fall of Kilinochchi  to  government  control
    from 1996 to 1998 undermined her claim to have worked for  the  LTTE  in
    Kilinochchi between 1996 and 1999. She said that the  LTTE  overran  the
    army in 1998 (this claim is supported by the  background  material)  and
    that she continued to work for the LTTE at the camp throughout the  time
    that the LTTE controlled Kilinochchi town during 1996 and 1998.

64. She disagreed with the assertion that  all  female  prisoners  had  been
    released in October 2010 as claimed by the Minister  for  Rehabilitation
    and Prison Reform. She insisted that she  was  detained  until  February
    2011 and that many people linked to the LTTE were detained at secret, or
    unknown, camps.

65. She denied there was any inconsistency in the chronology about when  she
    was burnt with an iron rod.

66. She had claimed not to be able to remember all  the  dates  when  things
    had happened.

67. She had not registered with a GP when she came to the United Kingdom.

68. She thought that the guard that who made it possible for her to use  the
    lavatory unsupervised had agreed to facilitate in her escape but she did
    not know. She relied on Sashi Accar whose instruction she followed.

69. She said at paragraph 17 of her statement:

         "Of course there are barbed wire and fence  around  the  camp.   We
         cannot jump over that fence.  I was driven outside in hiding in the
         van.  When I was dropped at the bush I got into the other  van  and
         dressed like a Muslim woman.  They drove to Negombo."

70. She said that it was not recorded fully in the  asylum  interview.   She
    said she had explained at interview there were  two  vans  involved  and
    this had not been picked up.

71. The appellant gave evidence before me and adopted  her  statement  which
    itself  adopted  the  answers  given  at  the  interview  and  screening
    interview subject to certain clarifications.  She was not asked  further
    questions by Mr Paramjorthy but she was cross-examined.

72. She was asked if she could explain why her  husband  had  not  mentioned
    her working for the Tamil Tigers when  he  made  an  asylum  claim  even
    though he had mentioned his nephew and sisters  working  for  the  LTTE.
    The appellant replied:

         "I do not know that application was made by my husband,  I  do  not
         know why he did not want to mention it".

73. I say here that I think  this  must  be  the  complete  answer  to  that
    question.  Firstly I am not in a position to  evaluate  the  premise  on
    which the question was based.  I have not seen the file relating to  the
    appellant's husband.  I have not seen the  Record  of  Proceedings,  the
    statements made or the answers given to questions asked.  I do not  know
    if it is right that in his evidence he made no mention of the  appellant
    working for the Tamil Tigers.  However even if it is right I do not  see
    how it helps me to determine this appeal.  The appellant's  husband  was
    looking after himself and answering questions about his case.  If he had
    mentioned that his wife claimed to have been tortured  then  the  answer
    might have defeated an allegation of recent fabrication but,  unless  he
    claimed to have been present when the alleged torture took place, it  is
    unlikely that he would have been able to give useful evidence about  her
    ill treatment. I did not think it appropriate to exclude such  questions
    in the Tribunal, where the rules of  evidence  do  not  apply,  but  the
    chances anything relevant emerging from  such  questions  was  extremely
    thin and it did not.

74. Mr Melvin asked if the Sri Lankan Authorities actively  looked  for  the
    appellant's family between 1999 and 2009 before the  family  removed  to
    Ramanathan camp.  The appellant answered in the affirmative.

75. The appellant confirmed that she had not  produced  any  documents  from
    Sri Lanka to show the Authorities were in any way looking for her.

76. She was asked questions about her experiences  at  the  Babumaddu  Camp.
    She claimed not to be able to give any indication at all of the size  of
    the camp.  She said that she had spent all of her time in a single  room
    with five other people, being let out only to use the  lavatory.   Given
    that she had been questioned and,  she  said,  tortured  this  seemed  a
    rather unlikely answer but Mr Melvin did not investigate this.

77. She was then asked a series of  questions  intending  to  illuminate  an
    inconsistency in the  appellant's  answers  about  when  she  was  first
    tortured.  I understand why the questions were put because the  recorded
    answers invited them but I find the assumed premise behind the questions
    was not justified when the answers are  read  carefully.   Certainly  in
    answer to question 79 ("What happened when you first  got  to  Babumaddu
    Camp?") the appellant indicated that she was burned on her back  with  a
    heated rod of iron.  However in the same answer she made it  plain  that
    the burning was connected to not signing the  statement  that  had  been
    written for her.  She made it plain in answer to the next question  that
    the burning followed questioning and said in answer to question 81  that
    the first thing that happened to her was that she was kicked and beaten.
     In answer to question 98 she indicated that it was some  four  or  five
    months later after she  had  arrived  that  she  was  asked  to  sign  a
    statement.

78. I am not satisfied that  when  the  interview  was  read  carefully  the
    appellant had ever made the apparently inconsistent answers relied  upon
    by Mr Melvin.

79. In answer to questions in  cross-examination  she  said  she  was  raped
    between May and October 2009.  It was then pointed out to her  that  she
    had said elsewhere that she had been raped in 2010.  She  said  she  was
    confused.

80. Mr Melvin did not ask her why she was  uncertain  about  the  number  of
    times she had been raped.

81. The appellant confirmed the document she had to sign was in Tamil.   She
    said that it was showed to her so she could recognise what  it  was  but
    she was not given an opportunity of reading it.

82. She said all of the prisoners who  shared  a  room  with  her  had  been
    subjected to burning and sexual abuse.

83. She confirmed that she had never been taken before a  court  or  charged
    with any criminal offence.

84. She claimed to know nothing about all female  prisoners  being  released
    in 2010.

85. She had received no medical treatment for asthma and epilepsy.

86. She did not know if the person who helped her escape remained in  prison
    after she had gone.  She said all of the women  detained  with  her  had
    been asked if they wanted to escape.

87. She was asked about the escape.  She said she was met by  a  driver  and
    she told me that her husband's uncle and her children were  there.   She
    said that the uncle, children and driver had all gone into the  camp  to
    collect her from inside the camp.  She could not explain why  the  whole
    family had gone there.

88.  Mr Melvin,  correctly  because  this  was  his  case,  put  it  to  the
    appellant that the burning on her body was not the result of torture  by
    the army but done to enhance her asylum claim.  She denied that.

89. She had not had medical treatment in the United Kingdom.

90. She understood the escape cost 10 lakh rupees to arrange.

91. There  is  a  medical  report  from  Dr  Zacharias  Costa  following  an
    examination  on  24 September  2011.   Mr  Melvin   was,   with   some
    justification, critical of Dr Costa's report.   It  is  not  clear,  for
    example, if Dr Costa is still in regular  practice.   It  is  even  less
    clear what expertise he has to support his  opinions.   However  I  find
    this something of a red herring because I do not find the opinions to be
    controversial.  Dr Costa concluded that the scars on her back and top of
    the breasts were not self-inflicted, and that the  scars  on  the  chest
    were diagnostic of cigarette burns and the other scars were  "diagnostic
    of scars which had been caused in the manner described".

92. The photographs clearly show what appear to be broad  scarred  lines  in
    the tissue across the appellant's back.  It is  absolutely  no  surprise
    whatsoever to know that there is medical opinion that these were  caused
    by burning with a hot rod of some kind.  Dr Costa cannot know, and  does
    not claim to know, if they were the result of torture or a procedure  to
    which the appellant voluntarily submitted herself to enhance her  claim.
    The second possibility might seem to be inherently unlikely  but  it  is
    not impossible and I do not read Dr Costa's  report  as  excluding  that
    possibility.

93. Although Mr Paramjorthy praised the skeleton argument from  Miss  Gandhi
    he was careful to make clear that he included that in his  argument  and
    did not adopt it as his argument.

94. I begin by considering the skeleton argument itself.

95. I am not satisfied that I should disbelieve the appellant because  there
    is background evidence that Kilinochchi was under army control at a time
    when the appellant claimed to be there working for the LTTE.  There  are
    two reasons for this.  The appellant was never asked  to  explain  where
    she meant by Kilinochchi.  I am  satisfied  that  a  rump  of  the  LTTE
    maintain control of Vanni where  fighting  took  place  and  that  Vanni
    includes part of Kilinochchi district.  Further as it is  accepted  that
    the appellant did do some work for  the  LTTE  I  do  not  find  this  a
    particularly insightful point.

96. The contention that the appellant cannot be telling  the  truth  because
    at a time when she claimed to have  been  imprisoned  and  tortured  all
    female detainees had been released is potentially a determinative point.
     I must ask myself exactly what the rehabilitation  and  prison  reforms
    minister meant when he said, as I am satisfied that  he  did,  that  the
    last of the female detainees were released in October 2010.  I have been
    able to inspect the Country of Origin Information Report  dated  4  July
    2011.  The reference to the "third category above" is the  reference  to
    "those with low level LTTE  involvement  and  were  believed  to  number
    between 3,000-4,000." These would  be  released  and  receive  community
    reintegration."

97. The appellant of course  claimed  to  be  involved  in  low  level  LTTE
    support but to have been suspected of  more.  The  Sri  Lankan  minister
    acknowledged that there are up to 4,000 people in this  category  and  I
    would not expect a minister in Sri Lanka to make up a figure  to  pander
    to the Government of the United Kingdom.

98. I felt the weight of Mr Paramjorthy's submission suggesting that a  very
    large number of people were detained for a time, and that  therefore  it
    was hard to accept that every woman had been released by  October  2010.
    However Mr Paramjorthy could not point to any evidence  that  any  women
    who had been detained in the end of war  roundups  were  detained  after
    October 2010 when the minister said they had all been released.

99. I acknowledge the point in Miss  Gandhi's  skeleton  argument  that  the
    appellant, on her case, was not suspected  merely  of  "low  level  LTTE
    involvement" and was not therefore within the category of people who the
    minister said had been released. If the appellant was suspected of  more
    than low level LTTE involvement then this submission answers the  point.
    It follows that the respondent's contention that the appellant cannot be
    telling the truth when she claimed to have been detained  after  October
    2010 is not  necessarily  right.  If  I  find  that  the  appellant  was
    suspected of more than low level LTTE activity there is nothing  in  the
    point.

100. I am not particularly concerned about the apparent  delay  in  claiming
    asylum.  The appellant says she went to a solicitor the  day  after  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom  and  a  solicitor  tried  immediately  to
    contact the Authorities in the United Kingdom but was unable to do  that
    until a few days afterwards when the process moved swiftly.  If she came
    to the United Kingdom under the charge of an agent as she  alleges  then
    it should not be held against her that  she  did  not  claim  asylum  on
    arrival.  I have no rational basis for discounting the solicitor's claim
    that he was not able to make contact with the United Kingdom immigration
    authorities sooner than he  did.   In  the  circumstances  I  cannot  be
    satisfied that the appellant did delay seeking asylum without reasonable
    excuse.

101. I must make my credibility findings on an analysis of the  evidence  as
    a whole and must not  be  drawn  into  circular  arguments  which  would
    require me to determine whether or not she had a reasonable  excuse  for
    not seeking asylum earlier before  I  determine  the  credibility  as  a
    whole.

102. The skeleton argument suggested that the appellant's inability  to  say
    more about her rape would be the result of trauma.  That could be right.
     She has given some details.  I appreciate that some rape victims  find
    it very hard to give an account of their experiences and  that  shutting
    down details could be a way of coping  with  a  horrendous  assault.   I
    accept that the appellant may have had some difficulty in making initial
    contact with a medical practitioner. However, whatever  (understandable)
    inhibitions she may feel about discussing rape, she is  a  mature  woman
    who must know the  risk  of  contracting  serious  sexually  transmitted
    diseases in the circumstances she described.   I  find  it  a  troubling
    feature of the case that she did  not  specifically  ask  for  tests  to
    confirm she was not suffering from such a disease and her failure so  to
    do is something that I find points against believing her account.

103. The account of the escape is hard to believe.   Miss  Gandhi  submitted
    that the fence that the appellant was able to jump over  was  a  modesty
    screen erected around the ablutions block and  not  the  security  fence
    around the camp.  If that is right then it does make more sense  of  the
    appellant's claim to have been made to hide within the van.   The  point
    is, according to the appellant, that she was taken into the  van  inside
    the security fence and  then  driven  out  where  she  met  her  family.
    Although this gives some internal logic to the story  I  still  find  it
    deeply unpersuasive.  It  was  the  appellant's  account  that  she  was
    traumatised and ill.  I do not see how she could climb a fence  with  or
    without attracting  the  attention  of  a  guard.   Neither  do  I  find
    attractive the idea that a secure camp could have its security so easily
    breached.  The Sri Lankan Authorities are not foolish  or  childish  and
    the idea of a security being so lax that a suspected LTTE activist could
    be driven away with no more subterfuge than hiding  under  the  seat  is
    unpersuasive.  I find it very hard to believe that part of the story.

104. Mr Melvin in his skeleton argument contended  it  was  incongruous  for
    the appellant to have signed a document in the Tamil language.  He  said
    that the evidence suggested that the Sri Lankan Authorities would make a
    false confession or similar document in  the  Singhalese  language.   He
    speculated that there was no reason for the document to  be  written  in
    Tamil unless it was for the appellant to see it and understand it.  I do
    not accept this.  It was not the appellant's case in evidence  that  she
    did not understand any of it but that she was not given  an  opportunity
    of reading it.  I do not  find  it  particularly  significant  that  the
    document was written in Tamil.  It is an official language or at least a
    language very widely spoken and used in Sri Lanka and it was given for a
    Tamil speaker.  It is possible that the Authorities wanted to be able to
    show that the appellant did understand what she had signed.   However  I
    find it more significant that no proceedings were brought as a result of
    signing  that  document.   This  suggests  it  was   either   not   very
    incriminating or the Authorities were not very bothered or that  it  did
    not happen at all.

105.  The  additional  evidence  served  by  Mr  Paramjorthy  comprised  the
    document "Sri Lankan Tamils tortured on return from the UK" published by
    Freedom From Torture and extracts of the COI Report of 18 February 2010.

106. The report considered the position of certain Tamils  returned  by  the
    United Kingdom and found that a significant number had been interrogated
    after their return.  Six cases involved torture in detention and  in  at
    least some of the cases the torture included burning with cigarettes  or
    metal rods.

107. The report draws on an earlier report "Out of the Silence" reported  in
    November 2011.  This report postulated  that  a  number  of  Sri  Lankan
    asylum seekers who reported being  tortured  by  burning  and  supported
    their claim with suitable scarring suggested that there was a policy  of
    branding victims which would serve not only as  long-term  psychological
    and  physical  damage  but  would  leave  marks  that  would  be  easily
    recognised by interrogators in the event of subsequent detention.

108. The COI Report draws together published reports concerning the lack  of
    support given to displaced civilians.  I have no hesitation in accepting
    that the treatment of people in refugee camps left much  to  be  desired
    and  certainly  does  not  support  a  suggestion  of  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities energetically acting respectfully to  reintegrate  displaced
    people into mainstream society.  Nevertheless the same report,  although
    acknowledging the scale of the problem, records a letter to the  British
    High Commission of 12 January 2010 reporting the government of Sri Lanka
    intended to free the detainees.  It said that about 70,000 civilians had
    been released in the recent months leading up to January 2010  and  that
    people were being released or removed in large numbers.   I  have  found
    nothing that expressly undermines the reading of the minister's comments
    that all female prisoners were released by October 2010.

109. I  found  paragraph  21  of  Mr  Melvin's  written  submissions  to  be
    particularly helpful and I set them out below.  He said:

         "The Secretary of State accepts that before and after  the  end  of
         the war (May 2009) in  Sri  Lanka  the  authorities  detained  many
         thousands of Tamils in an attempt to find LTTE cadres hiding  among
         the civilian population.  The objective evidence  above  points  to
         men/women up to the age of 35 and some teenage  children  being  of
         particular interest.  It should be noted that the appellant in this
         appeal was 40 years of age at the time  travelling  with  her  aged
         parents-in-law and her two children.  It is accepted  in  the  RFRL
         that she may have been detained in the Menik Farm set of camps  and
         screened there but, what is not accepted is  that  she  would  have
         been transferred to another camp for further screening.   There  is
         nothing in the COI evidence that points to any 40  year  old  women
         being burned with hot irons, forced to sign Tamil documents and not
         charged once the confessions were obtained.  There is  also  little
         evidence that any women were detained beyond October 2010 and  very
         little evidence showing that the camps where suspected cadres  were
         detained were anything other than high security.   It  is  accepted
         that some instances of bribery for freedom went on at that time but
         the objective evidence of the  COI  report  does  show  that  large
         numbers of Tamils were released soon after and whilst accepted that
         figures show over 100,000 remained in temporary  camps  in  January
         2010 this does not show that any women were still detained  a  year
         later in 2011, which is what is being claimed by the appellant."

110. Concerning  the  Freedom  From  Torture  report  Mr  Melvin  makes  the
    perfectly fair point that because  the  claimants  are,  understandably,
    anonymised it is not possible for the Secretary of State to  investigate
    the profile of the returned people.   Other  than  showing  that  Tamils
    continue to complain of  serious  ill-treatment  including  torture  and
    support that claim with marks to the body this  does  not  take  matters
    very far.

111. I remain very troubled about the  scarring  on  the  appellant's  body.
    Somebody, somewhere, somehow has  attacked  her  with  hot  irons.   The
    appellant has marks on the front of her chest at the top of her  breasts
    and on her back which are highly indicative of  her  being  burned.   It
    flies in the face of all commonsense to think that a woman would  submit
    to that kind of injury voluntarily unless, perhaps, she  was  under  the
    most enormous pressure to rid herself of life  in  Sri  Lanka.   I  have
    reflected very hard on this strand of evidence.  It concerns me.

112. Nevertheless I do not believe the appellant's account of escaping  from
    custody.  It is wholly incongruous to me that she would be able  to  get
    out as easily as  she  claims  from  a  place  which  according  to  the
    background evidence was a high security detention facility for suspected
    LTTE activists.

113. I appreciate there is some evidence that  very  rich  people  and  high
    profile operators have been able to bribe their way out of  custody  but
    the appellant does not put herself in such a category and  there  is  no
    reason why I should.  Her inability to be  more  forthcoming  about  the
    circumstances of her detention and vagueness in her  evidence  does  not
    make it any easier to believe.

114. The appellant's account of being a  Sri  Lankan  Tamil  who  gave  some
    practical support to the LTTE and who was detained in the  aftermath  of
    the war is credible but if that was the extent of her case she would not
    need protection now.

115. I do not understand why she might have been suspected of more than  low
    level support. I appreciate that it does not follow from this  that  she
    was not suspected of such activity. There might be good reasons that are
    not known to the appellant or the authorities might have made a  mistake
    but it is a gap in the appellant's case that cannot be ignored.

116. I cannot reconcile her claim to have  been  of  such  interest  to  the
    authorities that she was taken away to a special camp with her claim  to
    have escaped by climbing a fence to reach an awaiting van that drove her
    out of the camp. I cannot reconcile the lax security  with  the  alleged
    heightened interest.

117. Even when I remind myself fully of Mr Paramjorthy's and  Miss  Gandhi's
    reasoned submissions and the lower standard of proof I do not accept the
    account.

118. Even if the appellant's scarring attracts attention  in  the  event  of
    her return it could only prompt enquiry and I do not believe there  will
    be any records adverse to her that would lead to further detention.

119. However I see no reason to find that there is a real risk of her  scars
    being noticed.  There is nothing before me to suggest there is a  policy
    of strip searching people on return.  I do not accept the mere  fact  of
    scars will create any risk.

120. It follows that the appellant has not proved her  case  and  I  dismiss
    the appeal on all grounds.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 4 July 2013                    |



Please Note:
The Reasons for Finding an Error of Law are appended to this Determination
beginning at page 16.



                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09886/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 September 2012                            |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                                     VT
                         [Anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:


    For the Appellant: Mr Paramjorthy


    For the Respondent: Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.





                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

                                  DECISION

 1. The appellant, Mrs V--- T---, [born in  1969],  is  a  citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka.


 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against a panel determination of the
    First-tier Tribunal comprising Designated Immigration Judge  Lewis  and
    Immigration Judge Lucas, who dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against
    the decision of the respondent dated 23.8.11 to refuse to grant  asylum
    and to give removal directions.


 3. Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer granted permission to appeal  on  22.2.12.
    Thus the matter came before us as an appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance we have to determine whether or not there was  an
    error of law such that the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dated 12.10.12 should be set aside.

 5. In summary, the appellant's claim is that between 1996 and 1999 she had
    been forced to work for the LTTE at Skanthapurran Camp as a teacher  of
    maths and religion. In 2000 she ceased working for the LTTE because  of
    'medical reasons', and married the same year. She continued to help the
    LTTE with functions and  decorations  on  another  2-4  occasions.  The
    appellant's husband worked for the LTTE  as  a  carpenter  until  2004,
    stopping because he had chest pains. The Sri Lankan army  arrested  her
    husband in 2007 and she did not see him again until she came to the UK.
    The appellant and other members of her family were eventually taken  to
    the Ramanthan Camp, where an unknown person informed the army that  she
    and her husband and father had worked for the LTTE. In consequence, she
    was arrested on 31.5.09 and taken to  Babumaddu  Camp,  where  she  was
    beaten, tortured, and raped. She was  questioned  about  her  own  LTTE
    activities and those of her husband and her father. The authorities did
    not believe her account, with the result that she remained in detention
    for about one and a half years, until, with the assistance of her uncle
    and her in-laws, she managed to escape on 20.2.11. After some 23 or  24
    days in hiding  she  and  her  children  left  Sri  Lanka  using  false
    passports and flew to the UK.

 6. The Grounds of Appeal submit as follows:

      a) That the First-tier Tribunal misunderstood material aspects of  the
         appellant's claim, amounting to a material error of law;

      b) That the adverse credibility findings as to the appellant's  actual
         involvement with the LTTE were irrational and amount to a  material
         error of law;

      c) In particular, it is submitted that the Tribunal erred  in  law  in
         finding that on the  basis  of  the  appellant's  actual  low  LTTE
         profile the authorities would not have any adverse interest in  her
         and would not have detained her. The Tribunal failed to assess  the
         appellant's credibility on the basis that she was suspected of LTTE
         involvement, in respect of which the authorities perceived that she
         was not telling the truth.  The  background  material  demonstrates
         that mere suspicion of LTTE involvement was sufficient  to  warrant
         arrest. In the circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law
         in finding that  her  account  of  arrest  and  detention  was  not
         credible.

      d) In the circumstances, it is submitted that due  to  the  identified
         errors of law the findings of fact as to the  appellant's  risk  on
         return are materially deficient.

 7. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Spencer noted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal found that the appellant  was  not  of  previous  adverse
    interest to the Sri Lankan authorities so as to warrant her  arrest  in
    May 2009 and detention until 2011 but this was not the reason  advanced
    by the appellant for her arrest and detention. The appellant's case was
    that whilst in the Ramanthan Camp she was denounced  as  having  worked
    for the LTTE, together with her husband and father. On the other  hand,
    the First-tier Tribunal relied on the fact that in his asylum claim the
    appellant's husband had not claimed  that  he  had  ever  been  a  LTTE
    member, and the First-tier Tribunal did  not  believe  the  appellant's
    account of her escape from detention.

 8. Judge Spencer noted that whilst, even if the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    understood that her claim to have been detained was not on  account  of
    her previous LTTE activities, it might be argued that a finding  as  to
    whether or not she was detained depended on her  credibility,  so  that
    the outcome of the appeal would have been the same, it  was  impossible
    to determine the likely  outcome  of  the  appeal  had  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  approached  the  appellant's  account  on  a  correct  basis,
    particularly in view of the medical evidence. In the circumstances,  it
    was  at  least  arguable  that  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the appeal.

 9. In her oral submissions on behalf  of  the  appellant,  Mr  Paramjorthy
    submitted that the appellant was not detained  because  of  her  actual
    profile, but because she had been anonymously denounced as she and  her
    husband and father having worked for the LTTE. At  questions  79-86  of
    the AIR, the appellant explained that she told the authorities that for
    a few months she had done cooking and teaching but later fell sick  and
    stopped working for the LTTE. She also told them that her  husband  had
    done some carpentry for the LTTE  but  fell  sick  and  they  moved  to
    Vavuniya. The army disbelieved her, stating that  she  was  lying,  and
    asserted that she had been continuously working for the LTTE.

10. At paragraph [53] of the determination the  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that if the appellant is to  be  believed  she  had  a  very  low  LTTE
    profile. That she was able to cease her employment at  will  reinforced
    the fact that she could have had no profile  of  any  significance.  At
    para [54] the Tribunal found that she, "had no  profile  at  all  as  a
    consequence of that service. This must have some consequences  for  the
    remainder and substance of her claim." This was repeated at para  [58].
    Mr Paramjorthy submitted that the Tribunal  erred  in  approaching  the
    case from the perspective of the appellant's actual profile rather than
    that of the authorities who detained her after being denounced and kept
    her in detention for questioning including torture, beatings and  rape,
    because they did not believe her account. It was  submitted  that  this
    error led the First-tier Tribunal to conclude that  the  appellant  was
    neither arrested, nor detained for 18 months, nor tortured as claimed.

11. For the respondent, Mr Nath submitted that  one  had  to  look  at  the
    determination in its entirety. The appellant was not solely disbelieved
    on the basis of her profile. The Tribunal considered the credibility of
    the appellant's claim as a whole, including the fact that in his asylum
    claim the appellant's husband made no reference to any  involvement  of
    this appellant with the LTTE, although he asserted that his nephew  and
    sisters were, "in good  ranks  in  the  LTTE."  His  asylum  claim  was
    dismissed as being neither credible nor plausible.  Mr  Nath  submitted
    that there was a detailed assessment of the appellant's credibility  in
    the round and  that  the  omission  of  failing  to  mention  that  the
    appellant was detained because she was pointed out did not  go  to  the
    heart of the determination. If it was an  error  of  law,  it  was  not
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

12. For the reasons set out below we find that the First-tier Tribunal  did
    make a fundamental error in assessing the appellant's case.

13. There is no real dispute about the extent of  the  appellant's  claimed
    actual LTTE profile; she allegedly carried out some  work  in  teaching
    and cooking. However, the Tribunal concluded at para [52] that even  if
    she did, she had no adverse  profile  with  the  Sri  Lankan  army  and
    authorities. This conclusion is reinforced at para [53]. On  the  basis
    that she was able to cease working at  a  time  of  her  choosing,  the
    Tribunal concluded that she could have had  no  profile  -  adverse  or
    otherwise - of any significance either within the LTTE or with the  Sri
    Lankan authorities. At para [54] the  Tribunal  stated  that  this  was
    their foundation for finding that the appellant had no profile  at  all
    as a consequence of that service. In stating that, "This must have some
    consequences for the remainder and substance of her claim," it is clear
    that the Tribunal relied on this finding in assessing  the  balance  of
    the appellant's claim.

14. Adding the absence of any reference to this appellant's  LTTE  work  in
    her husband's asylum application, at para [56]  of  the  determination,
    together with the fact that he did not attend or give evidence  in  her
    support at her appeal hearing, at para [57], the Tribunal  went  on  to
    conclude, at para [58], that it was  not  reasonably  likely  that  the
    appellant worked for the LTTE as claimed between  1996  and  1999.  Her
    account was not believed, but even if she did perform some role for the
    LTTE, she had no profile either within the LTTE or with the Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

15. It is implicit in the balance of the determination  that  the  Tribunal
    assumed that the appellant's case was that  her  claimed  LTTE  profile
    alleged was the sole reason for  her  arrest,  lengthy  detention,  and
    torture. Looked at from that perspective, it is understandable that the
    Tribunal could  not  accept  that  such  a  lowly  profile  would  have
    warranted the lengthy detention and horrific treatment as the appellant
    claims.  However,  that  was  a  fundamental  misunderstanding  of  the
    appellant's case.

16. At no stage did the Tribunal refer to or seem to  understand  that  the
    appellant's case that she was detained, not because her claimed  actual
    LTTE profile became known to  the  authorities,  but  because  she  was
    anonymously denounced as LTTE. Not only was she pointed out  as  having
    worked for the LTTE, but the authorities were allegedly told  that  her
    husband and father also worked for the LTTE. That, on  the  appellant's
    account, was why she was detained.

17. It is clear  from  para  [59]  that  the  early  erroneous  conclusions
    referred to above directly led the Tribunal to place little  weight  on
    the assertion that the appellant was detained for one and a half  years
    and tortured as claimed. As the Tribunal stated at para  [61],  "We  do
    not accept that there is any foundation for the  proposition  that  her
    alleged involvement with the LTTE - if there was one - would  have  led
    to her imprisonment at all, still less to a lengthy detention for up to
    one and a half years. Such detentions connote a degree and intensity of
    adverse interest that simply would not and did not exist in relation to
    this appellant... We do not therefore accept that she was  detained  in
    2009 and held for a period one and a half years." Again, at para  [63],
    the Tribunal stated, "the problem with this claim is  that  we  do  not
    accept that the appellant was arrested and detained at all."

18. At para [70] the Tribunal repeated its finding that the  appellant  had
    no  profile  at  all  and  suffered  no  adverse  attention  from   the
    authorities. The Tribunal did not accept that she was detained and ill-
    treated as claimed and, therefore, she had no adverse  profile  at  any
    stage prior to her departure from Sri Lanka in 2011.

19. At para [71] the  Tribunal  repeated  its  finding  that  even  if  the
    appellant had the limited involvement with the LTTE that  she  claimed,
    it did not accept that such involvement did or would have  brought  the
    appellant to the adverse attention of the Sri  Lankan  authorities.  On
    that basis, the Tribunal stated, "We certainly do not accept that  such
    involvement  would  lead  to  a  risk  upon  return  in   the   present
    circumstances and situation within Sri Lanka in 2011. We conclude  that
    the appellant is at no risk upon return  to  Sri  Lanka.  We  therefore
    dismiss the Appellant's asylum claim."

20. We find that the Tribunal proceeded to  make  findings  throughout  the
    determination which were predicated on the primary misunderstanding  of
    the appellant's case. The error effectively infected the  rest  of  the
    determination. The appellant's claimed low profile led to  a  disbelief
    that the appellant could have been detained, which in  turn  led  to  a
    disbelief that she would be at any adverse risk on return.  In  effect,
    the Tribunal led itself from one error to another.

21. It may be  that  even  if  the  appellant's  claim  had  been  properly
    understood and considered, it was possible for the  Tribunal  to  reach
    the view that her claim was not credible. However,  we  find  that  the
    primary error as to the basis of her claim  so  fundamentally  affected
    the other and subsequent findings that it is  impossible  to  determine
    that the outcome of the appeal would have been the same.

22. In the circumstances, we found that there was an error of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that  it  should
    be set aside.

23. We considered with the parties whether we could proceed to  remake  the
    decision without a further hearing. In their  submissions  to  us,  the
    representatives of both the appellant  and  the  respondent  sought  an
    adjournment of the substantive hearing of  the  appeal.  The  appellant
    wished to call her husband to give evidence in support of her claim and
    the respondent wished to question the appellant about her claim.

Conclusions

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    We set aside the decision.

    The decision will be re-made at an adjourned hearing.

                                 DIRECTIONS

1.  The hearing of the appeal will be at Field House.

2.  The appellant must file with the  Upper  Tribunal  and  serve  upon  the
respondent any further witness statements to be relied on not later than  28
days after the date hereof.
Signed: [pic]     Date: 4 July 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

We continue that order (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).
Signed: [pic]     Date: 4 July 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
