

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09217/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 4 July 2016                                |On 7 July 2016               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [E K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr U Aslam, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the first-tier tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Malawi, born on [ ] 1986.

 3. The SSHD appeals  against  a  decision  by  first-tier  tribunal  judge
    Kempton, promulgated on 5th May 2016, allowing the  appellant's  appeal
    against refusal of asylum.

 4. These are the SSHD's grounds:

      Ground 1:

      At paragraph 27 the judge finds that the appellant will be at risk  on
      return to Malawi on the basis of his homosexuality. This seems  to  be
      largely on the basis of what  is  said  at  4.1.1  and  4.1.2  of  the
      [SSHD's]  Country  Information  and  Guidance  Malawi  [COIR]:  sexual
      orientation and gender identity document.

      ... in doing so  the  judge  has  failed  to  take  into  account  the
      following passages of that document:

      2.3.5 However, in December 2015 two men  were  arrested  on  suspicion
      that they were engaging in homosexual acts in their house at  Area  25
      Township. They were released on bail and  ordered  to  return  to  the
      court to face sodomy charges. Subsequently, the two men were  released
      from custody and all  charges  dropped.  However,  the  moratorium  on
      arrests and prosecution under the laws remains in place.

      2.3.7 An LGBT person is unlikely to be prosecuted under existing  laws
      because of their sexual orientation or gender identity.

      2.3.10 While societal intolerance and discrimination occurs,  that  is
      no evidence of widespread harassment of and violence  against  persons
      known or perceived to be LGBT. A number of NGOs actively (and  openly)
      support LGBT persons and there are signs of growing societal tolerance
      of their rights.

      ... the background evidence does not demonstrate  a  general  risk  to
      LGBT individuals in Malawi and therefore there are inadequate  reasons
      given for finding that the appellant would be at risk.

      Ground 2:

      At paragraph 26 the judge accepts that the appellant is homosexual but
      does not explain why. Given that the appellant has  given  conflicting
      evidence and has admitted giving false evidence (paragraph 22), cogent
      reasons need to be given for accepting the appellant's sexuality.

 5. Mr Matthews submitted firstly on ground 2.  He said that  paragraph  26
    states a conclusion but gives no reasons.  The preceding  paragraph  is
    only a narration of the evidence from the appellant's sister  that  she
    has heard him say  he  is  gay,  that  he  has  never  brought  home  a
    girlfriend and that there was speculation about his sexuality  when  he
    was a teenager in Malawi.  There was no finding on that evidence,  even
    implicitly.  At the last sentence of paragraph 22 the judge  said  that
    the appellant's sexuality was not challenged but that was wrong.  There
    was a direct challenge in the refusal letter.  The respondent  made  no
    concession at the hearing.  The Presenting Officer might not have cross-
    examined, but was not bound  to  put  questions  on  an  issue  already
    raised.  The evidence about his sexuality left the  appellant  in  some
    difficulty.  He did provide some evidence to support it, and the  judge
    was entitled to decide the point in his favour, but she failed  to  say
    why.

 6. I referred to the finding at paragraph 27 that in the event  of  mental
    health problems developing in Malawi the appellant was  "highly  likely
    ... to behave bizarrely once again and risk making statements in public
    in relation to  his  sexual  orientation."   Mr  Matthews  accepted  my
    observation that any risk on return to Malawi  of  a  homosexual  would
    depend on findings  of  how  he  was  likely  to  behave,  and  that  a
    conclusion such as stated by the judge might be relevant.  I  indicated
    that it would be useful, if there is any supporting evidence  for  that
    finding, to be referred to it.   Mr Matthews said there was nothing  in
    the medical or other evidence to indicate that the appellant  had  made
    public statements of that nature in the past or was likely to do so  in
    future.

 7. Turning to ground 1, and on the question of  how  the  appellant  might
    behave, Mr Matthews said that his condition is controlled by medication
    taken by injection, and he made no case of similar treatment not  being
    available in Malawi (which  is  contrary  to  the  judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 27).  The judge narrated evidence  about  criminalisation  of
    homosexuality in Malawi, but that on its own does not show risk.  There
    was no reference in the decision to evidence other than  in  the  COIR,
    which was to the effect of no general risk to LGBTI persons,  and  non-
    enforcement of the law.  There was nothing in the decision to justify a
    finding of general risk.

 8. In a written response to the grant of permission the appellant says  on
    ground 1 that the question was whether the particular person might face
    a real risk; the judge clearly showed the real risk  arising  when  the
    appellant's mental health deteriorates; it was shown that the necessary
    medication is not available; the judge was right about the  possibility
    of revealing public statements; and risk in consequence  was  from  the
    authorities, so the  judge  was  also  right  about  absence  of  state
    protection.  On ground the response 2 rehearses the evidence to justify
    a finding that the appellant is homosexual, and says it was open to the
    judge, who gave "cogent reasons".

 9. In his oral submissions Mr Aslam  pointed  to  the  appellant's  mental
    health history, which  includes  compulsory  detention.   He  said  the
    relative weight to be given to items of evidence was for the judge, and
    that the appellant's orientation had  not  been  challenged  in  cross-
    examination.  He accepted that the judge had not said  explicitly  that
    she accepted the oral evidence of the appellant and his sister, but  he
    said that she must clearly have been impressed by that  evidence.   The
    COIR information justified the finding in favour of the appellant,  not
    as a generality for gay men, but based on his individual circumstances.
     The judge's reasoning provided the  reader  with  a  legally  adequate
    explanation for the outcome and the decision should stand.

10. Mr Matthews in response referred to the  medical  evidence,  being  two
    brief items from the same doctor, and said there was nothing  there  to
    indicate that the appellant's disorder had ever resulted in any episode
    of acting out in the way suggested by  the  judge,  or  that  any  such
    manifestation was likely in the future.

11. I reserved my decision.

12. The finding that the appellant is homosexual was open to the judge, but
    she failed to state her reasons for reaching it.  She further failed to
    explain  her  findings  that  the  appellant's  mental   health   might
    deteriorate for lack of medication, and that if it  did  so,  he  might
    behave in a particular way.   The  written  submissions  say  that  the
    evidence for the first of those findings was before the  judge,  but  I
    was not directed to it.  There was no evidence  for  the  second.   The
    further conclusion that such behaviour, were it to  occur,  would  give
    rise to risk of persecution is similarly unsupported.  It runs  counter
    to the evidence that prosecutions are rare.  No instance has been cited
    of prosecution (or other persecution) of a person who makes  homosexual
    manifestations as the result of mental disturbance.

13. Mr Aslam did his best to find the underpinnings by  which  the  judge's
    conclusions might be supported,  even  implicitly,  but  they  are  not
    there.

14. At best for the appellant there might have been enough to infer why his
    sexual orientation was accepted.  However, the case turned not on  that
    single issue but on an inter-connected consideration of how (if gay) he
    might behave, and with what consequences, in Malawi.  The decision as a
    whole cannot stand.  It would be artificial to single out  any  finding
    for preservation, and it would complicate the rehearing of the case.

15. The respondent's decision is based  primarily  on  the  view  that  the
    appellant has not shown that he is homosexual, and it does not  contain
    any analysis along the lines of HJ  and  HT  [2010]  Imm  AR  729  (see
    paragraphs 35 and 82, in particular).  The judge did not use that  case
    as a guide.  There is no relevant country guidance on  Malawi,  and  of
    course one country cannot be taken as a guide to another, but reference
    to cases on other countries might have given the judge a useful pattern
    for her approach, once having accepted the appellant to be gay.

16. The decision of the first-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  its
    findings are to stand. The nature of  the  case  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and  of
    Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to the first-tier Tribunal for
    an entirely fresh hearing.

17. The member(s) of the first-tier Tribunal chosen to  consider  the  case
    are not to include Judge Kempton.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            6 July 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




