
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: AA/09662/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on  17 December 2015                 |On 7 January 2016                    |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


                                   Between

                                     OO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                  ANONYMITY

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) we make an Anonymity  Order.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


Representation
Appellant:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr D Neale, of Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal Project


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an Asylum and ECHR case in which  the  Appellant  challenges  a
    dismissal of her appeal.  The Appellant has a husband and  2  children,
    listed as dependent on her appeal.  They are all Nigerian  citizens  of
    Yoruba ethnicity.

 2. The Appellant entered the UK  as  a  visitor,  following  a  successful
    appeal, in 2008. At the time she was pregnant. The Appellant  describes
    holding a responsible job in Nigeria as a  bank  financial  controller.
    After her arrival the Appellant discovered that the baby  was  a  girl.
    On telling her mother in Nigeria that she  was  expecting  a  girl  her
    mother told her to come back to Nigeria so that the baby could  undergo
    FGM.  She had undergone FGM when a child. Her sister had also undergone
    FGM, and is said to have died as a result.  She  and  her  husband  are
    against the practice. The Appellant resolved not to return to  Nigeria.
    Her resolve continued when she had a second daughter. The Appellant and
    her husband are estranged from her family as a result.

 3. The Appellant's husband joined her in the UK. He came here as a student
    in 2010.  We have no information as to whether he revealed her unlawful
    presence but we infer that he did not as  that  would  be  inconsistent
    with the grant of his visa, which must have been predicated on a return
    to Nigeria. We have no information as to when his leave expired but  it
    is not suggested that he has enjoyed any continuing  leave  to  remain,
    and we infer that he is an overstayer.

 4. The reasons for refusal letter of the  Respondent  indicates  that  the
    Appellant remained as an overstayer, from which we infer that  she  did
    not  make  an application to regularise her  status  by   becoming  her
    student  husband's dependent,   whilst  he  had  leave.  The  Appellant
    agrees that she made three such applications, not the six  asserted  by
    the Respondent, to remain as a dependent of her Dutch national  cousin,
    here in the UK (whom we infer sponsored her visit).  The last  is  said
    to be in 2013. Her evidence was that she is no  longer  in  touch  with
    that cousin. Those applications were refused.  She says  she  discussed
    asylum with her representative at the time of the EEA early application
    of 2008, and downloaded information about claiming  asylum  herself  in
    2012, but her representative did not know much about  it,  and  advised
    the EEA route. It is said that in the last  application  she  mentioned
    her determination to avoid exposing her daughter to FGM.  She  has  not
    retained the applications and cannot prove the  position  herself,  and
    she asserts that her subject access requests have not provided the full
    files.  The tribunal find the position unproven either way but  comment
    that in any event such a mention insignificant as no claim was in  fact
    made.

 5. The Appellant has worked for  the  NHS  as  a  radiology  assistant  at
    Churchill Hospital, Oxford between 2009 and 2013. Her plan is to  do  a
    degree in Nursing at Oxford Brooks University.

 6. In April 2014 the Appellant claimed Asylum. Her  claim  relied  on  the
    exposure of her daughter to FGM through her own family living in Lagos,
    an inability to rely on her husband's father, an Imam in Lagos, because
    of her husband's  conversion  to  Christianity,  and  an  inability  to
    relocate elsewhere in Nigeria because of stigma attached  to  the  fact
    her husband suffers from depression, characterised in its  acute  phase
    by psychotic episodes.

 7. The couple have three children. The eldest is a  son  D;  he  lives  in
    Nigeria with his paternal grandmother.  He came to the UK on a visit in
    2013, and returned to Nigeria. We infer that it is  unlikely  that  the
    unlawful status of his  parents  was  revealed  in  that  context.  The
    couples two other children are daughters, both born here, the eldest of
    whom, F N A was born on 07 May 2008, and the youngest: E  M  A,  on  18
    April 2012.

 8. They family were served removal decisions inline with  the  refusal  of
    the principal Appellant's application, and they all filed responses  to
    one stop notices concurrently with the Appellant's  notice  of  appeal.
    The daughters relied on the factual matrix of the risk of forced FGM to
    them on return and claimed asylum and Article 3 protection. The husband
    initially said that he is estranged from  his  family  because  he  has
    converted from Islam to Christianity and been subjected to threats from
    his father, and subsequently clarified that it is also because of  FGM,
    and, in concert with the main Appellant claimed that  the  exposure  of
    the daughters to FGM places both parents into a Particular Social Group
    in the context of the Convention, and would expose them to inhuman  and
    degrading treatment contrary to Article 3.

 9. By her decision dated 26 October 2014 the Secretary  of  State  refused
    the application for asylum.  The respondent was of the  view  that  the
    daughters were not at risk at  all,  able  to  be  protected  by  their
    parents, but if there was risk beyond that of the family  then  by  the
    Nigerian State authorities. With regard to the husband's conversion the
    Respondent  found  bare  assertion  insufficient   to   establish   the
    conversion, or the claimed father in laws threats arising from it,  and
    that in any event the State would provide  sufficient  protection.  The
    late claim undermined the credibility of the account  of  circumstances
    in Nigeria.

10. The Appellants' ensuing appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  (the  "FtT")
    failed.  The appeal was dismissed on  Asylum,  Article  3  and  8  ECHR
    grounds.   The tribunal found that the Appellant  was  not  a  credible
    witness.  Her evidence was discrepant and inconsistent internally,  and
    as against the country background evidence. The claim was made so late,
    in the context of having had legal  advice  about  which  she  had  not
    complained, and of a poor immigration history, that her statement  that
    the lateness was explained by her lack of knowledge of the Asylum route
    undermined her credibility, particularly in light of her education  and
    intelligence.  There was a significant lack of evidence of any  of  the
    claimed threats she said she  had  received.   Her  evidence  that  her
    husband had never applied for a USA visa, changed  when  confronted  by
    the inconsistency of that position with his admission in interview that
    such an application had been refused, to saying that she had not  known
    about it. The tribunal  found  that  a  lie,  given  the  self  evident
    importance of place of residence to the couple.

11. The tribunal found the medical evidence of the GP established that  the
    Appellant had herself suffered Type 1 FGM  and  so  had  suffered  past
    persecution.

12. The emphasis of the case in submissions was that the Appellant would be
    destitute on return to Lagos and it was that position which would force
    her to fall back on the support of her family, and in that  context  it
    was said that support  would  be  forthcoming,  but  at  the  price  of
    subjecting her daughters to FGM. The claim was that she and her husband
    would, in those circumstances, feel they had no choice but to agree  to
    it.

13. The case for destitution was that :

       . the Appellant's husband would not be able to work because  of   his
         mental health problems and or the stigma attached thereto

       . they would not be able to rely on the husband's  father  or  mother
         for support because of his threats  against  the  husband  for  his
         conversion to Christianity

       . the Appellant  would not be able to work  because of caring for the
         children and husband

14. The tension in the decision which was found arguable  at the permission
    stage arises from paragraph  32, the penultimate paragraph in a section
    headed  "Evidence and Findings":

         "32. However the Appellant says she would have to fall back on  her
         parents to avoid destitution on return. Were she to do so then  she
         says she would submit to pressure from her parents to  undergo  FGM
         and would be unable to seek  protection  from  the  authorities  as
         should she do so support from her parents would  be  withdrawn.  If
         this occurred we accept to the low standard of proof applicable  to
         an asylum claim that the Appellant as a parent of children at  real
         risk of FGM and so  entitled  to  the  protection  of  the  Refugee
         Convention."

15. The grounds assert that the wording "and so entitled to the  protection
    of the Refugee Convention" amounts to a finding, in the context of  the
    paragraph heading, that  the  Appellant  is  a  refugee,  so  that  the
    dismissal of the appeal is contrary and perverse.

16. We are not persuaded that that is the position.  Plainly the  paragraph
    is infelicitously drafted. The obvious typographical error  is  but  an
    indication of that.  The reasoning is not assisted by the incorporation
    of submission, evidence and findings, somewhat muddled  together  under
    the heading, but  decisions  cannot  be  forensically  scrutinised  and
    picked over in such a disjunctive way.  This is clearly not intended to
    be a conclusive statement dispositive of the appeal. In the  very  next
    paragraph the tribunal set  out  the  Respondent's  argument  that  the
    parents will be able to protect the children, with  the  assistance  of
    State protection in Nigeria generally,  but  also  in  the  context  of
    proximity to  the  maternal  relatives  as  well,  and  whilst  plainly
    accepting the former conclude, against the respondent in respect of the
    latter:

         "33. ... if however the Appellant were dependent on her parents  we
         accept that the risk is of FGM to the children is a real risk."

17. We pause to note here that what is being said is not that she could not
    protect the children, but that she would not. However it is the use  of
    the word "if" which clearly  underlies  the  qualified  nature  of  the
    finding and makes plain  that  the  grounds'  characterisation  of  the
    previous  paragraph  as  dispositive  is  misconceived.  In  short  the
    tribunal  found  there  would  be  sufficiency  of   state   protection
    sufficient to meet the risk if the  Appellant  and  her  husband  lived
    independently  of  her  family,  however  they  accepted  that  if  the
    daughters fell into the hands of the maternal grandmother they would be
    at risk of FGM, and that as parents of children so exposed, the parents
    would also fall within the convention  as  a  member  of  a  particular
    social group.

18. The somewhat infelicitous labelling  of  this  next  section  "internal
    flight" does not substantively undermine our conclusion.  The  tribunal
    over the next five pages  explain  why  in  fact  they  find  that  the
    Appellant, who for these purposes (hence the  heading)  they  treat  as
    being returned to her own family, would, contrary  to  her  assertions,
    be able to live safely elsewhere without undue hardship, and  so  avoid
    the persecutory risk of living as a dependent of her  parents.   Whilst
    the panel might have simply said they did not think she would return to
    her parents home, because that is their plain  conclusion,  their  more
    circuitous approach results in no error.   In  this  following  section
    the tribunal find the claimed inclination and ability of the children's
    maternal grandparents to reach beyond the household, even in the lesser
    context of the city of  Lagos  is  not  established.  They  reject  the
    claimed fear of the Appellant's husband's father, i.e.  her  father  in
    law. The Appellant's own evidence was that her mother in  law  who  was
    separated from the father-in-law was able to "keep "D"  safe  from  the
    father in law", even though they all lived in Lagos.

19. The Panel remind the Appellant that her mother in law looks  after  the
    Appellant's other child "D", and there is no evidence to show that  she
    would not continue to provide support. The  tribunal  explain  why  the
    Appellant and her husband could live without the support of either  the
    Appellants' parents or those of her husband in any event, in  Lagos  or
    elsewhere. The tribunal set out that with the Appellant's education and
    work history she would be able to work. With regard to her husband  the
    tribunal find on the medical evidence that the risk of remission is  in
    the context of noncompliance with medication  and  does  not  establish
    that he would not be able to work.  There was  no  evidence  medication
    would be unavailable in Nigeria, and the evidence,  on  balance  showed
    that he would have the opportunity to remain well.

20. Whilst the tribunal's approach leads to more  detailed  reasoning  than
    might be considered necessary, reflecting  the  anxious  scrutiny  that
    they have evidently applied to the grounds of appeal,  setting  out  at
    length the main credibility issues that led them to reject her account,
    and the reasons why they were not persuaded that  her  claim  that  she
    would be forced to rely on her parents because  of  undue  hardship  in
    separately from them, treated in effect as "relocation", was  not  made
    out. In summary the panel find the Appellant and her husband would  not
    be destitute, and would not be dependent on the Appellant's parents, so
    that the risk that was argued for, i.e. arising from dependence on  the
    Appellant's parents was not established, even to the  low  standard  of
    proof applicable.  The adverse credibility findings  are  detailed  and
    cogently  reasoned.  The  self  direction,  factual  findings  and  the
    reasoning of all are quite adequate when the  decision  is  read  as  a
    whole.



DECISION

21. We dismiss the appeal and affirm the decision of the FtT dismissing the
    appeal on all grounds.


                                       E Davidge Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
                                                    Dated:  18 December 2015
