
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09981/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford UT                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th January 2017                           |On 19th January 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                    B A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Warren of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is hereby made on account of this matter being a
protection claim.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Libya.  He appeals  with  permission  to
    the Upper Tribunal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Spencer) dismissing his  appeal  against  removal  to  Libya  on
    asylum, human protection and human rights grounds.

Background

 2. The Appellant entered the UK in January  2015  travelling  via  an  air
    flight from Tunisia and claimed asylum  on  arrival.   His  core  claim
    amounts to saying the following. He is  a  member  of  the  pro-Gadaffi
    Warshafana Tribe.  He said that he worked in a car repair  garage  from
    2009 to 2011 and that  the  garage  was  used  to  service  and  repair
    government vehicles.

 3. After the revolution in 2011, he stopped  working  in  the  garage  and
    returned to his home town of Warshafana.  He remained there  from  2011
    to 2014, but in 2014 militia troops came and attacked the town.

 4. He said his house was destroyed and his brother kidnapped.  He  managed
    to escape the militia troops but found out later that his  brother  had
    died.

 5. His parents fled to Bani-al-Waheed but he decided to leave the country,
    because he found out that he is on  a  "wanted"  list.  The  Respondent
    disbelieved the Appellant's account and refused asylum.

 6. When the matter came before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge  made
    several findings which led him to the conclusion that  the  Appellant's
    core story was not credible.

       . He accepted, and it was not challenged, that  the  Appellant  is  a
         Libyan national however;

       . He found with good  reason  that  the  Appellant  had  submitted  a
         fraudulent ID card and;

       . He did not accept as credible the copy death  certificate  relating
         to the Appellant's kidnapped brother.

 7. The judge concluded therefore that there was nothing in the Appellant's
    history which would expose him to a risk of persecution or  other  ill-
    treatment directed at him.  He then considered the question of risk  to
    the Appellant, on return to Libya.  He  appeared  to  accept  that  the
    Appellant's parents  have  relocated  to  Bani-al  Waheed  and  on  the
    Appellant's own account are safe there.  The judge found therefore that
    Bani-al-Waheed would be a safe destination for  the  Appellant  and  he
    could join his parents there and that they would provide any  necessary
    support.  However the judge also accepted that there is  indiscriminate
    violence in Libya and accepted that events  there  have  changed  there
    since the CG case of  AT  and  Others.   Having  found  that  there  is
    indiscriminate violence in certain areas of  Libya,  the  judge  simply
    said that because the Appellant's parents are  safe  in  Bani-al-Waheed
    then the Appellant could join them there. There was  no  evaluation  of
    the Art.15(c) risk at the point of return.

Onward Appeal

 8. The Grounds of Appeal against the judge's decision do not challenge the
    judge's assessment of the Appellant's credibility  or  his  conclusions
    about the factual basis of the Appellant's claim.  I see no  reason  to
    disturb those findings and they are to be regarded  as  final  for  the
    purposes of this appeal.

 9. The grounds argue firstly that the judge did not direct himself to  the
    correct standard for internal relocation and secondly  but  equally  as
    important did not consider the danger and difficulty of returning  this
    Appellant to Bani-al-Waheed, considering that Tripoli International and
    Benghazi Airports are closed.

10. I heard brief submissions from Miss Warren for the  Appellant  and  Mrs
    Petterson for the Respondent. Miss Warren's submissions, briefly,  kept
    to the grounds seeking permission and emphasised that what was in issue
    amounted to a lack of findings on the Art.15(c) risk to the  Appellant.
    Mrs Petterson although relying on a Rule 24 response, nevertheless  did
    not strongly resist the application.

11. I find force in Miss Warren's  submissions,  and  I  find  that  in  an
    otherwise well-constructed decision, at least so far as the Appellant's
    core claim is concerned, the judge has not  adequately  considered  and
    given reasons for why it would not be dangerous and difficult to return
    this Appellant to Libya  at  the  present  time.   The  judge  has  not
    adequately given consideration to whether internal relocation to  Bani-
    al-Waheed or elsewhere in Libya is a viable  option.   Those  questions
    are central to the issue of risk on return.  That is an error  and,  as
    it is a material error, I hereby set aside the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal insofar as the question of risk on  return  and  internal
    relocation is concerned.

12. Both representatives were of the view that should I find  an  error  of
    law in the decision on those matters, then the appropriate course would
    be to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for  full  and  fresh
    findings of facts to be made on those issues.  I agree that this is the
    appropriate course.  However all  findings  regarding  the  Appellant's
    credibility and the core claim of the Appellant are hereby preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of law.   The
matter is remitted to that Tribunal (not Judge Spencer) for a re-hearing  on
the issues of Art.15(c) risk on return.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed        C.E. Roberts                   Date         18th January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

