
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09317/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                          |Determination sent         |
|On 19 August 2013                               |On 24 October 2013         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               Mr Yahya Shimi

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Yahya Shimi, was born on 2 January 1990 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Tunisia.  The appellant appealed against a decision  of  the
    respondent  dated  26  September  2012  to  give  directions  for   the
    appellant's removal to Tunisia and to refuse him  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom.  In a determination which is dated  14  November  2012,
    the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.  The appeal is brought
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds only.

 2. The appellant has a  history  of  offending.   He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in April 2010 and, as Judge Batiste in the First-tier  Tribunal
    noted, he  has  since  then  "appeared  before  the  courts  with  some
    regularity."  He was cautioned for shoplifting in  September  2010  and
    convicted for a bail offence three months later.  He was  convicted  of
    wounding in April 2011 for which he received  a  community  order.   In
    April 2011, he was sentenced for six offences of theft from  a  person,
    receiving an absolute discharge.  In October 2011,  he  was  fined  for
    shoplifting, an offence committed whilst he was on bail.   In  November
    2011, he was again convicted  of  shoplifting  and  given  a  community
    order.  Judge Batiste noted that "none of these offences would cause  a
    respondent to instigate deportation proceedings [but] it is fair to say
    that they demonstrate that the appellant has been a persistent criminal
    while in the United Kingdom and has convicted both offences of violence
    and dishonesty."  The appellant  claimed  that  his  relationship  with
    Samantha Jarvis, to whom he is now married and by whom  he  now  has  a
    child, had changed his way of life.  The judge did not accept that this
    was supported by the evidence [13].  Samantha Jarvis had known from  an
    early stage of her relationship with the appellant of  the  "precarious
    nature" of the appellant's immigration status.  The judge accepted that
    the  couple  were  married  and  living  together  and  were   "clearly
    affectionate towards one another".  The appellant speaks  good  English
    and the judge accepted that communication between the appellant and  Ms
    Jarvis was not  a  problem.   When  Ms  Jarvis  appeared  before  Judge
    Batiste, she was heavily pregnant.  She has now given birth to a child.
     I was also told by the Presenting Officer that the appellant has  been
    summoned to court in  respect  of  a  new  criminal  charge  of  theft.
    Obviously, that matter was beyond the contemplation of the judge in the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The parties agree that this is an appeal which turned on  the  question
    of proportionality.  In [17], the judge wrote:

         "I considered all the factors  in  the  round.   I  find  that  the
         decision of the respondent is proportionate to the public end  that
         is sought to be achieved.  In particular I put weight on  the  fact
         that the appellant has amassed a considerable criminal record in  a
         short time causing me to place significant weight on the  issue  of
         preventing crime and disorder.  I also place significant weight  on
         the fact that the unborn child has not established any life in  the
         United Kingdom.  The most significant factor however is that I find
         that it is reasonable in all the circumstances for Samantha  Jarvis
         to relocate to Tunisia, once her child is  born.   While  I  accept
         that she may have a job and adult family in the United Kingdom;  is
         unable presently  to  speak  Arabic;  and  may  find  cultural  and
         religious differences these do not mean that it is  not  reasonable
         to expect her to live in Tunisia.  She will have  the  considerable
         support from the appellant's large family who she has indicated she
         speaks with every week via Skype and gets on with.  Given  that  it
         is reasonable for Samantha Jarvis and her child to travel with  the
         appellant to Tunisia when the child is born; there will  not  be  a
         breach of her Article 8 rights as the family unit will be together.
          In all the circumstances the decision of the respondent  does  not
         cause a breach of Article 8.  As such, this appeal fails."

 4. Somewhat puzzlingly, permission to appeal was sought and granted on the
    basis that the judge had failed to consider the principles contained in
    the case of Chikwamba 2008 UKHL 40.  On the face of the  determination,
    this is not a case in which the  judge  found  it  reasonable  for  the
    appellant to return and make an out of country  application  for  entry
    clearance.   He  has  not  even  suggested  (on  my  reading   of   the
    determination) that Samantha  Jarvis  should  accompany  the  appellant
    whilst he remains in Tunisia making such an application; the  departure
    of Samantha Jarvis from the United Kingdom which the  judge  considered
    reasonable was apparently to be permanent.  The question in this appeal
    is whether the judge was  right  to  find  that  the  decision  of  the
    respondent was, in  effect,  rendered  proportionate  because  Samantha
    Jarvis could relocate permanently to Tunisia.  Samantha Jarvis (and her
    child) are British citizens.  In Sanade and Others (British children  -
    Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal stated at
    [83-84]:


    If the residence right is only afforded to the non-citizen parent where
    otherwise the child would be forced to leave  the  European  Union,  it
    seems difficult to justify that consequence by reason of  the  criminal
    wrongdoing of the parent. It is one thing to justify the  exclusion  of
    an EU national from one part of the  Union  requiring  him  or  her  to
    return to their state of nationality, and quite another to require that
    person to leave the Union altogether. It seems to us that the Court  of
    Justice was applying the principle of international law that a  citizen
    cannot be expelled from  their  own  state  in  any  circumstances,  to
    citizenship of the European Union and concluding that  a  measure  that
    required an EU citizen to leave the Union would be contrary to EU law.

     In Zambrano, there was no suggestion that  the  children  as  Belgian
    citizens, could be expelled from Belgium. Nor, as Union citizens, could
    they be expelled from the Union as  a  whole  and,  had  there  been  a
    decision made by the Belgian authorities to that effect, it would  have
    been justiciable by the Court of Justice.  But the Court went  further:
    the expulsion of their Colombian parents (not citizens  of  the  Union)
    amounted to the children's constructive expulsion from the  Union.  The
    Court was not therefore directly applying  Article  20  which  is  non-
    derogable but granting rights to non-Union citizens necessary  to  give
    effect to the rights of Union  citizens.  However,  if  the  collateral
    right of residence afforded to the parents is a narrow one and  limited
    to cases where it is necessary to enable the child to enjoy his or  her
    rights, it may very well be that there is no room for any derogation at
    all, and our assumptions to the contrary in Omutunde  at  paragraph  32
    (cited at [65] above) should not be regarded as sound in the absence of
    a decision of the Court of Justice on the point in a case  that  raised
    the issue.




 5. In the circumstances, I find  that  the  judge  has  erred  in  law  by
    concluding that it would be reasonable for Samantha Jarvis,  a  British
    citizen, to relocate outside the European Union.   Further,  the  judge
    was (quite properly) also seeking to assess the circumstances  once  Ms
    Jarvis' child had been born.  However, he seems  to  have  paid  little
    attention to the fact that Ms Jarvis's child would be a British citizen
    whose removal would also not be reasonable (see ZH (Tanzania) 2011 UKSC
    4).  Given that the reasonableness of  Ms  Jarvis  moving  to  live  in
    Tunisia was described by the judge as the main reason why he  dismissed
    the Article 8 ECHR appeal, I find that he has erred in law and that his
    determination should be set aside.  I have remade the decision.

 6. Judge Batiste very properly considered in detail  the  public  interest
    concerned with the appellant's removal.  It is also not  disputed  that
    the appellant and Ms Jarvis are in a stable marriage and they now  have
    a young child (Amira - date of  birth  14  December  2012).   Amira  is
    generally in good health although, in August 2013, she was examined  at
    North Tees and Hartlepool NHS Foundation Trust  after  blood  had  been
    observed in her stools.  Like  Judge  Batiste,  I  was  struck  by  the
    evident affection of Ms Jarvis for the appellant and her great  concern
    that he might be removed.

 7. As regards  the  public  interest,  I  am  aware  that  the  respondent
    considers that the provisions of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules
    provides details of the public interest arising  out  of  the  criminal
    offending of foreign citizens.   For  example,  I  note  that  S-EC.1.1
    (suitability - entry clearance) provides that entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom should be refused on the grounds that the  exclusion  of
    an applicant is  conducive  to  the  public  good  if  they  have  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four  years  or  have
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than  twelve  months
    where five years have passed since the end of the sentence.   Paragraph
    S-EC1.5 provides:

         The exclusion of the applicant from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good because for example the applicant's conduct  (including
         convictions which do not fall within paragraph S-EC1.4)  character,
         associations and other reasons make it  undesirable  to  grant  him
         entry clearance.

 8. Although I do not condone the  criminal  behaviour  of  this  appellant
    whatsoever (and I was particularly alarmed that he has, notwithstanding
    his claims to be a changed character, found himself in court yet  again
    since the First-tier Tribunal hearing) he would not  be  excluded  from
    entry clearance on public  interest  grounds  since  he  has  not  been
    imprisoned. If  Appendix  FM  provides  an  indication  of  the  public
    interest as the  respondent  submits,  then  the  appellant's  criminal
    offending per se would not  prevent  him  from  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom. Further, as Judge Batiste noted,  it  had  been  open  to  the
    respondent to make  a  decision  to  deport  the  appellant  under  the
    Immigration Act 1971 (on  the  basis  that  his  deportation  would  be
    conducive to the public good) but she has not chosen to do  so.   Those
    are factors which I need to consider as  part  of  the  proportionality
    exercise.

 9. Having already determined that it would not be reasonable for Ms Jarvis
    and her child to relocate to Tunisia, two  possible  further  scenarios
    arise.  First, the appellant could be removed  in  consequence  of  the
    immigration decision to Tunisia where he could make an out  of  country
    application or he could separate permanently from  Ms  Jarvis  and  the
    child to return to Tunisia alone.    Although the appellant may be able
    to apply for entry clearance and escape the exclusion provisions  under
    Appendix FM (see above) it is likely he  would  struggle  to  meet  the
    financial  requirements  of  the  Immigration   Rules.    Further   the
    principles enunciated by the House  of  Lords  in  Chikwamba  now  have
    greater force given that the couple now have a  child.   On  the  other
    hand, the appellant's poor immigration history and, in particular,  his
    offending history since he has been in the United  Kingdom  are  strong
    factors indicating that he should be removed.  Ultimately, the Tribunal
    needs to strike a balance between  the  public  interest  (and  here  I
    repeat that the respondent has not sought to remove  the  appellant  on
    the basis that his removal is conducive to the  public  good)  and  the
    (very likely) permanent break up of this young family.  Whilst none  of
    the appellant's offences taken singly are of the greatest seriousness I
    find that the persistence of his offending in a relatively short period
    of time renders that offending very serious.   Like  Judge  Batiste,  I
    have no reason at all to accept the appellant's assurances that he is a
    reformed man.  I am aware that, in  cases  of  serious  offending,  the
    break up of a family may be the only proper outcome of an  appeal  such
    as this (see Lee [2011] EWCA Civ 348).  Whilst remaining  keenly  aware
    of those principles, I have concluded on the particular facts  of  this
    appeal that the appellant should be granted a period of Article 8  ECHR
    leave.  I have had regard to his level of offending  but  also  to  the
    fact that he is a caring father of a very young child and a husband  of
    that child's mother who, notwithstanding the appellant's poor  conduct,
    has remained loyal to him.  Their life together may only reasonably  be
    pursued in the United Kingdom for the reasons I have stated  above.   I
    find that the interference which would be caused to the family lives of
    Ms Jarvis and Amira is such that the public interest concerned with the
    appellant's removal is outweighed in this instance, a decision which is
    informed by the fact that the respondent has not sought to  remove  the
    appellant and by the provisions of Appendix FM.  The  appellant  should
    be aware, however, that his fate lies in  his  own  hands.   Should  he
    continue to offend he need not be surprised if the respondent  were  to
    take a decision to deport him.  The fact that he has succeeded  in  his
    appeal on this occasion certainly does not  mean  that  he  can  expect
    always to succeed in appeals hereafter.  Likewise, if his  relationship
    with Ms Jarvis and Amira founders then his status in this  country  may
    again be properly described as precarious.

DECISION

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which is dated 14 November
    2012 is set aside.  I remade the decision.  This appeal is  allowed  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.






Signed                              Date 20 October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

