
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09882/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd November 2015                |On 11th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     JM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner of Counsel instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 2nd September 2015, in a renewed application, Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Lindsley gave  permission  to  the  appellant  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Butler who  dismissed  the
    appeal against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  asylum,
    humanitarian and human rights protection to  the  appellant,  an  adult
    citizen of Sri Lanka of Tamil ethnicity.

 2. In  granting  permission  Judge  Lindsley  outlined  the  grounds.   In
    summary,  these  contended  that  the  First-tier  Judge   applied   an
    excessively high standard of proof despite reciting the lower standard;
    wrongly required corroboration of the appellant's  history  failing  to
    take into consideration that the appellant's sister had been recognised
    as a refugee in France; wrongly discounted the  Medical  Report  of  Dr
    Halari because it was  not  based  on  evidence  when  it  referred  to
    evidence of Suzanne Wyatt; failed to have regard to  the  diagnosis  of
    trauma; wrongly regarded it as inconsistent that the appellant did  not
    know her sister was in France when interviewed by the  doctor  but  did
    know  when  she  was  interviewed;  and  should  not  have  taken  into
    consideration that the appellant was detained in UK when interviewed by
    the doctor.

 3.  Judge  Lindsley  thought  it  arguable  that  the   First-tier   Judge
    misunderstood that the appellant had been detained on arrival, had  not
    made a global assessment of credibility in the  light  of  the  Medical
    Report (Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367)  and  failed  to  give  sufficient
    weight to the diagnosis of PTSD typical of rape and torture  survivors.
    Judge Lindsley also thought it arguable that the  judge  was  wrong  to
    refuse to accept a letter and documentation from the  appellant's  twin
    sister that it was she who had gone to France  and  not  the  appellant
    thus requiring an "unlawful level of corroboration".

 4. In the grant of  permission  Judge  Lindsley  also  required  that  the
    appellant should provide a copy of the report of Suzanne Wyatt, A  &  E
    records of cutting and GP records  regarding  an  overdose  within  two
    weeks of receipt of the grant of permission.

Submissions

 5. Mr Turner relied upon his ten pages of  grounds  dated  4th  July  2015
    which were summarised in the  grant  of  permission  to  which  I  have
    referred.  He further contended that the judge's evaluation of evidence
    did not make it clear that he had referred to all of it.  He emphasised
    that the judge had failed  to  take  into  consideration  the  evidence
    referred to in the appendix to  the  Medical  Report  particularly  the
    report of Suzanne Wyatt.  He also contended that the judge  had  failed
    to take into consideration the comments in paragraph 105 of the Medical
    Report about the possibility of the appellant making a false allegation
    of rape to bolster her application which meant that the judge  had  not
    taken Dr Halari's report fully into consideration.

 6. Mr Turner also made reference to  the  latest  documents  submitted  in
    September 2015 in response to the  grant.   These  are  attached  to  a
    letter from solicitors which is erroneously dated  29th  May  2015  but
    bears a Field House  receipt  stamp  of  28th  September  2015.   These
    include an NHS patient record and other NHS correspondence including  a
    letter dated 3rd February 2015 from Suzanne Wyatt to the appellant.

 7. Mr Turner continued by making specific reference to paragraph 54 of the
    decision in which the judge found it significant that the appellant had
    not arranged for correspondence from her sister, J, to confirm her, the
    sister's, presence in Coquelles rather than  the  appellant.   In  this
    respect he pointed out that  the  judge  did  have  the  twin  sister's
    refugee documents to hand.

 8. Ms Johnstone relied upon the response  dated  18th  September  2015  in
    which the respondent expressed the view that the grounds amounted to no
    more than a disagreement with the judge's reasoned  findings.   It  was
    pointed out that the appellant was not present at the hearing  nor  had
    she signed her witness statement.  Further, the  judge  had  noted  the
    correct standard of proof which had been applied to the evidence.   The
    point is also made  that  the  First-tier  Judge  had  noted  that  the
    appellant had previously fled  from  the  protection  of  the  Austrian
    authorities and had  been  documented  by  the  French  authorities  in
    Coquelles on 11th January 2013 when she claimed to have been persecuted
    in Sri Lanka.  The judge had provided more than  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the explanation offered in this respect.

 9. Ms Johnstone also indicated that the  judge  had  covered  the  Mibanga
    point at paragraph 47 of the decision by clearly  taking  into  account
    the evidence in the round and not referring exclusively to the  medical
    evidence.  In relation to the report of Suzanne  Wyatt  this  had  been
    summarised in the Medical Report of Dr Halari.   Further,  it  was  not
    unreasonable for the judge to require additional information  from  the
    sister.   There  were  also  many  other  detailed  inconsistencies  in
    evidence which  the  judge  had  identified  to  entitle  the  negative
    credibility findings to be reached.

10. In conclusion, Mr Turner argued that the judge's failure to fully  read
    the report of Dr Halari was fatal.

Conclusions

11. The judge's decision is detailed and cogently reasoned making  adequate
    reference to all of the evidence put forward at the First-tier hearing.
     In the seven pages of findings  it  is  not  evident  that  the  judge
    departed from the lower standard of proof which is correctly defined in
    paragraph 36.

12. The suggestion that the judge, in effect, dealt with the Medical Report
    in isolation and therefore  departed  from  the  guidance  set  out  in
    Mibanga is without foundation. The  report  is  evaluated  against  the
    background of  the  other  evidence,  particularly  that  found  to  be
    inconsistent. Additionally, it cannot be  said  that  the  judge  dealt
    inadequately with the report when  its  findings  are  the  subject  of
    detailed consideration in the decision from paragraph 38  onwards.   It
    was unnecessary for the judge to seek a copy of the report  of  Suzanne
    Wyatt when the contents of the one page letter  comprising  the  report
    are adequately summarised in paragraph 37 of  the  medical  report  and
    evidently taken into consideration when Dr Halari reached  conclusions.
    Further, as Dr Halari properly indicates  in  paragraph  105,  although
    consideration had been given to whether or not the appellant  could  be
    making a false allegation it  would  be  for  the  Tribunal  to  decide
    overall  on  credibility.   The  fact  that  the  doctor  reached   the
    conclusion (paragraph 115) that the appellant was not fit for interview
    would not, in the absence of further up to date medical evidence, be  a
    conclusive reason for the appellant failing to give evidence and to  be
    cross-examined upon it at the hearing of  her  appeal.   As  the  judge
    points out, in paragraph 48 of the decision, it  was  not  possible  to
    attach significant weight to the appellant's statement when there  were
    other inconsistencies  in  the  evidence.   These  inconsistencies  are
    subsequently  referred  to.   I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge's
    consideration of and conclusions about the medical report show an error
    on a point of law.

13. In relation to inconsistencies in general, the judge was not  wrong  to
    regard as significant the evidence pointing to the appellant's presence
    in Coquelles rather than her sister when the appellant had claimed that
    she was being ill-treated in Sri Lanka.  As the judge was  entitled  to
    comment, if the appellant was clearly in contact with her twin  sister,
    who  had   sent   her   French   documentation   to   the   appellant's
    representatives, there was no good reason for the sister not  providing
    a statement to confirm the appellant's version of events.  Further,  as
    paragraph 57 of  the  decision  shows,  the  appellant's  brother  gave
    evidence in which he was unable to  comment  on  photographic  evidence
    said to represent scars on the sister's back.  The judge  ties  in  the
    evidence of significant inconsistency with the Medical Report  and  its
    conclusions  in  paragraph  63  thus  showing  that  the  evidence  was
    considered in the round.   The  fact  that  some  of  the  evidence  in
    isolation may have weighed strongly in the appellant's favour  did  not
    mean that the judge was required to reject significant inconsistency in
    other areas.

14.  The  judge's  reference  to  the  appellant  not  being  in  detention
    (paragraph 46) is clearly a reference to the state of  affairs  at  the
    time of the hearing and is, no doubt, reference to the comments  of  Dr
    Halari about benefit to the appellant of being released from  detention
    (paragraph 119).  The comments should be seen in conjunction  with  the
    content of paragraphs 47 and  48  of  the  decision,  particularly  the
    latter commenting on the appellant's failure to attend to give evidence
    and to rely upon an unsigned and undated statement.

15. Thus, I have reached the conclusion that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    dismiss the appeal for the comprehensive and cogent reasons given.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal  and  I  continue
that direction:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
