

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers:
AA/09131/2015

                                              AA/09135/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 May 2016                          |  On 20 May 2016                    |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                            S Z (FIRST Appellant)
                           A K (SECOND Appellant)
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Z Malik, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
                    Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellants from serious harm, having regard to the interests of justice
    and the principle of proportionality.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R J N B Morris (the judge), promulgated  on  8  December
    2015, in which she dismissed the Appellants' appeals  on  all  grounds.
    Those appeals were against the Respondent's decisions of 4  June  2015,
    refusing the Appellants' protection and human rights claims.

 3. The first Appellant is the mother of the  second.  They  are  Pakistani
    nationals. The first Appellant's claim was based in essence on  alleged
    domestic violence committed by her husband both in  Pakistan  and  this
    country. It was said that the Appellants would be at risk on return  to
    Pakistan.

 4. The Respondent accepted that there  had  been  domestic  violence,  but
    concluded that the Appellants would have  familial  support  on  return
    and, taking the case at its highest, the Appellants could receive state
    protection and/or internally relocate.



The judge's decision

 5. The judge notes the Respondent's concession as to the domestic violence
    and does not go behind it. She then sets out a number of reasons as  to
    why other aspects of the first Appellant's  evidence  were  unreliable.
    Some of these are the same  as  those  contained  in  the  Respondent's
    reasons for refusal letter, whilst some are independent (paragraphs 16-
    18). At paragraph 21 the judge makes the statement that:

           "I found that there is a real likelihood that this aspect of her
           story [relating to  familial  connections  and  support]  was  a
           fabrication  which  was  intended  to  bolster  the  Appellant's
           claim."

   6. The first sentence of paragraph 26 reads:




           "...I have concluded that  one  of  the  core  elements  of  the
           Appellant's account of persecution lacks credibility,  and  that
           there is a real likelihood that it is a fabrication designed  to
           enable her to remain in the United Kingdom."




   7. As a result, the appeals were dismissed.

 8. The judge did not stop her consideration of the case at  the  point  of
    making the credibility findings. At  paragraphs  22-25  she  takes  the
    claim at it highest and concludes that the Respondent  was  correct  to
    have found that sufficient protection and/or internal  relocation  were
    available to the Appellants. On this basis, the appeals were  dismissed
    as well.

 9. Finally, the judge goes into some detail in considering and  ultimately
    dismissing the Article 8 claims, both within and outside of  the  Rules
    (paragraphs 28-48).

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

10. There are four grounds, the drafting of which leaves  something  to  be
    desired in terms of  content  and  proper  reflection  of  the  judge's
    decision. However, the essence of these are: that the  judge  erred  in
    applying an incorrect standard of proof; that she erred in relation  to
    the issue of internal relocation; that she erred in her  assessment  of
    the Article 8 claims; finally, that  she  erred  in  dealing  with  the
    second Appellant's best interests and wellbeing.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Archer
    on 14 March 2016. There is specific mention only of ground 1.  However,
    permission was not expressly limited.



The hearing before me

12. The Appellants did not attend the hearing. Mr Malik confirmed that they
    were aware of the occasion, and he was  content  to  proceed  in  their
    absence, as was I.

13. Mr Malik submitted that the judge erred in relation to  the  statements
    made in paragraphs 21 and 26 (quoted above). In response to my question
    as to whether any error  was  material  in  light  of  the  alternative
    conclusions on protection and in  particular  internal  relocation,  Mr
    Malik submitted that the judge's assessment of internal relocation  was
    inadequate. He accepted that it was implicit in her consideration  that
    the correct legal tests had been applied. However, he  stated  that  it
    these tests needed to be expressly set out. He suggested that there was
    nothing to show that the judge actually agreed  with  the  Respondent's
    analysis in the reasons for refusal letter. In relation  to  Article  8
    (including the best interests  issue),  Mr  Malik  submitted  that  the
    claims were "weak" and could not ultimately succeed.  As  I  understood
    his final comments, he asked me to set aside the judge's decision so as
    to remove  the  adverse  credibility  findings,  remake  the  decisions
    myself, and dismiss the appeals on the basis of the internal relocation
    issue as  contained  in  paragraph  25  of  the  judge's  decision.  He
    reiterated that the Article 8 claims would not succeed.

14. Mr Bramble acknowledged what appeared to be a misdirection  as  to  the
    standard of proof. He suggested that the specific findings could  stand
    in any event. In the alternative, the judge's conclusions  on  internal
    relocation were open to her. He expressed some  tentative  concerns  on
    the Article 8 conclusions, but in view of Mr  Malik's  position,  these
    were by-the-by.

Decision on error of law

15. The judge expressed herself in the rather  unfortunate  terms  set  out
    earlier on not one but two separate occasions. What she has said  is  a
    misdirection  in  law  as  to  the  applicable  standard  of  proof  in
    protection claims. It is a pity that there is no other reference  in  a
    standard paragraph to the correct legal test: this might have indicated
    a slip on the pen on her part in  respect  of  paragraphs  21  and  26.
    Although  the  individual  adverse  credibility  findings   do   appear
    adequately reasoned, having regard to what the judge has actually  said
    and the need for anxious scrutiny in protection  claims,  I  find  that
    there is an error here.

16. The question then is whether the error is material to  the  outcome  of
    the appeals. In my view it is not.

17. The judge has clearly gone on to consider the claims at their  highest.
    This therefore negates the  error  made  in  relation  to  the  adverse
    credibility issues provided the alternative conclusions are  themselves
    sustainable.

18. At paragraph 25 the judge expressly confirms that she had had regard to
    all the evidence before her including the country information. There is
    no reason to suppose that  this  statement  was  inaccurate.  She  then
    states that she agrees with the  Respondent's  conclusions  as  regards
    internal relocation as set out in paragraphs 50-77 of the  reasons  for
    refusal letter. The judge goes on and (in my view quite properly) gives
    specific examples of the reasons with which she agrees (paragraph 25(i)
    and (ii)).

19. There is no challenge to the content of the country information  relied
    on by the Respondent and in turn the judge. Mr  Malik's  sole  line  of
    attack relates to  the  relevant  legal  test  applicable  to  internal
    relocation, namely "reasonableness" or "undue  harshness".  Mr  Malik's
    argument is that the judge failed  to  explicitly  state  the  relevant
    terminology in paragraph 25.

20. I reject this submission for the following reasons. First, in paragraph
    24 the judge makes specific reference to the question  of  whether  the
    Appellants  could  "reasonably"  stay  in  another  location.   Second,
    specific reference is made to relocation being  "reasonable"  and  "not
    unduly harsh" in paragraphs 75-76 of the reasons  for  refusal  letter,
    the very same passages with which the judge was agreeing  with.  Third,
    at paragraph 14(i) of her decision the judge cites Januzi [2006] UKHL 5
    and a passage therefrom in which the unduly harsh test is explained.

21. Reading the judge's decision in full, in its proper context,  and  with
    an appreciation both of common sense and the notion of  substance  over
    form, it is quite clear to me  that  the  judge  had  in  in  mind  the
    appropriate legal test in relation to  internal  relocation.  There  is
    simply no error here.

22. Therefore, the judge's conclusions on the alternative scenario  of  the
    Appellants' cases at their highest are sustainable. It was open to  the
    judge to dismiss the appeals on this basis.

23. As I have said previously, Mr Malik urged me to set aside  the  judge's
    decision  even  if,  as  I  understood  his  position,  the  judge  had
    essentially been correct on the internal relocation point. It is  right
    that there has been an error on  the  assessment  of  some  aspects  of
    credibility, but that of course does not compel me  to  set  aside  the
    decision: I have the power to do (section 12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007).  Here,  because  the   error   is
    immaterial, I do not exercise that power.

24. Turning to the Article 8 issue, the long and short of  it  is  that  Mr
    Malik has adopted the position that the  claims  were  bound  to  fail.
    Therefore, any errors which may exist in the judge's decision must,  on
    the Appellants' case before me, be immaterial.

25. In any event, the grounds  themselves  do  not  identify  any  material
    errors. The judge conducted a thorough consideration of Article 8, both
    inside and outside of the Rules. The second Appellant's  wellbeing  and
    best interests are fully dealt with, under correct legal direction  and
    with fully sustainable reasoning. There is nothing to properly  suggest
    that the Article 8 assessment is materially infected by  the  error  on
    credibility made in relation to the protection claim. Mr Malik has  not
    made any submission to the contrary and the grounds do  not  articulate
    anything approaching a challenge of this sort.

26. In light of the foregoing, the judge's decision stands.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The Appellants'  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

I maintain the anonymity direction

Signed                                       Date:  17 May 2016


H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date:  17 May 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
