
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09461/2012




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Date sent                  |
|On 3rd July 2013                                |On 11th July 2013          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      dEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                          Mr mohamed rushdy mikthar
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr M Dwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national who was born on  the  4th  January
   1980. He appeals with permission from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal (Judge Abebrese) to dismiss his appeal against the  respondent's
   refusal of his application for asylum.

2. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  any  direction  concerning  the
   anonymity of the appellant. In those circumstances it would be  pointless
   for me to do so at this stage.

Background to the appeal

3. The factual basis of  the  appellant's  application  for  asylum  may  be
   conveniently summarised as follows. His uncle contested  local  elections
   in 1997 and this led to the appellant becoming involved in a  fight  with
   local ruling party activists who were trying to steal  the  vote.  During
   parliamentary elections in 2001 his cousin was  shot  and  killed,  along
   with ten others, as he tried to protect the ballot box from being  stolen
   by ruling party activists. As a result of this the appellant  moved  from
   his home town of Madawala in Kandy to the capital  city  of  Colombo.  In
   April 2009, the appellant's friend, Duminda Silva,  was  elected  to  the
   provincial council and a year later  he  was  elected  to  represent  the
   district of Colombo in Parliament. Mr Silva had a  somewhat  murky  past,
   having been accused (amongst other things) of  kidnapping  and  raping  a
   young girl in 2003, in respect of which criminal proceedings were mounted
   against him in 2005. This led the appellant  to  regret  his  association
   with Mr Silva and, partly to study and partly to avoid becoming embroiled
   in the proceedings against Mr Silva, he came to  the  United  Kingdom  in
   2007. However, he began to feel guilty about not having  made  a  witness
   statement about the things that Mr Silva  had  told  him  concerning  the
   alleged rape. So it was that during a visit to  Sri  Lanka  in  September
   2009, he gave a secret letter to the Attorney General before returning to
   the United Kingdom in order  to  continue  with  his  studies.  The  case
   against Mr Silva was discontinued in 2010 as the  result  of  the  victim
   withdrawing her statement. This was despite the fact that the contents of
   the appellant's secret letter would in itself  have  secured  Mr  Silva's
   conviction. The appellant returned to Sri Lanka on the 28th July 2011 and
   attended a social gathering organised by Mr Silva. As he was  driving  to
   Kandy with his cousin, Safran, he was stopped and beaten by five men. The
   men asked him why he was appearing to be friendly with Mr Silva  when  he
   had made a statement  against  him.  As  a  result  of  that  attack  the
   appellant spent  three  days  in  hospital.  Meanwhile,  members  of  the
   appellant's family  took  part  in  a  revenge  attack  against  the  his
   assailants. On the 26th August 2011, whilst  the  appellant  was  absent,
   four or five men came to his mother's house and attacked  her  with  iron
   bars. They said that they would kill the appellant when they  found  him.
   On the following day, the police  arrested  him  on  a  false  charge  of
   assault against  a  man  called  'Sunil'.  As  the  appellant  was  being
   transported to court in a van, however, he was able to escape and hide in
   a Buddhist temple. The monks duly informed the appellant's family of  his
   whereabouts. With the assistance of a family friend who was a Sri  Lankan
   immigration officer, the appellant returned to the United Kingdom on  the
   8th September 2011 and thereafter resumed his studies. In July 2012,  his
   mother informed the appellant that she had been attacked  in  the  family
   home and that her attackers had said that if she wished to stay alive she
   had better inform her son to return to Sri Lanka. The  appellant  claimed
   asylum on the 15th September 2012, which was just  two  days  before  his
   leave to remain in the United Kingdom was due to expire.

4. Somewhat unusually, the appellant indicated that he wished his appeal  to
   the First-tier Tribunal to be determined on the  papers.  More  unusually
   still, in my experience, the respondent does not seem  to  have  insisted
   upon an oral hearing. Judge Abebrese therefore decided to accede  to  the
   appellant's request. The judge proceeded to  find  that  the  appellant's
   account of the reasons for him seeking asylum in the United  Kingdom  was
   not credible. He therefore dismissed the appeal. In his Notice of  Appeal
   to the Upper Tribunal the appellant states that he 'disagrees'  with  the
   judge's decision and that he will "stand with the  previous  statements".
   He also cites passages from the  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report
   relating to Sri Lanka, dated in December 2012,  in  which  various  human
   rights abuses by the Sri Lankan authorities are catalogued. The appellant
   emphasises a news release by Human Rights Watch that  urges  the  British
   government to suspend returning those  who  have  engaged  in  activities
   which the Sri Lankan authorities might view as anti-government. He argues
   that this evidence supports his contention that all failed asylum-seekers
   are at risk of persecution on return to Sri Lanka.

5. Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  expressed  in  the
   following terms:

    1. In a determination  promulgated  on  5  March  2013  F-tTJ  Abebrese
       dismissed an appeal against refusal of asylum on the grounds tha the
       appellant was not in want of international protection.

    2. The application for permission to appeal asserts that the  appellant
       is need for asylum with the situation having got out of control when
       his mother was threatened; country information shows that  returnees
       are in danger.

    3. This determination is based on LP (2007) UKAIT 76. It does not  take
       account of MS  (Sri  Lanka)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1548 which finds a greater level of  risk
       than LP and had been handed down  before  this  determination  on  5
       March. An arguable error of law accordingly arises.

Analysis

6. The permission to appeal is a curious document. Whilst it summarises  the
   appellant's grounds of appeal, it does not indicate  whether  its  author
   considered those grounds were arguable. However, the clear implication is
   that he did not. The judge thereafter proceeded to  grant  permission  to
   appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis of a decision by the  Court  of
   Appeal which (by contrast with the decision of LP (LTTE area -  Tamils  -
   Colombo - risk) Sri Lanka CG [2007] UKAIT 00076 that had been  cited  and
   applied by JudgeAbebrese) was not and could not  be  a  Country  Guidance
   case. Moreover, upon reading the judgments of that case, it is clear that
   they do not express any  generally  applicable  guidance  concerning  the
   level of risk on return to Sri Lanka. On the contrary,  the  observations
   of the Court of Appeal are wholly fact specific. This is made very  clear
   by the terms of paragraph 10 of the judgement:

             It is beyond dispute that MS comes within several of the  risk
             categories described in LP (LTTE area -  Tamils  -  Colombo  -
             risk) Sri Lanka  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00076.  The  task  of  the
             tribunals was  to  evaluate  his  individual  case.  [Emphasis
             added]

   I am therefore satisfied that there is not even an arguable error of  law
   arising from the  matter  upon  which  the  appellant  has  been  granted
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. I thus turn to  consider  the
   grounds that were raised by the appellant himself.

7. As the appellant makes clear in his Notice of Appeal,  the  first  ground
   that he raises amounts to nothing more than a disagreement with the First-
   tier Tribunal Judge's findings of fact. Those findings of fact were in my
   view reasonably open to the judge on the evidence that was before him and
   he cannot therefore be said to have erred in law in making them.

8. In relation to the appellant's second ground of appeal  (that  background
   country information demonstrates the he faces a risk  of  persecution  on
   return to Sri Lanka) the judge correctly  applied  the  relevant  country
   guidance case that was applicable  at  the  time  of  his  decision.  The
   further background country information that is  cited  by  the  appellant
   would not in my view have justified the judge in departing from it. It is
   right to note  that  the  Tribunal  has  very  recently  promulgated  its
   decision in GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]
   UKUT 00319 (IAC). I express no view upon the potential of  that  decision
   to affect the outcome of any fresh claim that the appellant may choose to
   make. However, I am completely satisfied that the judge correctly applied
   the guidance that was extant at the date of his decision.

9. As the appellant has been unrepresented throughout these  proceedings,  I
   have anxiously considered whether there may be other so-called  'Robinson
   obvious' points that can be taken in the appellant's favour. The only one
   that occurs to me is the possibility that the judge fell into  procedural
   error by failing to exercise his discretion in listing the appeal for  an
   oral hearing. However, I am satisfied this would not have made a material
   difference to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  I  am  fortified  in  this
   conclusion by the fact that when I invited the appellant to address me as
   to why I should allow his appeal, he simply repeated his account  of  the
   circumstances that had caused him to seek asylum and which the judge  did
   not find credible.

Decision

10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an error of  law  such  as  to  set
   aside its determination. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

Anonymity not directed.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


