
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09835/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12 May 2016                             |On 19 May 2016                 |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                                     L D
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. R. Head, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on [ ] 1998.   He  made
    an application to the respondent for asylum on the ground  that  if  he
    were to be returned to Afghanistan he would face  mistreatment  due  to
    the fact that his father was a member of the Taliban.  He claimed  that
    he too is being sought as a consequence of his father's membership.  He
    also relied on Articles 2 and 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights (ECHR).

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's  application  for  international
    protection and he appealed.

 3. That appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dean  Kershaw
    who in a decision promulgated on 22 February 2016 dismissed it.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal and on 30  March  2016  Judge
    Simpson gave her reasons for granting such permission.

 5. Those reasons state:-

         "1.  The appellant ("A")  seeks  permission  to  appeal  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kershaw) who, in  a
             decision promulgated on 22 February 2016, dismissed his appeal
             against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum  or
             humanitarian protection and to  remove  him  from  the  United
             Kingdom.  Although this appeal  was  not  submitted  until  16
             March 2016 in view of its merit I have decided to extend time.



         2.   The grounds are as follows:

             (a)  the Judge erred by failing to consider the personal  risk
                  to A given that it is  accepted  that  his  father  was  a
                  Taliban commander in Afghanistan;

             (b)   the  Judge  failed  to  give  cogent,  sustainable   and
                  sufficient reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence  of  the
                  witnesses;

             (c)  the Judge failed  to  have  regard  to  Country  Guidance
                  cases;

             (d)  the Judge failed to have regard to the expert report.

         3.   It is arguable that the  Judge's  findings  in  [73]-[76]  are
             unsustainable given that the Taleban are not in authority  nor
             are they in control throughout the  entirety  of  Afghanistan.
             Moreover, the Judge has failed to  consider  the  case  of  RQ
             (Afghan National Army) - Hizb-e Islami - risk) Afghanistan  CG
             [2008], which is still a  binding  authority,  or  indeed  any
             other relevant cases.  As to risk from the Afghan  authorities
             it is arguable that this aspect of  the  claim  has  not  been
             given adequate  consideration,  particularly  given  that  his
             father  was  a  Taleban  commander.   As  to  the  credibility
             findings, the Judge has arguably overlooked the  fact  that  A
             mentioned recruitment by the Taleban in his initial  SEF  form
             and has also arguably failed to assess  A's  evidence  in  the
             context of the background information and relevant  case  law.
             Finally, the Judge's comments in [84] appear to indicate  some
             confusion as to the meaning of  'sufficiency  of  protection',
             which is not generally considered to be a human rights issue.

         4.   The grounds identify an arguable material error of law."

 6. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 7. On the Tribunal's file was a letter from the respondent dated 14  April
    2016 wherein it confirmed amongst other things:-

         "2.  It appears from the grounds of appeal that  a  country  expert
             report was before the Judge however there does not  appear  to
             be any finding in respect of the report.

         3.   The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application for
             permission to appeal and invites the Tribunal to determine the
             appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing."

 8. Today Ms Head relied on all the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal.
    Mr Bramble accepted that they disclosed  within  the  decision  of  the
    judge an arguable error of  law.   On  my  own  analysis  that  is  the
    position.

 9. Both parties asked, and I agree, that the appropriate  way  forward  is
    for this appeal to be determined afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

10. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt with  afresh,
    pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b),  before  any  judge
    aside from Judge Dean Kershaw.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 13 May 2016.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

