
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: AA/09931/2008


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On 15 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                Yong Hack Jen
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            NOTICE OF ABANDONMENT
                      Pursuant to paragraph 17A of the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended)

 1. The appellant, a citizen of the Democratic People's Republic  of  Korea
    (North Korea), appealed to the Upper Tribunal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's
    decision to set removal directions to  the  Republic  of  Korea  (South
    Korea), after refusing him refugee status, humanitarian protection,  or
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. Paragraph 17A(1) requires a party to an asylum or immigration  case  to
    notify the Upper Tribunal where the appellant has been granted leave to
    remain. On 13 September 2013,  the  respondent  granted  the  appellant
    refugee status. The claim was recorded as determined on 9  March  2009.
    By a letter dated 27 November 2014 the appellant's solicitors  informed
    the Upper Tribunal of the respondent's decision, indicating  that  they
    had closed the appellant's file.

 3. An appeal may be treated as abandoned or  finally  determined  for  the
    reasons set out at section 102(4) and 102(4A)-(4C) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended), which so far as  relevant
    to this appeal are as follows:

         "(4A)    An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while he
         is in the United Kingdom shall  be  treated  as  abandoned  if  the
         appellant is granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
         (subject to subsections (4B) and (4C)).

         (4B) Subsection (4A) shall not apply to an appeal in so far  as  it
         is brought  on  the  ground  relating  to  the  Refugee  Convention
         specified in section 84(1)(g) where the appellant-

                 a) is granted leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                    Kingdom for a period exceeding 12 months, and

                 b) gives notice, in accordance with any relevant procedural
                    rules (which may include provision about  timing),  that
                    he wishes to pursue the  appeal  in  so  far  as  it  is
                    brought on that ground. ..."

 4. Paragraph 17A(2) requires the Upper Tribunal to send to the  parties  a
    notice that the appeal  is  being  treated  as  abandoned,  unless  the
    appellant sends to the Upper Tribunal within 30 days of  the  grant  of
    leave to remain a notice stating that he wishes to pursue  his  appeal.
    No such notice has been received in this appeal.

 5. The Upper Tribunal therefore treats this appeal as abandoned.

|                                     |Judith AJC Gleeson                   |
|Date:  2 December 2016        |Signed: Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson         |

