

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09359/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 June 2013                               |On 29 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            AHMED ABDULLAH WASUGE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P Solanki, instructed by Mellor & Jackson,
solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This was an appeal with permission granted to  the  Secretary  of  State,
   the respondent below.  The claimant is a Somali citizen, born in 1940 and
   now 73 years old.  He came to the United  Kingdom  on  26  May  2010  and
   claimed asylum on arrival.  The Secretary of State refused his claim  for
   asylum, humanitarian protection  or  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
   grounds.

2.  The claimant was one of those present in the local hotel  in  Beledweyne
   in which there was a  large  explosion.   He  was  taken  by  the  Somali
   government to Kenya for medical treatment and has not returned to Somalia
   since then.  He has a number of physical problems  arising  out  of  that
   explosion and his age. He has significant hearing loss.   A  letter  from
   his GP indicates that he has chronic back pain caused by torture  in  his
   home country, for which he needs regular medication and pain relief,  and
   that he has type 2 diabetes.

3. The claimant has been treated in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  suspected
   heart attack; he was admitted to North West London Hospital on 21 January
   2012 with unspecified chest  pain,  hypercholesterolaemia,  hypertension,
   dyslipidaemia,  and  ischaemic  heart  disease.    A  coronary  angiogram
   indicated widespread coronary vessel disease; a  coronary  artery  bypass
   graft was recommended, but the claimant refused surgery.  He now takes  a
   number of heart-related medications:  atorvastatin,  glyceryl  trinitrate
   spray, bisoprolol and isosorbide mononitrate, levothyroxine,  clopidogrel
   and furosemide.

4. The claimant appealed and although he was unsuccessful before  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Law in August 2010, he challenged that  decision  and  his
   appeal before FTJ Woodhouse on 19  February  2013  was  successful.   The
   First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted as credible his account of having been
   present in Beledweyne in Somalia from  2004-2005  and  2007-2009,  during
   which Al-Shabab was present in the southern and central areas of Somalia.



5. He was an elder and a  member  of  the  majority  Hawiye  clan.   He  was
   questioned by Al-Shabab on a number of occasions because of his status as
   an elder within that clan, and also because of his stated  opposition  to
   their violent activities, the last occasion being in May  2009.   He  was
   not ill-treated during those discussions despite his public  role  as  an
   advocate for a peaceful resolution in the region.   Al-Shabab  has  since
   been defeated and it is not suggested that the claimant remains  at  real
   risk of harm  from  them  or  from  the  Somali  government.   First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Woodhouse dismissed his  asylum,  humanitarian  protection
   and Article 3 ECHR appeals, then proceeded to consider his  appeal  under
   Article 8 ECHR.

6. She did so based on  the  claimant's  current  health  problems  and  the
   private and family life he has developed in the United Kingdom.  Although
   the claimant still has  family  members  in  Somalia  and  would  receive
   financial and social support because he is a Hawiye elder, he  also,  the
   Secretary of State accepted,  had  family  life  with  his  son  Abdi  in
   Manchester until Abdi moved to Northern Ireland.  The claimant lives  now
   with a friend in London.  His life is focused  on  managing  his  serious
   health complaints and she was not satisfied that the  complex  medication
   required to regulate his heart  would  be  available  in  Somalia.    The
   claimant's  appeal  was  allowed  under  Article  8  ECHR   outside   the
   Immigration Rules.

7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on four  grounds,  two
   of which were a challenge to the judge's Article 8  reasoning  and  which
   Designated Judge Digney considered were no more than a disagreement  with
   the outcome of the appeal.  The two grounds of appeal which he considered
   had arguable merit were that the Tribunal  had  failed  to  consider  the
   Article 8 provisions now included in the Immigration Rules, and  that  in
   that respect, the determination was incomplete.  Permission to appeal was
   granted on that basis.

8. At the hearing, I asked Mr McGirr why the Secretary of  State  considered
   that the error in failing to consider Article 8 within  the  Rules  would
   have materially affected the outcome of the appeal.  He  agreed  that  it
   would not do so since the amended Rules would not have  resulted  in  the
   claimant's appeal being allowed within the Rules.   He  argued  that  the
   failure to deal with Article 8 within the Rules meant that the First-tier
   Tribunal Judge's proportionality assessment might  have  been  incorrect.
   He accepted,  however,  that  the  proportionality  balance  was  in  the
   claimant's failure by reason of his age and health problems.

9. I indicated at the hearing that I  did  not  consider  there  to  be  any
   material error of law in the determination and that I  would  uphold  the
   First-tier Tribunal decision.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.

Consequential Directions

Forthwith on receipt  of  this  decision  the  respondent  shall  grant  the
appellant leave to remain for such period as is necessary to give effect  to
this determination.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
|                                      |                                     |
|Date:  17 September 2013              |Signed:                              |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |Judith Gleeson                       |
|                                      |Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |







