
[pic]
IAC-CH- CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09144/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15th July 2015                    |On 31st July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                               MR RAUFI SHAPOL
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                             REMITTAL & REASONS

   1. The appellant is a male citizen  of  Iran,  born  5  April  1994.   He
      arrived in the United Kingdom in March 2010 and  applied  for  asylum.
      At the time he was an unaccompanied minor.  In December 2013  he  made
      an application for further leave to  remain  which  was  refused.   He
      appealed that decision and his appeal came before Judge of the  First-
      Tier Tribunal Suffield-Thompson sitting at Newport on  2  March  2015.
      There was an oral hearing and both parties were represented.

   2. In a determination dated the same day the judge allowed the appeal "on
      asylum grounds" and "under the Immigration Rules", but  dismissed  the
      appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds.   The  judge  did   not
      adjudicate in respect of Article 8 ECHR.

   3. The Secretary of State sought leave to appeal.  There  is  one  ground
      alleging error in a  failure  to  adequately  reason  findings  and  a
      failure to apply a  Country  Guidance  case  (SB  Iran).   By  way  of
      amplification the Secretary of State contends that the judge  gave  no
      explanation as to how the situation has changed in Iran since SB  Iran
      and subsequently the judge had failed to give  adequate  reasoning  to
      support the contention that failed asylum seekers are now targeted  in
      Iran, and further had failed to explain why the appellant would be  at
      risk due to his race and  religion  beyond  suffering  discrimination.
      Finally, it is suggested the judge  had  failed  to  explain  why  the
      appellant would be perceived as a draft evader.

   4. Leave to appeal was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Simpson who gave the following as her reasons:

         "1.  The respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             decision of the First-Tier Tribunal (Judge  Suffield-Thompson)
             who, in a decision promulgated on 9 March  2015,  allowed  the
             appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
             to refuse asylum and/or humanitarian protection.

         2.   The respondent's grounds are as follows:

             (a)  the Judge failed to explain  why  he  believed  that  the
                  situation had materially changed in Iran since SB (risk on
                  return - illegal exit) Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053  was
                  decided:

             (b)  the Judge failed to give adequate  reasoning  to  support
                  his finding that failed asylum seekers are now targeted by
                  the authorities in Iran;

             (c)  the Judge failed to adequately explain why the  appellant
                  would be at risk due to his race and religion;

             (d)  the Judge failed to explain why the appellant is or  will
                  be perceived as a draft evader.  In

         3.   Country Guidance cases are meant to be followed:  they  should
             only be  departed  from  in  the  circumstances  described  in
             Practice Direction 12.2 and 12.4 and  the  UT  (IAC)  Guidance
             Note 2011, no. T, paragraphs 11 and  12  (see:  DSG  &  Others
             (Afghan Sikhs: departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  128
             (IAC)) i.e. where there is credible fresh evidence relevant to
             the issue that has not been considered in the country guidance
             case or, if a subsequent case  includes  further  issues  that
             have not been considered in the CG case.  Moreover, in [28] it
             is arguable that the  Judge  has  misdirected  himself  as  to
             Devaseelan: the earlier Judge found that the appellant  lacked
             credibility and dismissed his case on that  basis  and  it  is
             unlikely  that  a  change  in  circumstances  in  Iran   would
             undermine  the  earlier  Judge's  assessment  of  credibility.
             Finally, in [39], the  fact  that  the  appellant  has  evaded
             military service is not a reason to grant asylum.

         4.   The grounds do identify an arguable material error of law".

   5. Thus the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   6. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Bandegani mentioned  that  there
      was a cross-appeal.  Neither I nor Mr Richards were aware of that.  Mr
      Bandegani produced an application and a  copy  of  an  Upper  Tribunal
      decision by Judge Jordan.  Mr Bandegani explained that an  application
      for a cross-appeal was lodged, but it had not been dealt with  by  the
      First-Tier Tribunal.  Upper Tribunal  Judge  Jordan  had,  in  effect,
      noted that leave to appeal had been granted to the Secretary of  State
      and he therefore granted leave to the appellant "to permit  the  Upper
      Tribunal full scope in its consideration".

   7. Mr Richards indicated that he was content to  proceed  and  indeed  he
      indicated that it was clear that Judge Suffield-Thompson had not dealt
      with Article 8 at all, and that this was an error of law  material  to
      the outcome and her determination should be set aside,  and  the  case
      remitted back to the First-Tier Tribunal.  Mr Bandegani indicated that
      to be the appropriate action.  He did however  intend  to  oppose  the
      Secretary of State's appeal and referred to a Rule 24 letter dated  29
      April 2015.  Unfortunately that letter had not  made  its  way  to  my
      court file.

   8. Mr Richards made a submission on behalf of the Secretary of  State  in
      which he relied upon the grounds  seeking  leave.   He  described  the
      determination as "woefully inadequate".  He said  the  conclusion  was
      wrong, had been decided outside Country Guidance case law in the  form
      of SB (risk on return: illegal exit) Iran [CG 2009] UKAIT 00053.   The
      decision should be set aside.  The judge had also found the  appellant
      to be at risk because of Kurdish ethnicity.  Her conclusions had  been
      inadequately reasoned by reference to the  guidance  notes  available.
      The judge had found the appellant also to be at risk as a Sunni Muslim
      and again this conclusion was  reached  on  the  basis  of  inadequate
      evidence.  There is no evidence to show that just any Sunni Muslim  is
      at risk in Iran.  In conclusion the judge has simply not done  enough.
      The determination contains a material error of law.  It  cannot  stand
      and should be returned for re-hearing.

   9. Mr Bandegani in his submission accepted that sub-paragraph (d) in  the
      grounds had merit.  The judge was wrong to find that the appellant was
      a draft evader and thereby at risk.  This amounted to an error of law,
      but it was not material to the outcome.  However the judge  was  right
      to conclude that the appellant was at risk as a Sunni Muslim, a  Kurd,
      a failed asylum seeker and someone who had left illegally.   This  was
      explained in paragraph 28 of the determination.

  10. Mr Bandegani referred me to paragraph 37 of  the  determination  where
      the judge indicates that she had only quoted some of the  "independent
      evidence" and then back at paragraph  29  reference  is  made  to  the
      "Country Information Guidance" on Iran.

  11. Mr Bandegani then took me through (in  some  detail)  the  information
      contained in the appellant's original bundle.  I made a  note  in  the
      Record of Proceedings of the pages to  which  I  was  referred  and  I
      marked the various  passages  within  the  bundle.   Having  noted  Mr
      Bandegani's comments as he made them, I can summarise  his  submission
      as being that whilst the judge referred in detail to only some of  the
      objective information there was clearly enough within the  appellant's
      bundle to establish that the appellant was at risk under a  number  of
      headings, but in particular his religion, his ethnicity, his  position
      as a failed asylum seeker and as someone who had left Iran  illegally.
      The judge was therefore perfectly  entitled  to  depart  from  Country
      Guidance as set out in SB (Iran) and upon that basis the  judge  could
      allow the appeal.  The findings of risk were open to her.

  12. Mr Richards in response said that it  was  just  not  good  enough  to
      refer, as the judge had done, (paragraph 37) that "only some of  which
      I have quoted here".  The losing party (in this case the Secretary  of
      State) should be able to understand from  the  determination  why  the
      judge had reached her conclusion.  It was  not  appropriate  for  that
      losing party to have  to  go  away  to  trawl  through  "a  wealth  of
      independent evidence".  Mr Richards repeated that  the  reasons  given
      were inadequate.

  13. At the conclusion of the hearing I indicated that I would  reserve  my
      decision.  The "Article 8 appeal" would in any event  be  remitted  to
      the First-Tier Tribunal.  It  was  acknowledged  that  if  I  found  a
      material error of law in how the judge had  dealt  with  the  "asylum"
      appeal to the extent that her decision must  be  set  aside,  then  it
      would be appropriate to remit that aspect of the appeal  back  to  the
      First-Tier as well.

  14. There are various issues in this appeal, but in particular I  have  to
      consider whether or not the judge was correct  in  departing  from  SB
      Iran and did she adequately explain why she considered she was able to
      allow the appeal of the appellant despite the Country  Guidance  case?
      Another issue is whether or not she correctly applied the guidance  of
      Devaseelan (paragraphs 27 and 28 refer).  This was referred to in  the
      reasons given by the judge in granting leave to appeal.  However  that
      was not a point argued by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  grounds
      seeking leave and certainly not referred to by Mr Richards.  It is not
      appropriate for me to comment further on that point.

  15. Mr Bandegani quite properly acknowledged an error of law  with  regard
      to the reference to draft evasion.  He is correct  in  his  submission
      that on its own that error might not be material.

  16. However I do find that Judge Suffield-Thompson made a  material  error
      in the determination in the way she dealt with  the  Country  Guidance
      case law.  The adage that a losing party should know why they lost  is
      often referred to, but it is a very relevant point.  In this case  the
      judge was faced with a Country Guidance case in the form of  SB  Iran.
      She was obliged to follow that guidance unless it can  be  found  that
      the situation has materially changed since SB Iran or the  appellant's
      situation can be differentiated.  In  either  case  there  has  to  be
      reasoned findings and I am afraid that in this case the  reasoning  is
      inadequate.  The contents of paragraph 37 cannot be used as a  blanket
      to avoid detailed examination of all the  objective  information  (not
      "evidence").

  17. In short I find the judges treatment of Country Guidance  does  indeed
      to amount to a material error of law and as such her decisions must be
      set aside.

  18. I have given thought to whether or not any of the judge's findings can
      be preserved, but I have concluded that they  cannot.   Indeed  it  is
      difficult to conclude exactly what findings the judge made and in  the
      circumstances it is appropriate that all aspects  of  this  appeal  be
      dealt with de novo before First-Tier Tribunal with a judge other  than
      Judge Suffield-Thompson.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole
