
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09024/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 April 2016                              |On 18 May 2016                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     R K
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Brooks, Counsel instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appealed by way of renewed grounds  of  appeal  and  with
    permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge
    Graves, promulgated on 21 October 2015 dismissing the appellant's claim
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and protection under  the  European
    Convention.

 2. The Secretary of State had made a decision on 19  March  2015  refusing
    the appellant's protection claim.  The appellant claimed that he feared
    return to Sri Lanka on the basis he would receive mistreatment owing to
    imputed political opinion.  He claimed that the Sri Lankan army and the
    Karuna group had wanted him to work for them in  2004  because  he  had
    previously worked for the LTTE, although he claimed he was not involved
    in any fighting, and  might  supply  information.   He  stated  he  was
    forcibly recruited to the LTTE in October 2003 and in April 2004 he was
    recruited to work for the Karuna group which had  splintered  from  the
    LTTE and joined government forces.  The appellant's evidence  was  that
    he joined the Karuna group and stayed with them for about  two  months.
    With the help of his cousin he claimed to  have  escaped  and  went  to
    Qatar in 2004.  It was  advanced  that  the  appellant  came  from  the
    eastern province under the military command of the Karuna  and  as  the
    appellant was part of that province it was compulsory to join  Karuna's
    side and whosoever refused to join them were treated as traitors.   The
    appellant was required to identify any LTTE members he recognised which
    he did and those who were identified were taken away.

 3. It was after this that the appellant made arrangements to leave for Sri
    Lanka and travel to Qatar where he worked as a labourer.  He stated  in
    2009 he decided to return to Sri Lanka and returned on 23 October 2010.
     He claims that after his arrival men from the Karuna group came to his
    home and detained him and  he  was  subject  to  physical  abuse.   His
    release was facilitated by a bribe and he remained with  an  agent  who
    obtained for him a passport and exit through the airport  whereupon  he
    arrived in the UK on 21 July and was told by  an  agent  not  to  claim
    asylum.

 4. He then began pro-Tamil activities in London but in July  2013  decided
    to return to Sri Lanka and when speaking to a friend on  the  telephone
    told him of the situation. A few days later his  family  contacted  him
    from Batticaloa informing him that the Sri Lankan army and  the  Karuna
    group had come to his house in the belief that he was  there.   He  was
    not able  to  make  contact  with  his  friend  and  he  suffered  from
    depression and was unable to continue his studies.

 5. He claims that  his  parents  had  been  harassed  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities who had come to his house with a paramilitary group.

 6. It contended that the Immigration Judge improperly focused upon  issues
    and discrepancies that were  entirely  consistent  with  an  individual
    attempting to recall events that had taken place a  significant  period
    of time ago.  That he failed to  identify  the  exact  number  of  days
    should not be a reason to reject his claim.  Similarly he believed that
    a relative had arranged through an agent to secure his release and  his
    discrepancy in this account should be considered on the  basis  he  was
    not involved in those arrangements.

 7. The account of the torture that he was subject to whilst  detained  was
    not inconsistent.   The  judge  seemed  to  assert  the  appellant  was
    claiming he was at risk from the LTTE but he was not claiming this.

 8. With respect to the appellant's ability to obtain a passport the  judge
    was referred to the Country of Origin Information Report  which  stated
    that there was a  high  level  of  corruption  in  Sri  Lanka  and  the
    unscrupulous actions  of  government  officials  at  all  levels  which
    undermined the  issuing  process  for  many  official  documents.   His
    account of having obtained a passport was entirely consistent with  the
    objective evidence.  The grounds of appeal referred  to  the  objective
    evidence as recorded by the panel in GJ and  Others  (post  civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)  which  was  consistent
    with the appellant's account of obtaining his release through  bribery.
    The panel in that case referred, in paragraph 275, to  the  possibility
    of leaving via the airport  even  when  a  person  was  being  actively
    sought.  Paragraph 170 of GJ  indicated  that  having  left  Sri  Lanka
    without difficulty was not probative of  a  lack  of  interest  in  the
    individual given the prevalence of bribery and corruption in Sri  Lanka
    l.

 9. Although the evidence of the appellant with respect to aspects  of  his
    claim "might appear to be extraordinary" it should be considered in the
    context of the situation as prevailed in Sri Lanka.   The  plausibility
    of the account should be assessed in the context of available evidence.



10. The error was most clearly demonstrated by the judge's total failure to
    even refer to the expert report of Dr Chris Smith and it was asserted:

         "It is fully acknowledged that the account given by  the  appellant
         was unusual in the sense that  it  was  not  of  a  factual  matrix
         similar to that considered by the Tribunal in GJ.   That  therefore
         required, however, that the judge give even  greater  consideration
         to the evidence of an expert who could provide evidence  about  the
         country condition which was not held by the judge."

11. The expert was asked specific questions about the  appellant's  account
    and he asserted that in his view the account was a plausible  one.   In
    those circumstances it was incumbent upon the judge to have  regard  to
    that expert opinion, whose expertise was not challenged.  The judge was
    then required, if she rejected that evidence, to then give reasons why,
    despite the expert expressing the views that the evidence was  in  fact
    plausible, she found it inconsistent with the country conditions.

12. Further, the judge failed to have regard to the  letter  from  the  Sri
    Lankan Member of Parliament who provided corroboration of the fact that
    his family had been harassed by the Sri Lankan army and members of  the
    Karuna group.  The failure  of  any  regard  to  this  evidence  was  a
    manifest error of law in that it provides direct corroboration  of  the
    fundamental aspect of the appellant's account.

13. Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan  acknowledged  that  the  judge  had  made
    credibility findings in  each  aspect  of  the  appellant's  claim  but
    granted permission on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the  judge
    should have taken into  account  material  evidence  contained  in  the
    expert report of Dr Smith which was evidence which  was  likely  to  be
    material.  It was open to the judge to reject the evidence  or  explain
    why little weight was placed on the evidence.  It was arguable  it  was
    sufficiently important this should have been taken into account.

14. A Rule 24 response was served contending that the  judge  had  directed
    himself appropriately in a detailed and thorough determination and  had
    provided a plethora of reasons why the appellant was not  believed  and
    made many adverse credibility findings and notwithstanding the fact the
    judge had made no direct reference to Dr Smith's report, it  was  clear
    that the judge had given careful and anxious scrutiny to all  documents
    before the Tribunal regardless of whether they  had  been  specifically
    referred to in the determination.  It was not incumbent upon the  judge
    to refer to each and every piece of evidence and in VHR  (unmeritorious
    grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367 it was found:

         "Appeals should not be mounted on the basis of a litany of forensic
         criticisms of particular findings of the First-tier Tribunal whilst
         ignoring the basic legal test that the appellant has to meet."

15. As McCombe LJ in VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ 522 said:

         "Regrettably there is an increasing tendency in immigration  cases,
         when a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given  a  judgment  explaining
         why he has reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow  out
         industriously areas of evidence that have  been  less  fully  dealt
         with than others and then to use this as a basis  for  saying  that
         the judge's decision is legally flawed because it did not deal with
         the particular matter more fully.  In my  judgment,  with  respect,
         that is no basis on which  to  sustain  a  proper  challenge  to  a
         judge's finding of fact."

16. At the hearing before me it was submitted by Mr Brooks  that  Dr  Smith
    was an expert who had given evidence widely in  Tribunal  hearings  and
    who  had  identified  aspects  of  the  appellant's  case  which   were
    consistent with  the  version  of  events.   The  judge  had  given  no
    explanation as to why he had disregarded the report of Dr  Smith  which
    showed the appellant's version  of  events  to  be  credible.   It  was
    submitted by Mr Brooks that it was clear that it was not just those who
    fitted into GJ who would be at risk and the question was  whether  this
    appellant could be believed and if he was detained, whether he  was  at
    risk of ill-treatment.   Would  he  have  a  perceived  association  in
    connection with the LTTE?  It was the activities  in  Sri  Lanka  which
    were a key to the appellant.  His account was entirely consistent  with
    hailing from the Eastern province and Judge Graves'  assessment  lacked
    understanding.  Despite having a low-level involvement with the LTTE he
    would still be  of  interest  to  the  authorities.   Indeed  Dr  Smith
    referred to the Karuna group as  being  "absolutely  ruthless"  in  its
    recruitment of cadres of the LTTE.  The judge's finding that it was not
    credible that the Karuna group would go to such lengths to recruit  the
    appellant was at variance with this objective  information.   That  the
    appellant was able to give intelligence on other members  of  the  LTTE
    was important.  His account of  being  detained  and  interrogated  was
    internally consistent.  The authorities had an interest in  the  former
    LTTE members.  The judge's treatment of the  bribes  finding  that  the
    appellant's account was not believable was inadequate.  The question of
    bribes was addressed in paragraph 58 of Dr  Smith's  report  which  was
    that the authorities were even suspicious of Tamils with a low  profile
    and they did not escape surveillance.  There was evidence  that  people
    were chopping and changing all the time and that  people  were  joining
    different groups.

17. Mr Melvin submitted that the grounds were an attempt  to  re-argue  the
    case and the points raised  by  Mr  Smith  were  not  material  to  the
    conclusion.  There was no challenge to the findings on  the  sur  place
    activities and all of  the  points  were  dealt  with  by  the  country
    guidance.  It was clear that the UNHCR guidelines had been rejected and
    it was not the case that anyone with a  low-level  of  profile  was  at
    risk.  There was nothing in the appellant's case which showed  that  he
    was at current risk and the judge had addressed  the  country  guidance
    and the vast amount of objective evidence.  There was  nothing  in  the
    points raised which could result in the appellant being on a stop  list
    or wanted list.  I was referred to VHR and it should be noted  that  Dr
    Smith had been criticised widely in various cases, not least in LP  and
    EK and UK [2011].   There  was  no  material  difference  between  this
    appellant and the principles of GJ applied.

18. I asked Mr Brooks what it was that Dr Smith was adding over  and  above
    that of the objective evidence which had been supplied.

19. I make the following points with regards to the determination of  Judge
    Graves.  It is  clear  that  he  addressed  his  mind  to  the  claimed
    traumatic experiences of detentions and the  fact  that  there  may  be
    minor inconsistencies and where appropriate the benefit  of  the  doubt
    should be given.  The judge also reminded himself that there had been a
    lapse of time in years [paragraph 24].  With that in  mind,  the  judge
    has made a series of credibility findings  against  the  appellant  and
    noted at paragraph 44 the following:

         "I consider the appellant's case both against the guidance given in
         GJ and also in the light of the country evidence before me.   I  do
         not accept that the Appellant has, or would be perceived to have, a
         significant or any more than a very  low  level  role  in  diaspora
         activities.  Nor that any such activities would be perceived to  be
         with the aim of destabilising the government  or  that  they  would
         have come to the attention of the authorities.   I  do  not  accept
         that he falls into any other risk category  or  that  even  to  the
         lower standard, he has established that he may be on  a  wanted  or
         stop list.  The Appellant's case is, I find inherently  weak,  that
         the government and parliamentary have been pursuing him for  years,
         simply because they want to recruit him."

20. Although the judge has not specifically named the report of Dr Smith it
    should be identified that the same  expert  gave  evidence  on  country
    conditions in Sri Lanka to the Upper Tribunal in GJ and in  Appendix  J
    to that Country Guidance the Tribunal stated as follows;

              'Dr Smith has provided us with four written reports; two  upon
         the request of the third appellant, dated 24 January  2013  and  28
         January 2013, one at the request of the second appellant  dated  30
         January 2013 and one at the request of the first appellant dated 13
         August 2012. These reports cumulatively total 155  pages.  Although
         these reports deal  specifically  with  the  circumstances  of  the
         appellants that requested their production,  each  primarily  deals
         with the general circumstances in Sri Lanka'.

21. It should also be noted that the Secretary of State annexed the COI for
    Sri Lanka for 2012 as  part  of  the  background  evidence,  and  which
    details the history and background of the Karuna group (TMVP) group and
    notes human rights abuses.

22. I have carefully considered that report and noted  the  questions  that
    were asked.  The opening reference regarding instructions to  Dr  Smith
    and recorded in his report is at [21] as follows:

         "I have been asked  by  Kanaga  Solicitors,  to  comment  upon  the
         general  situation  in  Sri  Lanka  relating  to   the   risk   and
         vulnerability  of  returned  asylum  seekers  to  Sri  Lanka.    In
         particular I have given the following  instructions  and  offer  my
         opinion."

23. The expert then set out  the  nine  questions  and  instructed  him  to
    address his mind:

         "(1) Is the Appellant's description of his forced involvement  with
             the Karuna Group consistent with the situation as it prevailed
             in Sri Lanka at that time?

         (2)  Did the Karuna  group  commit  human  rights  violations  with
             respect to members of the LTTE?

         (3)  Is it plausible that the Appellant would  have  been  able  to
             escape the Karuna group through the payment of a bribe?

         (4)  The Appellant  has  described  having  been  detained  at  the
             instigation of the Karuna group when he returned to Sri  Lanka
             in 2009, after the conflict had finished.  Is this plausible?

         (5)  The Appellant has described members of the group asking him to
             join - even though he had deserted -  and  suspecting  him  of
             involvement or planned involvement with  the  LTTE.   Is  this
             plausible?

         (6)  The Appellant has suggested that the  Karuna  group  may  have
             detained him in order to obtain a bribe to allow his  release.
             Is this credible?

         (7)  The Appellant has described the fact that he informed a friend
             that  he  was  intending  to  return  and   subsequently   the
             authorities went to his home.  Are phone calls monitored?   Do
             the authorities still use informers to provide information  to
             them?

         (8)  The Appellant has stated that since then his family have  been
             visited  by  the   authorities   with   paramilitaries.    Did
             paramilitaries still operate in Sri Lanka in 2014?

         (9)  The Appellant has described his family being  visited  by  the
             authorities and he has been accused of  involvement  with  the
             LTTE in London.  Do the authorities believe that the  LTTE  is
             active?

24. In response to the first question the expert merely states with  regard
    to the forcible recruitment by the Karuna group in April 2004 which the
    appellant claims:

         "24. This is entirely consistent with my understanding of events in
             the eastern province at this time.   The  Karuna  group  sided
             with the government and  proved  absolutely  ruthless  in  its
             fight against the LTTE and its recruitment of former cadres."

25. The expert makes no further opinion other than this generalisation  and
    no reference to particular reports. In his preamble the  expert  states
    that much of his information  is  from  secondary  sources  and  it  is
    difficult  to  keep  up  to  date  because  government  officials   are
    discouraged from engaging with researchers such  as  him.   The  expert
    himself cites material such as the COI 2012 which was available to  the
    judge independently.  It is not disputed by the judge that  the  Karuna
    group did indeed recruit those from the LTTE  during  that  period  but
    there is nothing in the general assertion which cannot be found in  the
    country background evidence  for  example  the  List  of  Incidents  of
    Violence and the Article in the Tamil Guardian (conscription) and/or GJ
    to which the judge refers.

26. One of the reasons the judge found against the appellant  at  paragraph
    33 was that the appellant was able to remain in Colombo between October
    2010 and July 2011 without further problems. This was after the alleged
    recruitment. The judge also remarked that  the  appellant  intended  to
    return to Sri Lanka in 2013 for the purpose of a  holiday  to  see  his
    family and produced an invoice.  The judge found,

    "this is entirely inconsistent with his claim to have fled Sri Lanka in
    fear of persecution.  If he  was  in  such  fear  it  is  difficult  to
    understand why he would plan a holiday home".

27. Indeed, it is not disputed by the judge that the Karuna was involved in
    recruitment.  What is disputed is that this appellant was recruited and
    as the expert states at [26] in response to question 2

    "this aspect of the  conflict  has  been  very  poorly  documented  and
    material evidence is scant. However,  there  is  little  argument  with
    regard to the brutality of this internecine conflict and as such  human
    rights violations would have been committed on both sides'

    The expert effectively makes generalisations  about  the  conflict  and
    human rights abuses but adds nothing more  than  is  available  in  the
    country background material and/or GJ.

28. In response to question 3 the expert adds no  more  to  that  which  is
    contained in GJ with respect to bribery in Sri Lanka and it  was  quite
    clear that the judge  has  referenced  GJ  extensively  throughout  the
    determination.

29. In response to question 4 the expert merely relies  on  interviews  but
    also refers to a Home Office Country of Origin Information Report dated
    2004 and makes findings in respect of the  mechanisms  of  surveillance
    and the systematic and centralised collection of  records  provide  the
    basis for the stop lists.  Once  again  much  of  this  information  is
    available in the country guidance on GJ and  the  expert's  finding  at
    paragraph 40 of his  report  "irrespective  of  whether  the  appellant
    returns under escort or independently he  will  be  questioned  at  the
    airport" appears  to  rely  on  information  which  predates  GJ  which
    reviewed all of the information in relation to returns from the  UK  to
    Sri Lanka.

30. At question 5 the expert was candid and self explanatory stating,

    "this instruction is  extremely  case-specific  and  is  impossible  to
    answer without a great deal more detailed information that is available
    in the bundle provided and with additional research"

31. In relation to question 6 the expert states that he has  addressed  the
    issue relating to desertion but he has merely referred to the fact that
    bribery in Sri Lanka is extremely common and does  not  take  the  case
    further forward.

32. Questions 7 and 8 refer  to  general  assertions  in  relation  to  the
    security situation in Sri Lanka and the authorities' ability to monitor
    phones and that paramilitary groups continue to exist.

33. In response to question 9, the  Upper  Tribunal  covered  the  question
    comprehensively in relation to the authorities' attitude  to  the  LTTE
    and to security and indeed Dr Smith refers to GJ.  In GJ and Others the
    Upper Tribunal specifically considers and gives guidance as to  who  is
    indeed at risk.

34. Overall, the judge made a series of credibility  findings  against  the
    appellant which the expert report cannot attempt to redress, not  least
    that the appellant claims that he left Sri Lanka  in  2004  because  of
    persecution and yet returned in October  2010  and  planned  to  return
    again in May 2013.  The judge made a series of findings at paragraph 26
    that the appellant did receive a curtailment letter, his  asylum  claim
    was made some years after his arrival [2005] and only when his leave to
    remain had expired.  He only raised a claim that  he  was  in  fear  of
    persecution when he was already in detention.

35. The judge identified numerous discrepancies and inconsistencies  within
    the appellant's claim.  For example, at paragraph  27  how  he  escaped
    detention and who assisted him; at  paragraph  28  the  length  of  his
    detention and at paragraph 29 conflict as to whether he was tortured or
    not and indeed in his screening  interview  he  claimed  there  was  no
    allegation or assertion of torture.  By the  time  of  the  substantive
    interview the appellant stated he was beaten (AIR, 86).

36. At paragraph 30 the  judge  also  describes  how  the  purpose  of  his
    detention appeared to have changed between his screening interview  and
    his substantive interview in  his  later  statement  and  although  the
    differences were slight they were relevant.  At [30]  the  judge  notes
    that the appellant's description of the Karuna group's interest in  him
    was inconsistent with the background material as  the  war  had  ended.
    Clearly there was a determination by the Karuna group to recruit in the
    earlier period but the judge was referring to a later  time  period  at
    paragraph [30].

37. In particular the judge sets out at [31] that  the  appellant's  claims
    would suggest that he would even be at risk of the LTTE and yet he  did
    not mention this in the interview.  Overall the account was found to be
    altered and embellished.

38. Overall, at paragraph 32, the judge gives reasons as to why he did  not
    accept the authorities would have any interest  in  the  appellant  and
    states that the

         "apart from the internal inconsistencies  between  the  appellant's
         accounts I find the appellant's claim is not  consistent  with  the
         background material on Sri Lanka".

     Indeed the judge makes the point that the appellant was low level  and
    any information would be out of date and states:

         "There were vast bundles before me about abuses by the  Sri  Lankan
         Government against Tamils but the appellant's case is not  that  he
         has been pursued by the government for his previous support for the
         LTTE but because they want him to work for them."

39. Overall however it is the appellant's  claims  at  paragraph  33  which
    fundamentally undermine his claim.  Even if all that  is  suggested  in
    the expert report is correct it was not accepted by the judge that  the
    appellant would, having left the Karuna group in 2004,  avoid  interest
    for four months, until leaving for Qatar, return to Sri Lanka, live  in
    Colombo between October 2010 and July 2011 without further problems and
    then intend to holiday there when he claimed to have fled Sri Lanka  in
    fear of persecution.  This is with or without a  false  passport.   The
    judge noted that the appellant left and returned on  his  own  passport
    and although bribery is endemic, essentially the judge did  not  accept
    that the appellant would even consider returning if he were  afraid  of
    persecution. The judge made  pertinent  findings  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claim that he had told his friend when he was returning and
    the friend tipped off the authorities but found  it  was  not  credible
    that the authorities would turn up at his premises prior  to  when  the
    appellant had  informed  he  would  return  and  effectively  give  the
    appellant notice.  It was open to the judge to make this finding.

40.  Overall his account was not considered to be credible.  Even if  there
    were a material error of law in failing to cite the report of Dr  Smith
    I found this has made no material difference.  Because of the nature of
    the report, not least the generalisations there is no  indication  that
    the judge did fail to take  it  into  account  when  referring  to  the
    background evidence  and  further  the  report,  on  the  basis  of  my
    observations, could not take the matter further.

41. The letter from the Member of Parliament was obtained on  25  September
    2015 and not referred to in Mr Brook's submissions.   This  is  a  last
    minute letter obtained from a said Member of Parliament.  There was  as
    the judge states no letter or statement from his family despite a claim
    in the MP's letter that the paramilitary  group  and  Sri  Lankan  army
    wanted his son to be handed over.  I am not persuaded that  this  takes
    the case any further forward  and  in  view  of  its  late  production.
    Tanveer Ahmed IAT [2002] UKIAT 00439 states that "in asylum  and  human
    rights cases it is for an individual claimant to show that  a  document
    on which he seeks to rely can be relied on"  and  further  "a  document
    should not be viewed in isolation.  The decision maker should  look  at
    the evidence as a whole or in the round (which is the same thing)".  In
    view of the findings on credibility and in view of the shortcomings  of
    the documents itself in that it was late in production,  little  weight
    could be placed on the documentation  supporting the claim.  The  judge
    had noted at [26] that the appellant had produced  false  documentation
    to obtain entry clearance as a Tier 4  student  and  appeared  to  have
    little idea of what he was studying even though he had claimed to be on
    a full time course for  two  years.  This  background  only  served  to
    undermine the appellant's account further.

42. The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision is an attempt
    to re-argue the appeal by  contesting  a  thorough  and  well  reasoned
    decision.  That attempt does not succeed.

Notice of Decision

43. I find there was no material error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision and the decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 12th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

