
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09410/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19 February 2016                      |On 8 April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |
|                                         |                                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                                    [F F]
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr T Lay of Counsel
For the respondent:    ML Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a national of Gambia born on [ ] 1965.  She appealed  to
   the Upper Tribunal against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Scott-Baker dated 21 July 2015 refusing her appeal against  the  decision
   of  the  respondent  dated  28  August  2014,  refusing  her  asylum  and
   humanitarian protection  and  to  remove  her  from  the  United  Kingdom
   pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fisher  on
   28 August 2015 stating that it was arguable  that  the  First-tier  Judge
   erred  in  not  properly  evaluating  whether  the  appellant   had   the
   availability of family support in Gambia in light of  her  evidence  that
   the appellant was subject to physical abuse by some  family  members  and
   thereby her conclusion that her brother and son would  provide  her  with
   some  family  support  on  return  being  speculative  and   inadequately
   reasoned.

   The first-tier Tribunal's findings

3. The Judge in his  determination  made  the  following  findings  which  I
   summarise.



      . The appellant has given evidence on occasions in the past as to the
        abuse that she suffered as a child especially from her  father  who
        raped her and as to the death of her son when he was five  and  the
        miscarriage of twins  and  I  accept  that  these  facts  that  the
        appellant has suffered trauma as a result thereof.




      . The appellant claims the appellant was  unable  to  give  a  cogent
        account  as  to  her  husband's  claimed  involvement  in  the  UDP
        political party and her evidence on his  political  activities  was
        vague.  I do not however place any weight  on  the  fact  that  the
        appellant has been confused as to whether her husband was kidnapped
        in 2008 or 2009 as I accept that as she  has  experienced  dramatic
        events in the past her recollection may in part be  unreliable.   I
        also note that the appellant has been inconsistent as to  when  she
        suffered a miscarriage and as to whether it was  after  the  second
        time the authorities visited her house or at the time she  received
        the first threatening letter.  But again I do not place any adverse
        inference from this inconsistency.




      . In light of the objective material, I find on the lower standard of
        proof that it is likely that the appellant's husband did  disappear
        in 2009.  I make no finding that he was taken by the government  as
        the appellant's evidence on this was particularly vague.   She  has
        been inconsistent as to the extent of the interest in her after the
        disappearance of her husband. Crucially on her own account, I  note
        that she was able to live in the same place for  two  years  before
        leaving at her own behest.  On her own account  she  has  not  been
        personally targeted in her own right and  if  the  authorities  had
        been interested in her then they would have made  themselves  known
        at the time.  The appellant has not established that she  had  come
        to the adverse attention of the authorities either because  of  her
        own political opinion or on imputed political opinion arising  from
        her husband's activities.




      . The appellant did not claim asylum on arrival in the United Kingdom
        and this has also damaged the credibility.




      . The appellant alleged that she had been called a witch in Gambia as
        her  husband  disappeared,  her  son  died  and  she   suffered   a
        miscarriage loosing twins.  It is not accepted that if her life was
        at risk and was perceived to be a witch, she would have remained in
        her area without harm.




      . In dealing that the domestic abuse claimed by the appellant, I note
        that her father has died and she is in  contact  with  her  mother.
        The current circumstances or indeed  the  fact  that  she  remained
        living in the same place for two years after the miscarriage of the
        twins does not assist the appellant in establishing that she is  at
        risk of ill treatment on return from her family.  She also now  has
        an adult son living in the Gambia  and  her  brother  has  recently
        returned from the UK and they will be able to offer her support and
        assistance.  When she  claimed  that  her  son  had  recently  gone
        missing, I note that the appellant was vague  in  her  evidence  on
        this and I reject this claim for that reason.




      . In respect of risk on return, I do not accept that the appellant is
        at risk.  The main perpetrator was her father who has now died  and
        the evidence was that she is in contact with  her  mother,  brother
        and sister and such contact indicates that she is accepted as  part
        of the family.  She is now a grown woman and unlike the  time  when
        she had been abused by her father as a child.




      . It is accepted that the appellant has suffered trauma in  the  past
        and that she  had  been  unfortunate  in  losing  her  husband  and
        children but that does not mean that she is at risk of serious ill-
        treatment on return from any local people as being accused of being
        a witch.  I find that this aspect of her claim is exaggerated.  She
        remained living in the Gambia until 2010 when she  left  which  was
        two years after the date when her husband  was  kidnapped  and  she
        lost to the twins and three years after her son  died  of  malaria.
        If she had been at risk  from  any  local  people  she  would  have
        suffered at that stage which she did not.




      . In respect of her medical  condition,  the  appellant's  psychiatry
        conditions are not so severe that it could be said that she  is  an
        exceptional category of persons and  that  Article  3  is  engaged.
        Therefore, her removal from the United Kingdom would not  interfere
        with her rights under Article 8 or Article 3.   There  are  medical
        facilities  available  in  the  Gambia  and  the  appellant  cannot
        establish on the evidence that she can be viewed as an  exceptional
        case so that it can be said that returned is disproportionate.




      . The appellant's relationship with Mr. [W] does not come within  the
        ambit of family life because it is clear from his evidence that  he
        regarded the relationship has more akin to that of friends  and  it
        is not a committed exclusive relationship with her.




      . The appellant has lived all her life in the Gambia until 2010 which
        is the majority of her life.  She can speak the native language and
        she has her mother sister, adult son and a brother who recently has
        returned to the Gambia.  In  all  of  the  circumstances  I  cannot
        therefore  find  that  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to
        integration there and she would have some family support.  I do not
        accept, as she was in  contact  with  her  brother  in  the  United
        Kingdom that she has suffered any abuse from him and  he  would  be
        able to support and assist her in the Gambia.   Further  her  adult
        son remains in the Gambia and he too would be able to assist her.



The grounds of appeal

4. The appellant in his first  grounds  of  appeal  states  that  the  Judge
   failed  to  integrate  findings  of  fact  in   to   the   valuation   of
   proportionality of removal under Article 8 in particular the availability
   of family support in Gambia.  The second ground of  appeal  is  that  the
   Judge came to an irrational conclusion in his  evaluation  of  Article  3
   that  the  appellant  faced  risk   of   destitution   because   of   the
   unavailability of family support and also her mental health problems in a
   semi-rural area where she would have to go.   It  is  at  odds  with  the
   Judges own findings as to the family history and the role played  by  the
   appellant's mother.  The Judge ignored the medical evidence  that  family
   contact is likely to have a deleterious effect on her health and, further
   providing no reasoning as to how or why family support is meant to assist
   the appellant in circumstances where she will be in need of acute primary
   and secondly mental Health Services which are not available to her in the
   Gambia.  The third ground of appeal is the failure by the Judge  to  have
   regard to the evidence of the appellant's partner as to the existence  of
   family life.  The finding that the appellant and Mr. [W] do  not  have  a
   relationship of sufficient closeness to engage Article 8 is erroneous.


   The hearing

5. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Lay adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
   said that the appellant has been a victim of abuse and was raped  by  her
   father.  The Judge accepted that she had mental health  problems  due  to
   the trauma.  The Judge made an error when he said that the appellant  had
   family in the Gambia who would assist her.  The Judge did  not  integrate
   his findings.  The appellant's evidence was  that  her  brother  and  son
   would not help her.  The family history is a  very  complex.   The  Judge
   also erred by finding that the appellant is not in a  relationship.   She
   and Mr [W] are partners.   There  was  evidence  that  they  were  in  an
   exclusive relationship.


6. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tarlow adopted the Secretary  of  State's
   Rule 24 response and made the following submissions.  The  appellant  has
   her son and brother who will assist her in the Gambia.  The appellant  is
   a grown woman and therefore  there  will  be  no  risk.   The  Judge  was
   entitled to come to the conclusions that he did  and  has  not  made  any
   error.


My findings as to whether there is an error of law in the determination

7. I have given anxious scrutiny to  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge and have taken into account  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
   submissions by the parties at the hearing. The Judge  did  not  find  the
   appellant or her claim for asylum and  humanitarian  protection  credible
   for copious reasons.


8. The Judge stated that the appellant claims that  the  people  think  that
   she was a witch because her husband disappeared, her son died and she had
   a miscarriage of twins.  The Judge  however,  found  that  the  appellant
   managed to remain in her home for two years after these events and if she
   was going to come to the adverse attention of anyone, it would have  been
   in those two years.  The Judge was entitled to find, on the evidence that
   the appellant will face no harm on return.


9.  Furthermore,  the  Judge  found  the  appellant's  evidence   has   been
   inconsistent and vague about her husband's activities  in  the  political
   party, UDP.  He said that in any  event  and  on  her  own  account,  the
   appellant has not been targeted by the authorities for  her  own  claimed
   political activities in Gambia.  He was entitled to find that it  if  the
   authorities or anyone else had any interest in the appellant,  she  would
   not have been able to live for two years in the Gambia and then leave  at
   her own behest. The Judge was entitled to find on the evidence  that  the
   appellant had not demonstrated that she cannot be sent back to Gambia way
   she does not have any course to fear she will be ill-treated or harmed in
   any way the cause of her or her husband's political activities.


10. The main complaint against the  Judge,  and  for  which  permission  was
   granted, is that the Judge did not consider that the appellant  had  been
   abused by some members of her family.  The  Judge  found  that  the  main
   perpetrator was the appellant's father who  is  now  dead  and  therefore
   there can be no further risk from him.  The Judge did not accept that the
   appellant who was in contact with  her  brother  in  the  United  Kingdom
   suffered any abuse from him.  He found that the appellant who  is  now  a
   grown woman can return to her country when she has lived for the majority
   of our life since 2010. He found on the evidence that the appellant has a
   mother, sister, an adult son and a brother  who  recently  moved  to  the
   Gambia.  Therefore, the Judge was entitled to  find  that  the  appellant
   will have her family support in the Gambia as this  family  has  been  in
   contact with the appellant and this proves  that  they  consider  her  as
   family.  The Judge emphasized that the appellant's adult son is in Gambia
   who will be able to assist her and therefore she will not be returning as
   a single woman without family support.  Mr. [W] in his  evidence  at  the
   hearing also said that he will help the appellant setup in the Gambia  if
   she has to return.  Therefore, the Judge's finding that the appellant has
   family in the Gambia is not irrational.


11. I find that it is clear from reading the determination  that  the  Judge
   took into account the medical evidence in the round and there is no error
   of  law  in  his  evaluation  of  the  evidence.   The  Judge  relied  on
   jurisprudence from Medical Health cases and found that there are  medical
   facilities available into Gambia  and  the  appellant's  case  cannot  be
   viewed as an exceptional case so that  her  return  can  be  said  to  be
   disproportionate.  The appellant had PTSD and although Mr. [W] had  lived
   with the appellant, he said in his evidence that he did not know that the
   appellant was mentally ill until the appellant was arrested.  This  shows
   that the appellant was able to live without any outward signs  of  mental
   stress which is presumably why she has not had any psychological  therapy
   sessions.  The Judge stated that the  appellant's  medical  condition  is
   controlled by medication which she can continue to take  in  Gambia.   He
   was entitled and bound to come  to  these  conclusions  on  the  evidence
   before him.


12. The Judge was also entitled  to  rely  on  Mr.  [W]  evidence  that  his
   relationship with the appellant is not akin to  marriage  or  constitutes
   family life for the purposes of Article 8.  The evidence  was  that  they
   have not lived together for at least two years prior to  the  application
   which is why they cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.



13. Mr. [W] evidence is noted at  paragraph  57  of  the  determination.  He
   stated that he responded to an advert in 2012 that he placed in the local
   paper and the appellant responded.  He said that  after  some  time,  the
   appellant moved in with him and he did not know  that  she  was  in  this
   country illegally or that she was mentally ill until  she  was  arrested.
   In his evidence he said he was not in love with her but would  help  her.
   He confirmed that they did not have a sexual  relationship.   He  further
   confirmed that if she had to go to Gambia he would help her  set  out  in
   life.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  on  this  evidence  that  the
   appellant's  relationship  with  Mr.  [W]  was  not  one  which  can   be
   characterized as family life.  The Judge was entitled on the evidence  of
   Mr. [W] that he did not consider her relationship with Mr.  [W]  was  not
   one of lovers and it was more consistent with them  being  friends.   The
   Judge accepted that the appellant had private life and  her  relationship
   with Mr. [W] would come under this category but said it is  proportionate
   to remove the appellant.  These are sustainable findings.


14. I find that the Judge was entitled and required to reach his  conclusion
   based on his consideration and evaluation of the evidence as a whole.   I
   find that the Judge did take into account the risk  of  return  for  this
   appellant and found that she is not at risk for cogent and proper reasons
   which cannot be characterized as irrational or perverse.  The Judge  also
   found that the appellant has family support in Gambia which is  also  not
   irrational or perverse.


15. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA
   Civ 982 Brooke LJ commented on that analysis as follows:
       15. It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls used  the  words
       "vital" and "critical" as synonyms of the word "material"  which  we
       have used above. The  whole  of  his  judgment  warrants  attention,
       because it reveals the anxiety of an appellate court not to overturn
       a judgment at first instance unless it really cannot understand  the
       original Judge's thought processes when he/she was  making  material
       findings.
16. I find that I  have  no  difficulty  in  understanding  the  very  clear
   reasoning  in  the  Judge's  determination  for  why   he   reached   his
   conclusions. I find that the  grounds  of  appeal  are  no  more  than  a
   disagreement with the Judges findings of fact and the conclusions that he
   drew from such findings.  I find that no differently constituted Tribunal
   would come to a different conclusion on the evidence in this appeal.

17. I find that no error of law has been established in  the  determination.
   I find that he was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  is  not
   entitled to be recognised as a refugee  or  to  be  granted  humanitarian
   protection in this country and she can return to the Gambia without  fear
   of any harm. I uphold the decision.


DECISION

Appeal dismissed


     Dated this 20th day of March 2016

Signed by,

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................

Mrs S Chana











