
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09217/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2018                           |On 23 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     E K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam, McGlashan MacKay Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  R  Handley,  promulgated  on  22  November  2016,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on  4
    June 2015 to refuse him asylum  and  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Malawi born in 1986.   He  was,  however,
    first diagnosed with schizophrenia towards the end  of  2009  and  left
    university.  Subsequent to that there were a  number  of  incidents  in
    which he believed attempts were made to harm or  to  kill  him.   These
    include an attempt being made to poison him whilst he  was  living  and
    teaching in Blantyre and then an  incident  in  Lilongwe  when  he  was
    involved in a car crash.  He was at that point travelling in  a  police
    van as he had been stopped by police who had forced him into  the  van.
    In another incident his car was attacked and after that he  stated  his
    father admitted that he was trying to have him killed.

 3. The appellant then tried to leave  Malawi  to  go  to  Zambia  but  was
    attacked and returned home.  He then attempted to go  to  Tanzania  and
    again was prevented from doing  so  and  finally  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom where he enrolled at Swansea University having  obtained  entry
    clearance as a student.

 4. The appellant has two sisters and  an  aunt  who  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom as well as various cousins.

 5. The appellant claimed asylum in June 2011 but  that  was  refused.   He
    appealed against that decision stating that he is gay.

 6. The appeal did not proceed  as  the  appellant  had  been  admitted  to
    hospital owing to a deterioration in his mental health.   In  light  of
    the  information  supplied  the  respondent  withdrew   her   decision.
    Attempts to obtain additional interviews prove to be problematic  given
    the appellant's continuing ill health.

 7. The appellant's case has subsequently  changed.   He  stated  that  the
    father who he said had tried to kill him was in  fact  his  stepfather,
    his own biological  father  having  died  when  he  was  aged  5.   The
    relationship between his mother and stepfather had broken down; as  his
    stepfather believed in black magic and thought that by sacrificing  his
    life he would obtain wealth and also wanted to kill him because  he  is
    gay and is frightened  that  other  people  will  find  out  about  his
    sexuality.

 8. The appellant stated that he had a boyfriend in Malawi  named  HP  with
    whom he lost contact after coming to United Kingdom and that there  had
    been an incident in which  he  had  been  caught  with  Harris  by  the
    stepfather who beat him.

 9. The appellant has subsequently had a  relationship  with  Mr  Alexander
    Grey in the United Kingdom but that has now ceased.  He continues to be
    involved in various LGBT support  groups  centred  in  the  college  he
    attends.

10. The respondent refused the appellant's claim considering  the  accounts
    of incidents he had described as taking place in  Malawi  were  grossly
    inconsistent  and  lacking  in  credibility  even  accounting  for  the
    appellant's mental health problems.  It was also noted that the  person
    the appellant had described as being his female partner, Lubona, showed
    that she was a student in the United Kingdom as he had  said,  but  she
    was female, not male, and that therefore his explanation  that  he  had
    not been able to describe his sexuality and to describe his partner  as
    her not  him  was  inconsistent  and  not  plausible.   The  respondent
    considered also that the appellant's account of how he was  first  able
    to visit a gay club in Malawi was inconsistent and did not make sense.

Procedural History

11. The appeal first came before the First-tier Tribunal sitting in Glasgow
    on 23 March 2016.  On a decision promulgated on 5 May 2016,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kempton allowed the appeal concluding that the appellant
    was gay and would face persecution for that reason on return to Malawi.
     The respondent appealed that decision to the Upper Tribunal and  in  a
    decision promulgated on 6 July  2016,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Macleman
    concluded that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal had involved the
    making of an error of law, set it aside, and remitted it to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues.

12. When the matter came  before  Judge  Handley  on  18  October  2016  he
    concluded that the appellant is not a reliable  witness  and  that  his
    credibility had been damaged.  The judge concluded that:-

      a) it was wholly implausible that the appellant  had  failed  to  make
         mention of any difficulties he had due to his sexuality during  his
         asylum interview on 15 May 2012 [32]; and, had failed to mention in
         his asylum interview that his father wanted to kill him because  he
         had discovered that he was gay, finding it implausible that he  had
         not mentioned this in his interview [33];

      b) the appellant's credibility was further damaged by stating  in  his
         asylum interview that he had a partner who was female then  stating
         that he had lied to the interviewer when he  had  referred  to  his
         partner as being female; that it  was  not  plausible  he  was  too
         embarrassed to discuss his sexuality [34];

      c) the appellant's account of the attacks which  had happened  to  him
         in Malawi were implausible [35] to [37];

      d) the appellant's evidence at his second interview with regard to his
         sexuality was vague, unclear and lacking in plausibility;

      e) it was implausible the appellant was unable to know the surname  of
         "Ben" with whom he had had a relationship, noting that he had  been
         unable to provide evidence of this;

      f) there were inconsistencies in the evidence given by  the  appellant
         and by AG with who it is said they  are  in  a  relationship  [40],
         specifically the evidence as to when the relationship started, this
         casting  further  doubt  on  the  reliability  of  the  appellant's
         evidence [40];

      g) the appellant suffers from mental health issues  [45],  noting  the
         report of Dr Byres who had produced a report and also supplementary
         report following a meeting with the appellant on 13  October  2015,
         in which he confirmed that there  was  no  evidence  of  a  relapse
         psychiatric illness and no symptoms suggestive of  psychosis  [43],
         albeit that there would be a risk of relapse or psychosis  were  he
         to change his current antipsychotic medication;

      h) although the level of and standard of treatment available in Malawi
         would be of a lower standard than that from the United Kingdom,  he
         was not satisfied that Article 3 was engaged.

13. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred;

      a) in failing to factor into account  the  appellant's  mental  health
         problems in assessing credibility;

      b) in failing to provide any or adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
         evidence of AG that he had an intimate sexual relationship with the
         appellant.

14. For the reasons set out in  the  annexed  decision  promulgated  on  16
    August 2017, I set aside that decision, preserving none of the findings
    of fact. The appeal then came before me on 26 February 2018 having been
    adjourned twice before that.

The Hearing on 26 February 2018

15. I heard evidence from the appellant as well as  submissions  from  both
    representatives.  He was allowed to take time  when  requested  but  no
    other special adjustments  were  requested  nor  did  the  most  recent
    medical report identify any that would be necessary.

16. Having  adopted  his  witness  statements,  the  appellant  was  cross-
    examined.  He said that on return to Malawi he faced  being  imprisoned
    for fourteen years or possibly also killed and if they knew he was  gay
    he would be tortured.  Asked who knows he  is  gay  he  said  that  his
    mother did.

17. The appellant confirmed that he had read the  most  recent  psychiatric
    report from Dr Burrows and he accepted that he  has  schizophrenia  and
    that his thoughts were sometimes illogical.

18. The appellant said that the church he  now  attends  is  a  Pentecostal
    church but he was unaware of their attitude towards gay people and they
    did not discuss sexuality.

19. The appellant said that he  does  discuss  sexuality  with  friends  at
    college and that he attends  a  gay  club  there.   The  club  had  not
    provided him with a letter of support.

20. The appellant said that  he  was  no  longer  in  a  relationship  with
    Alexander Grey who had gone abroad and they were no longer in  contact.
    He said that prior to Mr Grey he had been in a  relationship  with  Ben
    Kalekwala.

21. The appellant accepted he  had  not  always  been  compliant  with  his
    medication in the past but that he is now.  He said that he  is  afraid
    that his illness would return.

22. In response to  my  questions  the  appellant  said  that  he  had  not
    socialised with people that he met in the club at college and that they
    did have a WhatsApp  group  and  said  it  was  difficult  for  him  to
    socialise with people.

23. He was unable to assist in explaining what  Dr  Burrows  had  meant  by
    "sexual disinhibition" in his report.

24. I then heard submissions from both representatives.

    The Law

25. It is for the appellant to demonstrate that he has a well-founded  fear
    of persecution in Malawi. He must do so to the lower standard of  proof
    applicable  to  asylum  claims.  In  assessing  his  evidence  I   have
    considered all the material produced to me as a whole, even if  I  have
    not referred to it expressly.

26. The starting point for any analysis of the appellant's evidence must be
    the psychiatric reports from Dr Burrows the most  recent  of  which  is
    dated 17 October 2017 in response to  the  directions  issued  in  this
    case.

27. It is not suggested that there is any material difference  between  the
    now three reports from Dr Burrows, the first  dated  8  September  2014
    followed by a supplement of 16 November 2015.  They do however indicate
    progress in the appellant's condition.

28. The appellant was first referred to psychiatric  services  in  December
    2011.  On assessment, it was believed that  he  was  suffering  from  a
    paranoid psychotic illness which  had  likely  been  present  for  some
    years.  It appeared also that he  had  been  treated  for  a  psychotic
    illness in Malawi where,  from  what  the  appellant  relates,  he  had
    suffered acute dystonia, a recognised  side  effect  of  anti-psychotic
    medication.  The psychiatrist notes "it is difficult to get hold  of  a
    clear narrative and timeline of events during this period  (during  his
    late teens and early 20s in Malawi) of the  appellant's  life  and  his
    account is often fragmented".  It is stated as follows:-

         "[The appellant's] first presentation in  the  UK  consisted  of  a
         constellation of  difficulties  characteristic  of  schizoaffective
         disorder.  This is a  severe  and  enduring  mental  illness  which
         presents with  both  psychotic  symptoms  and  symptoms  of  either
         elevated  or  depressed   mood.    [The   appellant's]   particular
         presentation  was  that  of  marked  suspiciousness  and   paranoia
         particularly in relation to being poisoned in some way by food.  He
         had marked thought disorder with difficulty  communicating  clearly
         and it was felt that he was experiencing  auditory  hallucinations.
         Unfortunately his suspicions and paranoia  became  extreme  to  the
         point where he believed people were tampering with food  and  drink
         in his flat and he had packed bags  to  flee  from  his  delusional
         belief of being poisoned.  At  this  point  his  vulnerability  and
         illness was deemed severe  enough  that  he  was  admitted  to  the
         psychiatric unit at the Southern General Hospital  on  22  December
         2011".

29. The appellant later absconded but was re-detained.  The first  drug  of
    treatment, Risperidone, provoked an acute  dystonic  reaction  and  the
    drug was then changed to Olanzapine.  After discharge in April 2012 the
    appellant received support on compulsory treatment although he appeared
    not to be taking it properly resulting in a further breakdown  in  July
    2012, reports from his family  indicating  his  illness  had  relapsed.
    There had been problems with the police.  It was the impression of  the
    treating  team  that  these  incidents   were   likely   due   to   him
    misidentifying people and misinterpreting their actions as part of  his
    deteriorating mental health.

30. Further readmission was authorised and  a  compulsory  treatment  order
    made.  There were difficulties in identifying  the  correct  medication
    and dosage and eventually the side effects  from  anti-psychotic  depot
    medication had resolved.

31. It is also  of  note  that  he  was  assessed  by  a  psychologist  for
    neuropsychological testing  and  it  was  identified  that  there  were
    significant  impairments  particularly  in  concentration  which   were
    consistent with a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder.

32. The appellant's health deteriorated again in March  2014  resulting  in
    further readmission, the doctor recording that "common  things  to  his
    presentation were that of paranoid  ideas,  people  following  him  and
    general fearfulness of  others.   There  are  also  reports  of  sexual
    disinhibition".

33. He was discharged on 27 March  2017  but  readmitted  four  days  later
    suffering again from ongoing delusions of  being  poisoned.   He  again
    absconded but he was later detained again with a gradual improvement to
    his mental state and change of medication.

34. When describing the current mental state, the  doctor  notes  that  the
    appellant is not currently in a relationship but identifies as gay.

35. In his summary and opinion, Dr Burrows states:

         "As described earlier in my  report,  [the  appellant]  has  likely
         experienced mental illness for many years prior to coming to the UK
         and that accounts of his late teens and 20s  are  often  fragmented
         and difficult to follow.  The likely reasons for  this  are  active
         illness impairing his memory and recall.

         It is difficult to ascertain with any certainty which  elements  of
         [the appellant's] experiences are true and  which  are  delusional.
         There are certain examples more bizarre ideas which would be deemed
         delusional and which [the appellant] now  holds  no  longer  to  be
         true.  There are however other examples which  [he]  maintains  are
         true to this day.

         It can  often  be  the  case  that  despite  resolution  of  active
         psychotic symptoms, full insight into  previously  held  delusional
         ideas is never entirely regained and  delusional  memories  may  be
         held too with certainty in the absence of current symptoms.   Again
         however I would stress that without any corroborating history  from
         this period of his life, we are unable to ascertain with  certainty
         the veracity of his account.  On balance however I do feel that  he
         had a long duration of untreated illness during this period of  his
         life in Malawi which would impact significantly on  his  memory  of
         this time.

         I do not feel [the applicant] will need any special measures  other
         than  additional  time  and  sensitivity  to  his   mental   health
         difficulties".

36. In the light of the above it is difficult to consider the appellant  to
    be a reliable witness of events which occurred in  Malawi.   That  does
    not mean that he has put forward what he knows to be untrue.  But there
    are indicators in  Dr  Burrows'  report  and  certainly  in  regard  to
    encounters  with  the  police  in  Wales  that  he  misunderstood   and
    misinterpreted what was happening.

37. It is in this context useful to have regard  to  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's sister set out in her witness statement, SL, who  lives  in
    Wales.  She explains that she had not been in Malawi at the time of the
    incidents complained of by the appellant  and  whether  she  had  heard
    about it from family and others who had told her that the appellant had
    become paranoid and sick, had tried to run away and had thought  people
    were going to kill him.  She does confirm attempts to leave the country
    and that it is now easier to talk to him as he received treatment.

38. SL's evidence does not confirm that the family had any animosity to the
    appellant although she does  confirm  that  there  are  poor  attitudes
    towards people with mental health in Malawi which is in turn  confirmed
    by the background evidence.  It is, however, I  consider  important  to
    note that there is no indication  from  the  evidence  the  family  had
    sought to disown him, rather that  they  understandably  had  found  it
    extremely difficult to cope with his behaviour.

39. The evidence of the appellant's sexual orientation is more complex  and
    is, to an extent, confused.

40. The appellant did  not  disclose  his  sexual  orientation  when  first
    interviewed.  He did, however, volunteer information when asked  if  he
    had anything to add in his interview on 13 May 2012 that he had found a
    significant partner.  He was then asked about the partner (Q178 to 191)
    giving her name as "LI" and that they were still in communication.

41. In his witness statement of 15 October 2012 he  explains  at  paragraph
    [38] that:

         "38. I would like to stress my partner is male.  I  did  not  bring
             this up before because I was embarrassed.  I phone  my  Lubona
             every day and we  constantly  send  each  other  emails.   The
             relationship that I have with Lubona is very strong and we are
             hoping to  get  married  in  the  future.   I  would  like  to
             apologise for causing any  inconvenience.   I  was  scared  to
             reveal  my  sexuality.   People  in  Malawi  do   not   accept
             homosexuality.  It can be said that homosexuality is forbidden
             in Malawi ...

         39.  ... all of my family here in the United Kingdom are  aware  of
             my sexuality and my health problem and support me as  much  as
             they can.

         40.  My stepfather wanted to kill me because he discovered  that  I
             was gay, my stepfather was afraid that other people might find
             out about my sexuality, and I would therefore bring  shame  on
             the family.  Another reason why my stepfather wanted  to  kill
             me was because my  stepfather  believes  in  black  magic  and
             thinks that by sacrificing my life he will obtain wealth".

42. That witness statement was prepared in support of a hearing due to take
    place on 22 October 2012 against a decision to refuse  the  applicant's
    asylum claim.  That had been refused on 13 July 2012.

43. In the subsequent refusal letter dated 30  June  2014,  the  respondent
    having agreed to reconsider the asylum claim, it is recorded  that  the
    Secretary of State was aware from 13 August 2012 that the appellant had
    been admitted to hospital over concerns about his mental health and the
    respondent was informed  by  his  then  representatives  the  appellant
    intended to make a statement and advised  by  the  solicitors  that  he
    intended to obtain a statement from the claimed partner  who  was  male
    rather than female and this would be sent.  It was never received.

44. The respondent attempted to fix an additional asylum interview but  the
    appellant was too unwell to attend.  A further interview was  scheduled
    on 23 April 2014 but did not proceed as the appellant  had  again  been
    hospitalised.  The same situation occurred on 14 May 2014.

45. The respondent drew  inferences  adverse  to  the  appellant  from  the
    failure to provide a statement from his partner [55].  She wrote that a
    check of Home Office records [57] showed only one person recorded  with
    the name of LI who was a Zambian national who lived in Swansea and  had
    been given indefinite leave to remain but  that  she  is  female.   The
    respondent did not accept the  explanations  of  the  appellant  having
    taken into account his mental health and did not accept that he is gay.

46. Subsequent to this refusal the appellant was interviewed  again  on  18
    March 2015 and was questioned about his sexuality.  He was asked "Going
    back to your sexuality, I understand that you are  not  comfortable  to
    talk about it but I need you to tell me if you have any fear on  return
    to Malawi because of your sexuality".  The appellant replied "no".   He
    did, however, describe himself as gay and that it would put him at risk
    in Malawi [Q 22] saying that he had not said that before because he was
    not comfortable [Q. 23].

47. The appellant then did describe that he had  realised  he  was  gay  at
    about the age of 18, had not had feelings for girls  but  had  feelings
    for men, which meant he was not comfortable at disclosing it in  public
    because in Malawi when you were gay they put  you  in  prison  and  his
    family had told him that gay people were outcasts.  He said he believed
    he would be always hiding his sexual orientation and not  going  public
    about it.  His stepfather had found out when he was about 18  and  beat
    him up as he had been caught with his boyfriend.  He said that  he  had
    met this person, HJ, in a gay club.  Asked if this was a  gay  club  he
    confirmed it was.  Asked if there were special meeting places that  gay
    people could go to socialise he said  it  was  an  underground  club  I
    should say in the city centre.   Asked  how  he  found  out  about  the
    underground gay club he said "I was just strolling along to  the  place
    one day and I just went in.  It is not like a big club, it  is  just  a
    small small club".  Asked how he had heard about it he said "I was just
    strolling along the place and I just walked in" and that he knew it was
    a gay club because there were no men  inside.   He  said  that  he  met
    Harris Jones, that they became friends and afterwards lovers  and  that
    they were together for about four years although they met only  once  a
    month.  He confirmed that after  the  incident  which  his  father  had
    caught him he had maintained a relationship with Harris for four years.



48. Asked [Q. 70] about the teaching of his religion in relation to  sexual
    orientation he said that he was a Presbyterian  when  he  was  back  in
    Malawi and so no gays were allowed but currently he is a member of  the
    Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints but he has not told them of
    his orientation.  He said that there is a conflict with  his  religious
    beliefs that is neutral on this point.

49. Asked if he had met other gay people in the United Kingdom [Q.  79]  he
    said "I had a boyfriend in the UK".

50. The appellant confirmed this person's name was LI.  It was put  to  him
    that he had referred in his first interview to this  person  as  either
    she or her fifteen times.  He said he was not comfortable saying he was
    gay  and  he  was  not  comfortable  and  had  not  raised  his  sexual
    orientation in interview.  He said that he was  with  LI  for  about  a
    year, that he is originally from Zambia, they had  started  as  friends
    meeting in church and then became lovers.  He  said  that  his  younger
    sister knows about his sexual orientation [Q. 95] but his  relationship
    with LI had ended when he came to Scotland.

51. The appellant said that he had now met a man called Ben  in  a  pub  in
    Glasgow and that they have been in a  relationship  for  about  a  year
    having met in a pub on Jamaica Street in Glasgow.

52. In the  subsequent,  third,  refusal  letter  dated  4  June  2015  the
    respondent considered that the  appellant's  reluctance  to  admit  his
    sexuality was not an unreasonable explanation [47] but drew  inferences
    from the failure to provide a statement from  LI  [49].   It  was  also
    noted that during his second interview he had said that he did not wish
    to proceed with the claim on the basis of sexuality and that he was not
    comfortable about talking about it.  Only later did he agree to discuss
    his sexuality stating first that he did not have a fear  to  return  on
    that basis, the Secretary of State considering it unclear as to why  he
    would change his mind about a risk as a result of his  sexuality  [55].
    That is a fair point.

53. The respondent did not accept the appellant's explanation as to how  he
    had first heard about the gay club [56] it being unclear why  he  would
    choose to walk into a gay club one day particularly  when  he  had  not
    known it existed before, and that it  was  unclear  how  he  could  not
    recall HJ's age given they had spent a significant period together as a
    couple [58].   The  respondent  concluded  that  "with  all  reasonable
    allowance having been made for the difficulties you  may  have  had  in
    providing your account - it is considered that the credibility of  your
    claim has been damaged to the  point  where  it  cannot  reasonably  be
    accepted".

54. The matter then proceeded  to  appeal  and  the  appellant  provided  a
    further witness statement  dated  12  November  2015.   Addressing  the
    points raised about his sexual orientation the appellant stated that he
    did not like revealing his sexuality to the Home Office because he  was
    uncomfortable by which he meant that he was ashamed of himself  because
    of the way he was brought up in Malawi.  He did, however, confirm  that
    LI is a man but could not recall exactly when their  relationship  came
    to an end and that a statement had not been provided as  they  were  no
    longer in contact.  He said "in terms of the person who the Home Office
    are talking about, this is not the same LI that I was in a relationship
    with.  I am not sure why  my  partner  is  not  in  the  Home  Office's
    records".  He added also that he still did not feel  comfortable  about
    talking about his sexuality and at the time when he went into the  club
    he did not know it was a gay club and did not know why he went in, that
    he was suffering his illness at the time.  It  was  not  usual  in  his
    culture to ask people their age.

55. In his supplementary statement dated 18 March 2016 the  appellant  said
    that "LI is a girl", was someone he had met in  a  church  in  Swansea,
    that he never had any form of relationship with her  and  that  he  had
    told the Home Office that he was with a girl called LI because he  felt
    uncomfortable in telling them he was gay, having been branded as gay in
    Malawi as he had never had a relationship with a girl.  He said he  had
    always struggled to cope with sexuality and he was worried in  case  he
    would be branded as a bad person when he was being interviewed  by  the
    Home Office and did then tell the Home Office that Lubona was a boy and
    not a girl, the reason for changing his story being that he was worried
    that the Home Office would think that he is not gay.

56. The appellant then gave Ben's surname confirming that they  meet  about
    once a week but that Ben is not one to get involved with his case.

57. In his witness statement of 17 October 2016 the appellant  adopted  his
    previous statement adding that he had been in a relationship  with  AG.
    He said:

         "I have been friends with AG for four years now.  I met him at  the
         African church in Govan.  AG is bisexual.  It was about four months
         ago that we became intimate with each other.  It has not been  easy
         to get into a relationship, especially given my mental  health  and
         that I have had this case hanging over me for years".

58. There is then a witness statement from AG confirming that they had been
    friends for about four years and that  some  four  months  ago  he  had
    arranged to meet the appellant who was in some  financial  difficulties
    and that having helped him buy some groceries and go for a meal he went
    back to the flat.  He said they had been  intimate  about  three  times
    during the last four months and that they see each other  a  number  of
    times a week.

59. Finally, in his witness statement of 12  February  2018  the  appellant
    said that he is gay and fears return to Malawi as he would not be  able
    to socialise as a gay person.  He says that he had previously told  the
    court that he had lied about seeing a woman before and that he had been
    casually seeing AG but it had not worked out as he had  gone  to  Spain
    and they had not kept in touch.

60. I take note of the differences in the evidence  between  the  appellant
    and AG that arose in the hearing  before  Judge  Handley.   I  do  not,
    however,  consider  that  much  weight  can  be   attached   to   these
    differences.  They are comparatively minor and relate to primarily  the
    sequencing of the events which took place on the  day  on  which  their
    relationship became intimate.  Whilst I accept that  AG  did  not  give
    evidence before me, nonetheless he did  give  evidence  on  a  previous
    occasion and I consider  that  some  weight  can  be  attached  to  his
    testimony.

61. I can accept the appellant's  reason  for  not  disclosing  his  sexual
    orientation at his screening interview or  in  his  initial  interview.
    The relevant guidance indicates that many  people,  particularly  those
    who arriving from a country or culture in which being  gay  results  in
    discrimination or worse, may be reluctant to disclose this. I  bear  in
    mind also the appellant's mental ill-health.

62. It is, however, more difficult to assess the appellant's  admitted  lie
    about LI.  As a starting point the appellant first volunteered that  he
    was in a relationship with Lubona and that she was a  woman.   He  then
    said that LI was in fact a man, a non-truth in which he persisted,  and
    then said LI was in fact a woman and she was simply  somebody  that  he
    had known in Swansea.

63. It does not appear to be contested by either party that LI exists.  The
    Home Office's own enquiries revealed that she does exist and  that,  as
    is evident from some of the descriptions of her given by the appellant,
    that she is Zambian.  She appears also to have lived in Swansea.   That
    is consistent with the appellant's description of her and  the  details
    he has given.  It thus appeared that she does exist and it appears also
    given the amount of detail the appellant was able  to  give  about  her
    which has been confirmed by the Home Office, that he knew her.

64. The explanation for the change in testimony  is  first,  the  appellant
    believed he ought to volunteer this information as he might be  thought
    to be gay, and second, changing her gender, on the basis that  he  felt
    he needed to prove he  is  gay.   This  suggests  at  best  significant
    confusion and illogical behaviour but that must  be  seen  through  the
    prism of Dr Burrows' diagnosis and observations as set out  above.   It
    is also necessary to consider the proximity of the  interviews  to  the
    appellant's periods of compulsory treatment and detention in  hospital.
    Whilst it might be  difficult  to  accept  the  explanations  given  by
    somebody who was behaving rationally, that is not the standard by which
    this appellant could be judged.  The thought processes behind what  the
    appellant says he did and why are further indicative of his  disordered
    and illogical thought processes,  again  consistent  with  the  medical
    reports.   It  does  also,  I  consider,  cast  further  doubt  on  the
    reliability of the appellant as a narrator.

65. Similarly, whilst I can accept that the appellant might meet  an  older
    man with whom he began a relationship in Malawi,  the  explanation  for
    how and  when  they  met  makes  little  sense.   There  is  no  proper
    explanation as to how he discovered the club or why he went in  and  it
    appears somewhat odd that the appellant was able to continue living  at
    the family home after the age of 18 when he says he was  discovered  by
    his stepfather.   In  light  of  the  difficulties  in  assessing  what
    happened to the appellant in Malawi when  it  appears  on  Dr  Burrows'
    diagnosis that the appellant was seriously  ill,  it  is  difficult  to
    believe that this account  is  reliable  or  capable  of  bearing  much
    weight. I do not, however, given the medical evidence, consider that it
    detracts from credibility.

66. It is difficult to attach weight to  the  account  of  the  appellant's
    relationship with Ben.  Although some details are given about  him  and
    where they met this appears to have been a casual relationship, nothing
    more  is  said  about  him.   Whilst  it  does  not  detract  from  the
    appellant's credibility, I note that there has been no  production  of,
    for example, casual photographs of them taken.

67. Equally, in terms of the appellant's socialising with other gay  people
    I accept that given his mental health he finds  socialising  difficult.
    He is on constant medication and has some insight into his illness  and
    in any event, the degree to which he socialises with other  gay  people
    or has relationships is incidental to his orientation.

68. While I note that Dr Burrows  records  that  the  appellant  identifies
    himself as gay, he says nothing more.  That is perfectly proper.

69. Given the unreliability of the appellant as a narrator, it is important
    to consider other external evidence as to the core issue of  his  case,
    that is his sexual orientation.  No submissions were made by  the  Home
    Office regarding the evidence of the sister or, for that  matter,  that
    of AG.  On one issue they are consistent, that is, that  the  appellant
    is a gay man.  I bear in mind that neither of  them  attended  to  give
    evidence before me but equally they had shown willingness to do  so  in
    the past in the case of AG.  I bear in mind that they may wish to  have
    helped the appellant particularly in the case of the sister who clearly
    feels that she has to support her brother.  What I do  note  about  her
    statement is that she does not confirm all the appellant's  account  in
    that she makes a distinction between what is clearly delusions  in  the
    appellant's account about what his family were seeking to do to him and
    his sexuality.  It is also noticeable that she does display some degree
    of reticence and difficulty in writing about it, which in  the  context
    is understandable.  In the circumstances I consider that weight can  be
    given to her evidence.

70. I note that there is no evidence confirming the appellant's  attendance
    at, for example, any gay society at his college.  I  do  not  know  why
    that is so but equally  it  is  unclear  to  me  just  how  formal  the
    discussions he  attends  are.   I  was  asked  to  take  on  board  his
    explanation that he does not socialise again for understandable reasons
    and I do so.

71. Finally, I have considered section 8 of the 2004  Act,  but  I  am  not
    satisfied that in  all  the  circumstances  of  this  case,  given  the
    appellant's  health,  that  any  material  damage  is  caused  to   his
    credibility of the appellant.

72. Taking all of these factors into account and viewing the evidence as  a
    whole, despite my concerns about the  reliability  of  the  appellant's
    evidence, and bearing in mind all the matters  raised  in  the  refusal
    letters, I am satisfied to the relevant standard that he is a gay  man.
    I am satisfied also that he identifies as such.   I  do  not,  however,
    accept his account of how he was ill-treated in Malawi, not because,  I
    do not accept that attempts were made to stop him leaving  the  country
    or that he may have been involved in a car crash or that he became ill,
     but because I do not accept his view of how and why these occurred.  I
    do not accept that attempts were made to poison him and it is perfectly
    understandable that family and others concerned for him would  wish  to
    stop him from running away given he was clearly mentally ill.

73. Having made these findings I must consider three steps as set out in HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 at [35]:

         "(a) The first  stage,  of  course,  is  to  consider  whether  the
         applicant is indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of that
         orientation he will not be entitled to be treated as  a  member  of
         the particular social group. But I would regard this  part  of  the
         test as having been satisfied if the applicant's case is that he is
         at risk of persecution because he is suspected of being gay, if his
         past history shows that this is in fact the case.


         (b)  The next stage is to examine a group of  questions  which  are
         directed to what his situation will be on return. This part of  the
         inquiry is directed to what will happen in  the  future.  The  Home
         Office's Country of Origin  report  will  provide  the  background.
         There will be little difficulty in holding that in  countries  such
         as Iran and Cameroon gays or persons who are believed to be gay are
         persecuted and that persecution is something that may reasonably be
         feared. The question is how each applicant, looked at individually,
         will conduct himself if returned and how others will react to  what
         he does. Those others will include everyone with whom he will  come
         in contact, in private as well as in public. The  way  he  conducts
         himself may vary  from  one  situation  to  another,  with  varying
         degrees of risk. But he cannot and must not be expected to  conceal
         aspects of his sexual orientation which he is unwilling to conceal,
         even from those whom he knows may disapprove of  it.  If  he  fears
         persecution as a result and that fear is well-founded, he  will  be
         entitled to asylum however unreasonable his refusal  to  resort  to
         concealment may be. The question what is reasonably  tolerable  has
         no part in this inquiry.


         ...


         (d)  The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will in fact
         conceal aspects of  his  sexual  orientation  if  returned,  is  to
         consider why he will do so. If this will simply be in  response  to
         social pressures or for cultural or religious reasons  of  his  own
         choosing and not because of a fear of persecution,  his  claim  for
         asylum must be rejected. But if the reason why he  will  resort  to
         concealment is that he genuinely fears that otherwise  he  will  be
         persecuted, it will be necessary to consider whether that  fear  is
         well founded.


         ..."


74. The test is framed in terms of sexual orientation, and in  whether  the
    person in question is a gay man

75. I accept on the basis of Dr Burrows' evidence and I  note  that  he  is
    also an honorary senior lecturer in psychiatry in Malawi,  that  it  is
    unlikely that the appellant would be able to  get  the  same  level  of
    support and to get the appropriate drug treatment as he obtains in  the
    United Kingdom.  That is not to say that this would  engage  Article  3
    but it is I consider important to note the very real concern  that  the
    appellant is likely to become unwell again and  that  there  have  been
    significant difficulties  in  the  past  with  his  medication  and  in
    controlling his schizophrenia.  I  note  also  that  in  the  past  his
    behaviour has involved sexual disinhibition.

76. I accept that in  theory  homosexuality  and  homosexual  behaviour  in
    Malawi is punishable at  law.   The  maximum  sentence  appears  to  be
    fourteen years but there is no indication that sentences of that length
    are passed contrary to what the  appellant  appears  to  believe  would
    happen to him.  Whilst there was in some four  to  five  years  ago  an
    indication of a change in attitudes, as  can  be  seen  from  the  Home
    Office COI of 31 October 2012 at paragraph 20.12, this did  not  result
    in the laws being  repealed.   Also  of  note  is  that  a  predecessor
    President Mutharika had in 2011 sharply objected to  rights  activists'
    calls to respect the rights  of  gays  and  lesbians,  adopting  former
    Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe's stance against homosexuals  saying
    that they are worse than dogs.  The more recent report from March  2016
    notes at paragraph 2.2.9 that despite statements made by the government
    that LGBT persons would not be prosecuted this did occur  in  May  2014
    noting  that  there  was  a  moratorium  on  arrests  (2.2.10).    That
    moratorium does, however, appear to have continued although It  appears
    to have been lifted as can be seen from the Nyasa Times  article  dated
    10 February 2016.

77. It is also apparent from  paragraph  2.2.13  that  there  are  societal
    stigma and discrimination with incidents ranging from physical assault,
    harassment in the own person's home and in accessing healthcare for gay
    people, it  is  also  recorded  there  is  no  evidence  of  widespread
    harassment or violence against persons known or perceived  to  be  LGBT
    [2.2.15].  It is, however, noticeable  at  paragraph  5.1.12  that  gay
    rights movements have to be secretive.  It is also noticeable from  the
    US State Department Report for 2014 quoted  at  6.1.6  that  documented
    abuses included mob violence and police harassment directed towards gay
    or allegedly gay men.  It also recorded at 6.1.8 that  the  Centre  for
    Human Rights and Rehabilitation noted in its annual report  that  human
    rights defenders for LGBT  rights  were  also  a  constant  subject  of
    ridicule and hate speech, also  recording  that  apparent  changes  are
    minimal.

78. The articles from 76 Crimes records (and this is sourced)  that  Malawi
    News reported that a gay man Eric Sambisa was detained by police  after
    being quoted in an article  in the Malawi Times entitled  "kill  us  or
    give us our rights".  It is also recorded that the  reporter  was  also
    detained and Mr Sambisa received death threats.  Further articles  from
    the source indicate the hostility and violence that people who are open
    about their  sexuality  receive.   It  is  instructive  also  that  the
    attitude of the police was to arrest the reporters and the gay men  who
    spoke out.

79. In the circumstances, I am  satisfied,  contrary  to  the  respondent's
    submissions and policy as set out in the country guidance  notes,  that
    those who are openly gay in Malawi are  at  risk  of  ill-treatment  of
    sufficient severity to amount to persecution.  Further, I am  satisfied
    that the appellant would find it  difficult  given  his  mental  health
    difficulties to be discreet that would put him at an enhanced risk.   I
    am also satisfied that in any event, that the discretion he attempts is
    motivated out of fear.  That is certainly the evidence  of  his  sister
    and it is consistent  with  the  background  information.   I  am  also
    satisfied by the material that gay men are seen as a particular  social
    group in Malawi.

80.  Accordingly,  for  these  reasons,  I  find  that  the  applicant  has
    demonstrated that he has a well-founded fear of persecution  on  return
    to Malawi on account of his membership of a  particular  social  group,
    that is, gay men.  I find consequently that his removal to Malawi would
    be in breach of  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  pursuant  to  the
    Refugee Convention and for the same reasons, Article  3  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention.

81. In the circumstances, it is unnecessary for me to consider whether  his
    removal to Malawi would be in breach of the  appellant's  rights  under
    the Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention  on  health  grounds;  or,
    under Article 8

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.


 2. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum grounds  and  on
    human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date  21 March 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09217/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 August 2017                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     E K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Matthews, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  R  Handley,  promulgated  on  22  November  2016,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on  4
    June 2015 to refuse him asylum  and  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Malawi.  His case is that he is a gay man
    and faces persecution on that account, both from his  family  and  more
    generally on return to Malawi.  He has also been diagnosed as having  a
    schizoaffective disorder and, since his arrival in the  United  Kingdom
    in 2010 he has been hospitalised, and detained  compulsorily under  the
    Mental Health (Scotland) Act.  It is also the appellant's case that  he
    would not receive the appropriate treatment both in terms of medication
    and the support he currently  receives  from  a  community  psychiatric
    nurse and other medical professionals if returned to Malawi.

 3. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal  letter.   In  summary,
    she did not accept the appellant's account of attempts and  attacks  on
    him in Malawi nor did she accept that he had suffered attacks from  his
    family.  She did not accept either that he is gay or that he  would  be
    at risk on return on that basis.  She was not  satisfied  either  that,
    despite his mental ill-health, as there  would  be  adequate  treatment
    available for him there albeit that it  was  not  up  to  the  standard
    available in the United Kingdom, it thus did not constitute a breach of
    his rights pursuant to Articles 3 of 8 of the Human Rights  Convention.



Procedural History

 4. The appeal first came before the First-tier Tribunal sitting in Glasgow
    on 23 March 2016.  On a decision promulgated on 5 May 2016,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kempton allowed the appeal concluding that the appellant
    was gay and would face persecution for that reason on return to Malawi.
     The respondent appealed that decision to the Upper Tribunal and  in  a
    decision promulgated on 6 July  2016,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Macleman
    concluded that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal had involved the
    making of an error of law, set it aside, and remitted it to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues.

 5. When the matter came  before  Judge  Handley  on  18  October  2016  he
    concluded that the appellant is not a reliable  witness  and  that  his
    credibility had been damaged.  The judge concluded that:-

      a) it was wholly implausible that the appellant  had  failed  to  make
         mention of any difficulties he had due to his sexuality during  his
         asylum interview on 15 May 2012 [32]; and, had failed to mention in
         his asylum interview that his father wanted to kill him because  he
         had discovered that he was gay, finding it implausible that he  had
         not mentioned this in his interview [33];

      b) the appellant's credibility was further damaged by stating  in  his
         asylum interview that he had a partner who was female then  stating
         that he had lied to the interviewer when he  had  referred  to  his
         partner as being female; that it  was  not  plausible  he  was  too
         embarrassed to discuss his sexuality [34];

      c) the appellant's account of the attacks which  had happened  to  him
         in Malawi were implausible [35] to [37];

      d) the appellant's evidence at his second interview with regard to his
         sexuality was vague, unclear and lacking in plausibility;

      e) it was implausible the appellant was unable to know the surname  of
         "Ben" with whom he had had a relationship, noting that he had  been
         unable to provide evidence of this;

      f) there were inconsistencies in the evidence given by  the  appellant
         and by AG with who it is said they  are  in  a  relationship  [40],
         specifically the evidence as to when the relationship started, this
         casting  further  doubt  on  the  reliability  of  the  appellant's
         evidence [40];

      g) the appellant suffers from mental health issues  [45],  noting  the
         report of Dr Byres who had produced a report and also supplementary
         report following a meeting with the appellant on 13  October  2015,
         in which he confirmed that there  was  no  evidence  of  a  relapse
         psychiatric illness and no symptoms suggestive of  psychosis  [43],
         albeit that there would be a risk of relapse or psychosis  were  he
         to change his current antipsychotic medication;

      h) although the level of and standard of treatment available in Malawi
         would be of a lower standard than that from the United Kingdom,  he
         was not satisfied that Article 3 was engaged.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred;

      a) in failing to factor into account  the  appellant's  mental  health
         problems in assessing credibility;

      b) in failing to provide any or adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
         evidence of AG that he had an intimate sexual relationship with the
         appellant.

The hearing

 7. I heard submissions from Mr Aslam on behalf of  the  appellant  and  Mr
    Matthews on behalf of the respondent.

 8. Mr Aslam submitted that  the  judge's  findings  with  respect  to  the
    relationship  between  AG  and  the  appellant  focused  on  when   the
    relationship had come into being, but failed to consider whether  there
    had been intimacy between them, a material issue in  assessing  whether
    the  appellant  is  gay.   He  submitted  further  that   the   judge's
    conclusions at [38] were inadequate.

 9. Mr Aslam submitted further that the judge had failed properly to engage
    with the medical evidence, it being important to the  appellant's  case
    that he may have difficulty as a result of  statements  he  might  make
    about his sexuality if suffered a psychotic relapse.  He  asked  me  to
    note also Dr Byres' indication of the risk of relapse.

10. Mr Matthews submitted that there was nothing in the medical evidence to
    suggest that the appellant had, at the time of the appeal, difficulties
    in recall or in cognition.  He  accepted  that  the  dismissal  of  the
    appellant's sexuality was at [38] short but that this was adequate.

11. Turning to the evidence of AG he submitted that it was clear from  what
    the  judge  had  recorded  at  [27]  to  [29]  that  there  were  clear
    inconsistencies in the evidence.

12. Mr Matthews submitted that there was nothing in the medical evidence to
    suggest the appellant was incapable of recall or  that  his  recall  of
    events had happened in Malawi was impaired.  He stated that the medical
    evidence regarding the appellant's condition  was  such  that  it  came
    nowhere near the high threshold to engage Article 3  or  Article  8  on
    medical grounds.

13. In  response,  Mr  Aslam  submitted  the  judge  should  properly  have
    addressed the nature of  the  appellant's  condition  although  he  did
    accept to an extent in response to my questions that Dr  Byres'  report
    did not expressly address the difficulties the appellant might have  in
    giving evidence.

14. I deal with the grounds in turn.

The Evidence of AG

15. There are  differences  in  the  evidence  relating  first  as  to  the
    circumstances in which, after meeting at Asda,  that  relations  became
    intimate and second, as to when  AG  had  learned  of  the  appellant's
    immigration status.  The appellant had [27] been unable to answer  when
    he had last met AG prior to meeting him at Asda.   He  also  said  that
    they had gone from Asda to AG's house and the relationship had become a
    sexual one at that point.  In contrast, AG at [30]  said  that  it  was
    about three days later when their relationship became intimate.   There
    are also differences in the evidence regarding when AG had known of the
    appellant's immigration status but there is no apparent drawing of  any
    inferences from that issue.

16. That said, whilst the judge does comment on the "appellant's  evidence"
    he makes no direct comment on that of AG.  Nor, for that  matter,  does
    he make any findings as to whether there was in fact any  relationship,
    sexual or otherwise between AG and the appellant.   Whilst  I  note  Mr
    Matthews' submission that the "appellant's evidence" could be taken  to
    refer to the appellant's evidence in its entirety, I  find  no  support
    for that in the determination.  Viewing the determination  as  a  whole
    and the way it is constructed in  the  references  to  the  appellant's
    credibility [34], I consider that the natural and proper  inference  is
    that the  reference  is  to  the  oral  and  written  evidence  of  the
    appellant, rather than the evidence put forward by him as a whole.

17. It therefore follows that there appears to be no  consideration  as  to
    whether her rejected AG's evidence. That in turn goes to  the  question
    of whether is in fact an intimate or sexual relationship between AG and
    the appellant which is relevant as to the question of  the  appellant's
    sexual orientation.

The Medical Evidence

18. There is a difficulty with  the  medical  evidence  in  that  Dr  Byres
    reports whilst providing a very detailed and  helpful  history  of  the
    appellant's condition, the difficulty there has  been  in  getting  the
    correct dosage and the appropriate drug to treat him,  little  is  said
    about his current state, or the difficulties  he  may  have  in  giving
    evidence.  Whilst there are indicators  that  the  appellant  has  some
    insight into his condition, equally it is not clear  from  the  medical
    reports whether he considers or accepts that some of the  things  which
    he says may have occurred in Malawi were in fact delusions.   Dr  Byres
    appears to believe that the allegations particularly of being  poisoned
    are unlikely to be true given that there is a thread of  the  appellant
    believing that he is being poisoned when this  is  not  the  case.  The
    appellant does, however, assert in his witness statement the  truth  of
    the events which occurred in Malawi.

19. There appears to be no  indication  in  the  medical  report  that  the
    appellant has difficulty in recalling what  occurred,  other  than  the
    implicit suggestion that  because  the  delusions  from  which  he  has
    suffered in the past, he believes things to have happened to him  which
    did not in fact happen.

20. There are I consider difficulties with the appellant's account of  what
    occurred in Malawi.  Although he accepts in his witness statement  that
    he has mental health conditions,  nonetheless  he  maintains  that  the
    events did occur.  While the judge did not accept that this events  did
    not occur, he did not find them to be incredible.  It  is  and  it  was
    open to him to conclude that the events was not plausible.

21. What the judge does not, however, appear to have considered is that the
    appellant may be a vulnerable individual.  Whilst it  is  not  a  point
    raised in the submissions before me, I note that in AM (Afghanistan)  v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civil 1123, that the Court of  Appeal  emphasised  the
    importance of  adhering  to  the  guidance  set  out  in  the  Practice
    Direction "First-tier and Upper Tribunal child,  vulnerable  adult  and
    sensitive witnesses", issued by the Senior President on 30 October 2008
    and the Joint Presidential Guidance Note Number 2 of 2010. These do not
    appear to have been addressed by the judge.

22. AM (Afghanistan) is relevant as to the  need  for  the  judge  to  have
    considered the medical report in assessing credibility, a point made by
    the appellant.  While it is not  suggested  that  the  appellant  lacks
    capacity, nonetheless there  are  strong  indications  in  the  medical
    evidence given that he has been sectioned on at  least  two  occasions,
    that care should  be  taken  in  assessing  his  evidence,  see  AM  in
    particular at [34].

23. Taking these factors into account, cumulatively  I  consider  that  the
    judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility was flawed,  in  that
    it failed to have proper regard to the appellant's  mental  ill-health.
    Taken together with failure to explain whether or not he accepted  AG's
    evidence,  I consider that the core findings of fact in this  case  are
    impugned and are unsafe.  I therefore set the  decision  aside  on  the
    basis that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
    making of an error of law.

24. Given the history of this case, I do not consider it  appropriate  that
    it should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

25. Accordingly, I make the following Directions [omitted]



Signed                                  Date:  16 August 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
