
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09613/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd December 2015                 |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MAMADY CONDE
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss R Head, Lawrence Lupin Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Appellant in this case was the Respondent in the First-tier  and  I
    shall refer to the parties as they were known at the  First-tier.   The
    Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 9th September 2015.  The decision of the First-
    tier was to allow the Appellant's appeal  on  Article  8  private  life
    grounds.  The Secretary  of  State  complains  that  in  reaching  that
    decision the  judge  first  of  all  should  not  have  embarked  on  a
    consideration of the Article 8 case outside of the Rules and  that  the
    judge's reasoning for doing so is inadequate.

 2. The grounds complain that the basis for a consideration outside of  the
    Rules was weak and that ground 1 of the application  asserts  that  the
    only basis that the judge has given for doing so is that the  Appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom as a minor and had gained less than seven
    years' residence prior to the making of this application.

 3. The grounds fail to recognise that prior  to  the  hearing  before  the
    judge at the First-tier Tribunal the matter had been considered by  the
    Upper Tribunal in relation to a previous and  in  the  event  erroneous
    decision of another First-tier Tribunal Judge and  that  the  basis  of
    remittal was that the judge  should  have  considered  the  Appellant's
    position outside of the Rules because, and it is succinctly articulated
    in the remittal decision of the Upper Tribunal,  that  the  Appellant's
    age as at the  date  of  his  application  determines  which  parts  of
    paragraph 276ADE  are  applicable  and  because  at  the  date  of  his
    application he was under the age of  18  his  consideration  under  the
    Rules is confined to 276ADE(iv) and in that Rule residence of less than
    seven years operates as an absolute bar to  any  consideration  of  the
    character and quality of an Appellant's private life,  and  absent  the
    applicability of  any  other  Rule  and  that  position  has  not  been
    contested either before the Upper Tribunal or before the First-tier  in
    the rehearing, no part of the Rules deals directly with the  assessment
    of the character and quality of the private life of this  Appellant  or
    indeed of the proportionality of  a  decision  of  removal.   For  that
    reason the first ground of this appeal is entirely misconceived.

 4. I find that the remaining ground is similarly  misconceived.   In  this
    ground  the  Respondent  complains  that  the  judge  has  treated  the
    Appellant's command of the English language and  the  strength  of  his
    financial position as determinative of  the  proportionality  exercise,
    contrary to the decision in  AM  (Malawi).  In  doing  so  the  grounds
    mischaracterise the findings of the  judge.   A  full  reading  of  the
    decision reveals that  the  judge  was  doing  no  more  than  what  is
    statutorily required by Section 117  where  the  factors  of  financial
    independence and ability to speak English  are  required  to  be  given
    consideration by the judge.

 5. A full reading of the decision makes it  abundantly  clear  that  those
    were not the determinative factors and that the judge took  account  of
    all of the circumstances of the Appellant including his age, his length
    of residence and  his integrating in the United  Kingdom.  In  addition
    the  judge  took  account  of  the  historical  difficulties  that  the
    Appellant had suffered in Guinea as indeed found to be  uncontested  by
    the Upper Tribunal including homelessness, brutality  on  the  streets,
    abuse, death of close family members and also  took  into  account  the
    difficulties that he would  find  on  return,  including  the  lack  of
    support other  than  from  a  remaining  sibling  who  is  in  domestic
    servitude and unable to provide the Appellant with  any  meaningful  or
    significant support in terms of reintegration.

 6. The judge recognised that whilst it would not  be  impossible  for  the
    Appellant  to  relocate  in  Guinea,  that  nonetheless  it   was   not
    proportionate to expect him to do  so,  weighing  in  the  balance  the
    quality of the private life that he enjoyed in the United  Kingdom  and
    the difficulties that he would face.  This is not a case plainly  where
    the  Rules  provided  an  adequate  consideration  fo  the  Appellant's
    position.  To the point that at  worst  the  judge's  conclusion  is  a
    generous consideration but there is nothing  in  the  conclusion  which
    reveals any perversity or any material error which would require me  to
    set it aside and remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

 7. Accordingly the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   E. Davidge    Date 30 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
