
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  AA/09590/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Wednesday 10 August 2016                   |On Wednesday 17 August 2016  |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL


                                   Between

                               MS JESSICA [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Emezie, solicitor, Dylan Conrad Kreolle
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge  Devittie  promulgated  on  21  June  2016  ("the   Decision")
       dismissing her appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse
       her asylum and  human  rights  claims.   Permission  to  appeal  the
       Decision was granted on 20 June 2016 by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Grant-Hutchison on two grounds.   Those  were  that  the  Judge  had
       misdirected himself by failing to consider  and  make  any  findings
       whether the Appellant's child is an EU citizen based on his father's
       asserted nationality and whether the Judge had failed to  take  into
       account section 117 Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       ("section 117B") when considering Article 8 ECHR.  The matter  comes
       before us to determine whether the Decision involved the making of a
       material error of law and, if we so find, to re-make  the  decision.




    2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria.  She came to  the  UK  as  a
       student on 15 August 2013 and immediately before the expiry  of  her
       leave, on 15 January 2015 claimed asylum.  The factual basis for the
       first of the grounds is that she has a child (L) born in the UK on [
       ] 2014.  The Appellant says that L's father is  Romanian.   That  is
       supported by L's birth certificate.  However, the nationality of L's
       father is  otherwise  not  demonstrated  by  any  other  documentary
       evidence.  There is no evidence either  that  L  is  himself  to  be
       treated as a national of Romania. The Appellant is no  longer  in  a
       relationship with L's father and she has  not  seen  him  since  May
       2015.


    3. The Appellant's asylum claim was based on  risk  due  to  her  son's
       mixed race and the risk to them both of  returning  to  an  area  of
       Nigeria where Boko Haram operates.  The Judge found that claim to be
       unsupported by the background evidence and that, in  any  event,  it
       would not be unduly harsh for the Appellant and her son to  relocate
       to another part of Nigeria if they faced problems on that account in
       her home area.  The appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum  grounds  and
       permission was not granted in relation to that claim.  We  need  say
       no more about it.


    4. The way in which Mr Emezie formulated the case before us is  on  the
       basis that L's father is said by the Appellant to  be  Romanian  and
       that this is therefore relevant to a  claim  under  the  Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the  EEA  Regulations")
       and is also a relevant factor in the assessment  of  proportionality
       under Article 8 ECHR.


    5. We start by considering the claim that the  Appellant  and  her  son
       could succeed under the EEA Regulations.  It is common  ground  that
       the Judge did not consider this claim.  It is also  right  to  point
       out that the Respondent did consider this possibility  but  rejected
       it firstly because it was not accepted that there was evidence  that
       L is a Romanian citizen and  secondly  because  even  if  that  were
       accepted there was no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had  procured
       sickness insurance to cover her and her son's stay in the UK.


    6. We asked Mr Emezie to point us to the grounds of appeal  which  took
       issue with the Respondent's decision on this basis.   He  emphasised
       that his firm was not responsible for those grounds  but  said  that
       paragraph [19] of the grounds was  sufficiently  widely  drafted  to
       amount to a challenge on this basis.  That document is  referred  to
       also as a "statement of additional grounds" which we  understand  to
       mean that it was intended by the Appellant's previous advisers to be
       also a response to the one-stop  notice  served  on  the  Appellant.
       Paragraph [19] reads as follows:-


           "Moreover the Respondent has failed to consider the family  life
           of the Appellant and her child in  the  EU  in  accordance  with
           Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights..."

    7. We accept that the inclusion of the  words  "in  the  EU"  might  be
       capable of drawing attention to the fact that the Appellant's  child
       might  qualify  for  European  citizenship  due  to   his   father's
       nationality.  However, that would depend how the case was developed.
        We therefore consider that sentence in the context in which  it  is
       developed in the grounds.


    8. That paragraph continues by reference  to  the  "Razgar"  test.  The
       application of that test to the facts of this case is set out in the
       remainder of [19] as follows:-


           "1.   Is there a family or private life?
           Our client has been present in the UK for over 2 years.  She has
           made the UK her ordinary place of  residence  and  has  a  child
           here.  Our client has developed  strong  ties  with  the  United
           Kingdom with her son and with the friends she has made here.  We
           remind the Secretary of State that the threshold for  engagement
           of Article 8 is not an especially  high  one  as  stated  in  AG
           (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ  801.  Accordingly,  we  submit
           that  our  client  meets  this  threshold  and  that   she   has
           established a significant private life in the UK.
           2.    Will removal interfere  with  the  family  and/or  private
           life?
           We submit that removal would have a severe and adverse effect on
           our client's private life.  Our client's child and  friends  are
           present in the UK.  Our client would not  be  able  to  continue
           these relationships in any meaningful manner if she were  to  be
           removed from the United Kingdom.
           We therefore submit that the removal of our client would greatly
           interfere with the strong private life she  has  established  as
           she would be deprived of the ties he [sic] has made  in  the  UK
           and that her removal would  end  the  future  enjoyment  of  our
           client's private life in the UK.
           3.    Is any interference with the  family  life  in  accordance
           with the law?
           We submit that removal of our client would  interfere  with  her
           family private life to such an extent that the rights guaranteed
           under Article 8 of the ECHR would be breached.
           We submit that any  interference  to  our  client's  family  and
           private  life  will   be   significant,   disproportionate   and
           inconsistent with the UK's obligation under the ECHR.  It  would
           therefore not be in accordance with the law.  Furthermore, it is
           submitted that removal would also be contrary  to  current  case
           law and UKVI policy.
           4.    Is the interference in pursuit of one of  the  permissible
           aims set out under Article 8(2)
           We seek to rely on the case of JO (Uganda) and JT (Ivory  Coast)
           v SSHD [2010]  EWCA  Civ  10  in  which  Lord  Justice  Richards
           discussed the distinction between the aims for deportation cases
           and ordinary removal cases.  It was held at paragraph 29 that in
           ordinary removal cases the  aim  to  be  pursued  would  be  the
           maintenance of immigration control.
           Accordingly we wish to refer the SSHD to the case of LD (Article
           8 - best interests of child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278  (IAC)  in
           which  the  Upper  Tribunal  emphasised  in  paragraph  17  that
           immigration control is not a legitimate end in itself.
           5.    Is the interference proportionate to the permissible aim?
           We further remind the Secretary of State that the  enquiry  into
           proportionality is about whether or not the decision  to  remove
           is reasonable.  We refer you to the case of VW Uganda AB Somalia
           v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA  Civ  5
           in which Lord  Justice  Sedley  states  that  the  inquiry  into
           proportionality is not a search for an  insurmountable  obstacle
           but it is rather a balanced judgement of what can reasonably  be
           expected in light of all the material facts (paragraph 19)
           We therefore submit that a proper consideration  of  the  lawful
           approach to the interpretation of Article 8 of the ECHR, as  set
           out in the jurisprudence, indicates that  the  Appellant's  ties
           with UK must necessarily have become strong  over  the  last  20
           years and as such, her removal from the UK  would  constitute  a
           breach of Article 8 of the ECHR."


       We pause to observe that the last part of that last sentence appears
       to bear no relation to this case since, of course, the Appellant has
       been in the UK for only  three years and her son is now aged two.


    9. Read in the context of [19] of the grounds of appeal as a whole,  we
       have no hesitation in finding that this does not constitute a ground
       based on any asserted entitlement to  European  citizenship  by  the
       Appellant's son.  The Appellant  was  legally  represented  in  this
       appeal.  The Respondent flagged up in her decision letter the  issue
       whether the Appellant's son might  be  Romanian  (or  French).   The
       grounds of appeal are also said to  be  a  statement  of  additional
       grounds.  The Appellant had not made an application  under  the  EEA
       Regulations.  However, this was her opportunity to raise  the  issue
       if she wished to  do  so.   The  omission  is  therefore  either  an
       oversight by her previous advisers or a deliberate decision  not  to
       take the point.  We think it quite likely  that  it  is  the  latter
       since, as we have already observed, there  is  a  lack  of  evidence
       either as to the nationality of L's father or as to  the  impact  of
       that on L even if his father is Romanian (or French).  There was  no
       evidence before the Judge  for  example  that  a  child  born  of  a
       Romanian father  outside  Romania  is  entitled  to  citizenship  in
       Romania (and similarly if he is French).  Even if L would thereby be
       entitled to citizenship of either country, there is no  evidence  to
       show  whether  that  is  an  automatic  entitlement  or  whether  an
       application is required.  If the latter, no doubt  the  Romanian  or
       French authorities would require to be satisfied of the  nationality
       of L's father.  It may be that the Appellant's inability  to  access
       that evidence is the reason that no approach has been made to  those
       authorities to obtain Romanian or French nationality for L.  We have
       no way of knowing.  However, whatever the reason, the  fact  remains
       that this is not the way in which we understand  the  case  to  have
       been put before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  This was not a point
       which the Judge was bound to take of his own volition.  As  we  have
       already observed, the Appellant  was  legally  represented  and  the
       Judge may well have thought, as we have already indicated,  that  it
       was a deliberate decision not to pursue a case on this basis due  to
       the lack of evidence.


   10. To a large extent, that disposes also of the issue  in  relation  to
       section 117B. We do not know  what  was  intended  by  Judge  Grant-
       Hutchison when granting permission on the second  ground.   The  way
       that part of the case was argued in the grounds  of  appeal  against
       the Decision by the Appellant's current solicitors  refers  in  this
       regard to  the  case  of  Dube  (s117A-117D)  2015  UKUT  90  (IAC).
       Although this is not the way in which Mr Emezie's  submissions  were
       developed, we consider this given that it was the way in  which  the
       grounds seeking permission were formulated and therefore  the  basis
       on which permission was granted. In relation to those grounds, it is
       not clear to us  whether  the  Appellant  relies  on  that  case  as
       authority for the proposition that the Tribunal has to  have  regard
       to section 117 or for the proposition that having regard to  section
       117 does not obviate the need to consider  Article  8  applying  the
       Razgar test.  We therefore consider  the  Decision  in  relation  to
       both.


   11. It is true that the Decision does not  refer  expressly  to  section
       117.  However, as Mr  Melvin  pointed  out,  there  is  nothing  put
       forward which is relevant to section 117B.  The Judge clearly had to
       have regard to the maintenance of immigration control  as  being  in
       the public interest.   He  did  so  ([10]).   The  Appellant  speaks
       English and she does not appear to have had recourse to public funds
       whilst in the UK.  However, as noted in  AM  (s117B)  (Malawi)  UKUT
       0260 (IAC) those factors are neutral.  Her  and  L's  private  lives
       were formed at a time when they  were  in  the  UK  with  precarious
       status.  The Appellant came here as a student and therefore had  the
       expectation that she would have to leave at the end of her  studies.
       The failure by the Judge to cite section 117B expressly is therefore
       not an error of law.  He had regard to  the  key  factors  at  [10].
       There was no need to do more on the facts of this particular case.


   12. We deal then with the issue whether the  Judge  has  considered  the
       Article 8 claim applying the Razgar test.  Again,  whilst  accepting
       that the Judge has not expressly referred to that  test  or  set  it
       out, we  consider  that  this  is  the  basis  on  which  the  Judge
       approached the claim at [8] to [10] of the Decision.  The Judge  has
       considered L's best interests as a primary consideration as  he  was
       bound to do ([8]).  He notes that L is  very  young.   As  such,  he
       finds that removal would not disrupt his family and private life  in
       the UK which is formed with his mother since  his  mother  would  be
       returning with him.  He accepts that there is an overlap as to where
       L's best interests lie with the  question  of  whether  he  and  his
       mother would be at risk in the Appellant's home area or  whether  it
       would be unduly harsh for the Appellant and L to relocate  elsewhere
       in Nigeria.  Noting his previous findings, he does not  accept  that
       they would be at risk or that they could not reasonably be  expected
       to relocate.  He notes that L has no contact with his father.  There
       would not therefore be a disruption to that relationship.   On  that
       basis, the Judge finds at [9] that L's best interests would  not  be
       adversely affected by removal.  He goes on then to weigh the  public
       interest into the balance and on that basis finds  there  to  be  no
       breach of the  Appellant's  and  L's  human  rights.   Although  the
       assessment is brief, we can discern no error of law in  the  Judge's
       approach.


   13. The way in which the case was developed by Mr Emezie in relation  to
       this ground at the hearing however largely  depended  on  the  first
       ground.  He submitted that the Judge had failed to consider  section
       117B(6).  That submission is unsustainable.  L is not on any view  a
       British citizen nor has he been in  the  UK  for  seven  years.   Mr
       Emezie  sought  to  persuade  us  that  section  117B(6)  unlawfully
       discriminates against EEA  children  who  are  not  covered  by  its
       provisions.  However, firstly, section 117B is  primary  legislation
       and we have to apply it as it is drafted.  Secondly, in  any  event,
       the reason why section 117B(6) does not refer  to  EEA  children  is
       that it has no need to do so.  Nationals of the European Union which
       includes children who are EU nationals benefit  from  the  right  of
       free movement and have no need of the  provisions  relating  to  the
       grant of leave to remain.


   14. Section 117B(6) can add nothing to ground one.  There  is  therefore
       no error of law in the Decision on this ground. If the Appellant had
       made a case based on L having European citizenship, the Judge  would
       have  been  bound  to  consider  whether  L  was  entitled  to  that
       citizenship and, if so satisfied and the Appellant  could  meet  the
       other requirements of the EEA Regulations in that  regard  then  she
       and L would be entitled to remain.  As  we  have  already  observed,
       however, that is not the way in which she put  her  case.   Although
       her witness statement refers to L's father being Romanian  ([10]  of
       her statement) that is only by way of background.  It is  said  only
       that he was born in Romania but has lived in the UK since 2000/2001.
        It is not said that  this  factor  is  of  any  importance  to  the
       position of the Appellant or L.  Again, we remind ourselves that the
       Appellant was legally represented and would have had  assistance  in
       the preparation of her statement.  If this were a factor  considered
       to be of any importance, that would have  been  highlighted  in  her
       statement.  It was not.


   15. Finally, for completeness, we make it clear that,  even  if  we  had
       found that the Judge had failed to make findings in relation to  the
       potential entitlement to European nationality of  L,  we  would  not
       have found the error to be material.  Mr Emezie confirmed  that  the
       Appellant did not seek to adduce any further evidence on this issue.
        Accordingly, all we have before us (and  all  that  the  Judge  had
       before him) is the following:-
           1) Reference at Q41 of the Appellant's asylum  interview  record
              when asked about L's father's nationality that "He said to me
              that he is a Romanian from France but I don't know if  he  is
              Romanian or he is French";
           2) Reference at Q139 to advice given to the Appellant to ask L's
              father to attend to make a passport application for  L  which
              L's father refused to do (which the Appellant  says  is  what
              led her to make the asylum claim when she did);
           3) The limited reference to the EU at [19] to which we refer  at
              [6] above;
           4) A statement from the Appellant making brief mention that  L's
              father was born in Romania (see [14] above);
           5) A brief mention in the chronology prepared  for  the  hearing
              before Judge Devittie that the father is a "Romanian  and  EU
              national";
           6) The child's birth certificate referring to his father's place
              of birth as Romania.


   16. Based on the above, we would have no hesitation in finding that  the
       Appellant cannot show that L is entitled  to  Romanian  nationality.
       If there were any error of law, therefore, it would not be material.
        We reject Mr Emezie's submission based on the case of Veerabudren v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWHC  500  (Admin)
       that it is not open to us to find that an  error  is  not  material.
       The case on which Mr Emezie relies is a judicial review.  We have no
       difficulty in understanding the Deputy Judge's  view  in  that  case
       that it was not open to the Court to find that an error  of  law  in
       the decision of the Secretary of State under review was  immaterial.
       The power of the Court in that instance is  one  of  review  and  it
       would be for the Secretary of State to re-take  the  decision  under
       challenge.  However, this is a statutory appeal.  Our power  is  not
       so limited.  It is to set aside a decision if there is an  error  of
       law and re-make the decision or remit it.  Clearly, if the error  of
       law is immaterial, there would be little point in setting aside  the
       decision only to re-make it in the same way.


   17. In conclusion, therefore, we are satisfied that there is no error of
       law in the Decision on either of the  two  grounds  in  relation  to
       which permission was granted for the reasons we have given.  Even if
       we were wrong about that, we find that any error is not material  as
       the Appellant cannot show that L is entitled to EU citizenship.   If
       she is able to do so in the future, it is of course open to  her  to
       make an application to the Respondent on that basis.

DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making  of  a  material
error on a point  of  law.  We  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Decision  promulgated  on  21  June  2016  with  the  consequence  that  the
Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Signed           [pic] Date    16 August 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
