
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09578/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th April 2015                    |On 9th July 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                   MR M R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 15th March  1986.   The
    Appellant's immigration history  is  set  out  in  considerable  detail
    within the Secretary of State's decision at paragraph 2.  In  short  he
    applied for a Tier 4 (General) multivisit visa to the United Kingdom on
    19th November 2010 and that visa was granted until 16th February  2012.
    The Appellant left Sri Lanka and arrived in the  UK  on  25th  December
    2010.  He overstayed the terms  of  his  visa  having  made  subsequent
    applications for extensions in the interim and on 2nd February  he  was
    encountered working at B&M in Hemel Hempstead  on  an  enforcement  led
    visit.  He was working in breach of his employment restrictions and  on
    that date he was served with a form IS151A on the  basis  that  he  had
    overstayed his leave to enter the UK.  On 8th May 2013  some  six  days
    after he was served with the form IS151A the Appellant claimed  asylum.



 2. That application was refused by the Secretary of  State  by  way  of  a
    Notice of Refusal dated 28th October 2014.  The Appellant  had  claimed
    asylum on the basis that if returned he would face mistreatment due  to
    his imputed political opinion because his partner with whom he  resided
    was suspected of being involved with the LTTE.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Birk  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  23rd  December  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 9th January 2015  the  Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed on asylum  grounds  and  human  rights  grounds  and  the
    Appellant was found not to be in need of humanitarian  protection.   On
    20th January 2015 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 30th January 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ievins
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge  Ievins  noted  that  the  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal focused on the judge's findings about  the
    authenticity or otherwise of a court summons  from  Sri  Lanka.   Judge
    Ievins considered that it might  be  thought  from  a  reading  of  the
    determination that the judge's concerns about the state  of  the  court
    summons and where and how it had been kept  were  one  of  the  sounder
    parts of the determination but that the grounds seeking  permission  to
    appeal made no mention  of  concerns  about  interpretation  which  are
    raised in  a  letter  from  the  Appellant's  solicitor  sent  the  day
    following the hearing.  I noted that  the  judge  had  found  that  the
    Appellant had provided a consistent account of his detention  and  ill-
    treatment and that what he claimed had happened "could  have  happened"
    but was nonetheless not truthful.

 4. Judge Ievins noted that the grounds seeking permission to  appeal  were
    drafted by Counsel who represented the Appellant at the hearing so that
    if there was anything in  the  concerns  about  interpretation  Counsel
    should have raised these in the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal.
    However, he noted that whilst asylum appeals are to be considered  with
    the most anxious scrutiny and despite the length of the hearing it  was
    arguable from reading the determination that that had  not  been  given
    and that it was arguable that it was not always possible to follow  the
    judge's reasoning.  He therefore considered there was an arguable error
    of law and he granted permission to appeal.

 5. On 10th February 2015 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response states clearly that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge properly considered the summons and that  the
    judge set out reasons at paragraph 35 of the  decision  as  to  why  he
    found that the documents could not be relied upon.  They state that  it
    was not merely the condition of the documents that caused the judge  to
    reject the documents but also the Appellant's oral testimony.  The Rule
    24 response goes on to note that the judge considered  the  Appellant's
    participation at political events in the UK and found that there was no
    evidence that he had succeeded  in  raising  a  profile  that  the  Sri
    Lankans would be adversely interested in him upon his return  and  that
    the judge was entitled to  make  that  finding  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant is not legally represented at
    this appeal.  He appears in person.  I explained in some detail to  the
    Appellant the process that would be followed and indicated to him  that
    I would listen without interruption to his  submissions  and  give  due
    consideration to everything that he had to say.  The Secretary of State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Jarvis.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Albeit that it is the Appellant's appeal Mr  Jarvis  made  the  initial
    submissions.  He starts by addressing  paragraph  2  of  Judge  Ievins'
    permission pointing out that that is a rather unusual analysis  bearing
    in  mind  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  representative's   grounds
    expressing concern about the summons and that Judge Ievins has  rightly
    expressed doubts about the merits of the grounds and he is correct that
    asylum appeals are to be considered with the most anxious scrutiny.  As
    for guidance as to how a judge  should  consider  anxious  scrutiny  he
    refers me to  the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  The  Queen  on  the
    Application of YH [2010] EWCA Civ 116 and states  that  this  has  been
    carried out properly by the judge.

 8.  Mr  Jarvis  submits  that  there  has  been  no  material  problem  in
    considering  the  evidence  and  that  there  is  nothing  within   the
    determination, Grounds of Appeal or permission that raises any specific
    concerns.  He points out that Judge Ievins was not  the  judge  at  the
    hearing, but the Appellant was represented and if there  were  concerns
    they would have been raised.  None were made and there was no reference
    to them and he submits there are no material  issues.   He  points  out
    that the legal representatives at the First-tier Tribunal including the
    judge were the best-placed parties to decide the issue and that it  has
    not been shown that the Immigration  Judge  has  not  carried  out  his
    judicial process properly.

 9. He points out the other issues raised in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  are
    effectively the same point and that the judge has  at  paragraph  34  a
    limited position with regard to the first summons and that  he  has  at
    paragraph 35 gone on to consider the guidance given  in  Tanveer  Ahmed
    and as long as the judge has considered the documentary evidence in the
    round and given reasons then that is within his purview and no material
    error of law is shown.

10. So far as the grounds setting out paragraph 5 and  6  allege  that  the
    judge has not properly considered the country guidance of GJ and Others
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319  (AIC)  Mr
    Jarvis points out that the authority makes it plain that to be at  risk
    it is necessary to  have  a  perceived  and  actual  profile  and  that
    attending demonstrations is not sufficient and that the judge has given
    due consideration to this point.  He submits that there is no  material
    error of law disclosed and asked me to dismiss the appeal.

11. The Appellant states that everything is true and that the documents are
    from the court and medical centres and demonstrations.   He  states  he
    took everything from the website and that everything he has  stated  is
    truthful.  He contends that he will still have a  problem  if  he  goes
    back home to Sri Lanka.  He points out to me  that  his  mother  passed
    away three days before the first hearing and that this did  affect  his
    concentration.  He also contends he had  a  dialect  problem  with  the
    interpreter but acknowledges that this has not been previously  raised.
    When asked if there was anything else the Appellant wished to state  he
    indicated that there was not.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

14. I am referred to the decision in The Queen on the Application of YH and
    as to how expression anxious scrutiny  should  be  construed  within  a
    legal analysis.  I acknowledge that this is  brought  to  me  by  legal
    representatives and I fully understand it is not a  concept  which  the
    Appellant in person would wish to address.  I have  given  within  this
    determination due and proper consideration  to  the  reference  to  the
    expression anxious scrutiny found in particular at paragraphs 22 to  24
    of YH.  Perhaps the most important analysis from  those  paragraphs  is
    the conclusion therein of the need  for  decisions  to  show  by  their
    reasoning that every factor which might tell in favour of an  applicant
    has properly been taken into account.  Such comments are made herein on
    the Appellant's behalf  particularly  with  regard  to  the  documents.
    Bearing in mind the manner in  which  the  judge  has  considered  this
    matter and the detailed findings that she has given I am satisfied that
    full and proper anxious scrutiny has been applied in this matter.

15. The principal ground of appeal in this matter relates  to  the  judge's
    analysis with regard to documents albeit that that is somewhat tempered
    by the manner in which  Judge  Ievins  granted  permission  to  appeal.
    However, the judge has, at paragraph 35 of her determination, given due
    consideration to the summonses under the principles set out in  Tanveer
    Ahmed and has made findings that the documents are not  reliable.   The
    judge has gone on to give full and proper reasons as to how she reached
    that decision and it is important to read paragraphs 35 to 38 in  their
    entirety and in context.

16. The judge has made adverse credibility findings.  A proper approach  to
    credibility requires an assessment of the evidence and of  the  general
    claim.  In asylum claims, relevant factors  are  firstly  the  internal
    consistency of the claim, secondly the  inherent  plausibility  of  the
    claim and thirdly the consistency of the claim with external factors of
    the  sort  typically  found  in  country  guidance.   Whilst  I   would
    acknowledge that it is theoretically correct that a Claimant need do no
    more than state his claim that claim still needs  to  be  examined  for
    consistency and inherent plausibility.  in this case the judge has made
    such an analysis  and  this  is  set  out  in  considerable  detail  at
    paragraphs 40 to 45.  Thereafter the judge has gone on to give due  and
    proper consideration to the country guidance authority.

17. As the Secretary of  State  has  pointed  out  it  is  not  merely  the
    condition of the documents that caused the judge  to  reject  them  but
    also the Appellant's oral evidence.  The judge has given due and proper
    consideration to the Appellant's participation at political  events  in
    the UK and found that there was no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had
    succeeded in raising a profile that the Sri Lankans would be  adversely
    interested in him upon his return.  Such findings  are  ones  that  the
    judge was entitled to make on the evidence before him.

18. Overall the decision is well-reasoned and well-set out.  The  arguments
    put forward amount to little more than disagreement.  For all the above
    reasons I am quite  satisfied  that  this  determination  discloses  no
    material error of law.  In reaching that decision I have given full and
    due proper consideration to the  submissions  made  in  person  by  the
    Appellant at this appeal.  In such circumstances the Appellant's appeal
    is dismissed and the decision of the Firs-tier Tribunal is  maintained.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material of law and  the
Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
is maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an anonymity order.   No  application  is
made to vary that order and none is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
