

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09028/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Sent           |
|On : 26th June 2013                           |On : 28th June 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                           dineshkumar uthayakumar

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   On 21st September 2012 an 'immigration decision' was  taken  to  remove
    Mr Dineshkumar from the United Kingdom, consequent upon the refusal  of
    his asylum claim.  An appeal against  that  decision  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 2nd November 2012, but was  dismissed  by  Judge
    Lever.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  sought  on  the
    strength of three grounds settled by Shivani  Jegarajah,  but  each  of
    those grounds was examined in detail and rejected by Judge Froom.   His
    reasons strike me as absolutely right, and I would adopt them  as  part
    of my own reasoning on the 'error of law' issue.  The  application  was
    renewed on the same grounds, however, directly to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and this time permission was granted by Judge Allen on the first ground
    only.  Notice of today's hearing was posted to  the  appellant  at  his
    home address and to Raj Law Solicitors on 30th May 2013.

2.    When the appeal came before me today, there was no  appearance  by  or
    on behalf of the appellant, and no explanation for the  non-attendance.
    In accordance with rule 38(b) of the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules
    2008 I considered it in the interests of justice to  proceed  with  the
    hearing in the absence of a party, and heard submissions from Mr Avery.
     I shall deal first with the two grounds on which Judge Allen  did  not
    grant leave to appeal.

3.   The appellant was 13 or 14 years old when he claims  to  have  conveyed
    handguns in his satchel.  That was certainly not too young for  him  to
    be able to recollect accurately what happened at that time, as asserted
    in the second ground.  As for the medical report by  Professor  Lingam,
    it does not greatly assist the appellant.  The Professor  explains  why
    the appellant's scars have the appearance of  lacerations  rather  than
    burns, and indeed concludes that they are "diagnostic with  lacerations
    (sic)".  But he goes on to say that, while they cannot have been  self-
    inflicted (some of them being out of the appellant's reach),  there  is
    "no way" he could differentiate between wounds  inflicted  in  the  way
    described by the appellant and wounds inflicted deliberately  in  other
    circumstances,  though  he  rules  out  flagellation  in  a   religious
    ceremony.  What Judge Lever says about the medical report at  paragraph
    43 of his determination is a very realistic appraisal of this  somewhat
    rambling report, and he emphasizes that he is considering it as part of
    his overall assessment of credibility.

4.   The first ground  stems  from  the  series  of  questions  put  to  the
    appellant by Judge Lever  after  a  lengthy  cross-examination  by  the
    Presenting Officer.  In a note to the appellant's caseworker after  the
    hearing, Miss Kezia Tobin of counsel said that in her  view  the  judge
    had intervened "to  an  extent  which  I  felt  was  bordering  on  the
    inappropriate."  That rather moderate view was expanded in the  grounds
    to an allegation that the conduct of the hearing was unfair,  bolstered
    by lengthy quotations from some  four  authorities.   The  hand-written
    notes taken by Miss Tobin were adduced in evidence, and  in  accordance
    with directions issued by Judge Reeds the  Presenting  Officer's  notes
    were typed up and made available for today's hearing.  At that hearing,
    I also considered the hand-written Record of Proceedings taken by Judge
    Lever.

5.   The result of comparing these three documents is that they  tally  well
    with each other, and for that reason may be regarded  as  a  reasonably
    accurate record of what was actually said.  They do not show that Judge
    Lever's conduct of the proceedings was in any way unfair or oppressive.
     His series of questions was not inordinately  long,  and  was  clearly
    designed to elicit relevant information.  He  did  not  step  into  the
    shoes of the Presenting Officer, as it were, and  continue  the  cross-
    examination.  Miss Tobin has not said there was anything hostile in his
    manner.

6.   In any event, the reasons given by Judge Lever for  not  believing  the
    appellant's story go  well  beyond  the  matters  which  he  asked  the
    appellant about himself.  Those reasons occupy paragraphs 32 to  49  of
    the determination, and amply justify the  adverse  credibility  finding
    reached by the judge.  As Mr Avery  observes,  most  of  those  reasons
    would be cogent independently of how the hearing was  conducted.   They
    have not been seriously challenged.  The issue about the conduct of the
    hearing turns out to have been a red herring, with no real substance.




     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              26th June 2013



