
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09784/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 6 July 2015                       |On 22 July 2015                      |
|Prepared on 7 July 2015              |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    O. S.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pickering, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant entered the United  Kingdom  using  her  own  Iranian
         passport and with the benefit of entry clearance as a visitor on 15
         August 2011, and she did so again on 22 July 2012.

      2. On 10 November 2013 the Appellant claimed asylum, saying  that  she
         had returned to Iran on 10 August 2012, and had then re-entered the
         UK illegally by air under an assumed identity on 10 November  2013.
         That application was refused on 31 October 2014, and in consequence
         a removal decision was made in relation to her.

      3. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal against the removal decision
         and her appeal was heard on 22  December  2014,  and  dismissed  by
         decision of Judge Buchanan, promulgated on 15 January 2015.  Whilst
         the Respondent had accepted that the Appellant was who she  claimed
         to be, he was not satisfied the Appellant had told the truth  about
         what had occurred after she had returned to Iran,  or  whether  she
         had come to the adverse attention of the Iranian authorities.

      4.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal, was refused on the basis it was no more  than
         a  disagreement  with  Judge  Buchanan's  decision.  Undaunted  the
         application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal, when it was  granted
         by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on 21 May 2015 on the  basis  that  it
         was arguable there had been an error of law in the  approach  taken
         to the evidence, although it was noted that this  should  not  give
         the Appellant too much hope.

      5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice of 2 June 2015 in  which  she
         asserted that the Judge had given adequate reasons for his  adverse
         credibility findings and that the grounds failed to engage properly
         with  the  decision  and  were  in  truth  merely   a   series   of
         disagreements and attempts to reargue the appeal.

      6. Thus the matter comes before me.

      Error of Law?

      7. The Appellant was  twice  granted  entry  clearance  as  a  visitor
         following a successful appeal to the Tribunal, in  order  to  visit
         her sister and brother in law  [A1].  The  Appellant  was  able  to
         travel on both occasions in the company of her father, who was also
         granted  entry  clearance  as  a  visitor  for  the  same  purpose.
         Curiously therefore the Appellant denied at her screening interview
         any knowledge of her sister's address, phone number, or immigration
         status [B17 Q6.8], although nothing turns upon that for the purpose
         of this hearing.

      8. The Appellant's brother in law had travelled to the UK in 2003, had
         unsuccessfully claimed asylum, and all of his appeal rights against
         a decision to remove him in August  2003  were  long  exhausted  by
         2006.

      9. The Appellant's sister had travelled to the UK on  1  August  2006.
         She was also an unsuccessful asylum seeker, whose own appeal to the
         Tribunal against a decision to remove her  had  been  dismissed  by
         Determination of Judge Dawson promulgated on 23 December 2006.  She
         too, travelled to the UK using her  own  Iranian  passport,  and  a
         grant of entry clearance as a visitor, and she had travelled in the
         company of her two children been reunited with her husband, and had
         promptly claimed asylum.

     10. The Determination of Judge Dawson was relied upon by the Respondent
         at the hearing before Judge Buchanan as part of the basis  for  the
         cross-examination of both the Appellant and the Appellant's sister.
         The Appellant's sister had been called to give evidence in  support
         of the Appellant. The findings of fact made by  Judge  Dawson,  and
         the results of that cross-examination were relied upon  in  support
         of two submissions advanced on behalf  of  the  Respondent  to  the
         effect that she was supporting a false account  by  the  Appellant;
         (i) that the Appellant's sister was not in  any  event  a  reliable
         witness, because she had relied upon a false  account  in  her  own
         asylum claim, and, (ii) that her evidence to Judge Buchanan was not
         consistent with that of the Appellant.

     11. It is accepted by Ms  Pickering  before  me  that  the  Appellant's
         sister did not admit to Judge Buchanan that she had  told  lies  to
         Judge Dawson in 2006 when giving evidence to him. It is plain  from
         both the decision, and her own witness statement, that the evidence
         given by the Appellant's sister to  Judge  Buchanan  was  that  the
         account  she  had  given  to  Judge  Dawson  in  2006   was   true,
         notwithstanding Judge Dawson's rejection of it  as  false  [6.14  &
         6.21].

     12. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there is simply no merit
         in Ground 2. There was material damage to the  general  credibility
         of the Appellant's sister. Moreover the Appellant  and  her  sister
         were not consistent in their evidence about  whether  their  father
         had ever been arrested, and the Judge was perfectly entitled on the
         evidence before him, for the reasons that he gave, to conclude that
         their father was  not  a  person  who  had  attracted  any  adverse
         attention  from  the  Iranian   authorities.   Notwithstanding   Ms
         Pickering's attempt in her submissions to me to develop Ground 2 in
         a manner which she accepted went well beyond that in which she  had
         drafted the complaint, there was simply  no  error  in  either  the
         Judge's conclusion that the evidence of the Appellant's sister  was
         not consistent with that of the Appellant,  or,  that  the  account
         relied upon by the Appellant was itself not credible.

     13. Ground 1, as advanced, was a complaint that the Judge had failed to
         take material evidence into account. There were four limbs to  that
         complaint.

     14. The first limb was  a  complaint  that  the  Judge  overlooked  the
         explanation offered by the Appellant for her failure to delete from
         her computer the electronic copy of a book received by email. There
         was however no explanation for that failure, as  such,  merely  the
         Appellant's assertion that she had failed to do  so  when  she  had
         taken the precaution of destroying the physical copy  of  the  book
         she had printed because she had overlooked the need to do so.  That
         was no explanation at all. She said  that  she  had  destroyed  the
         physical copy of the book in recognition of the serious risk to her
         safety that would result if she were caught in  possession  of  it.
         She had no explanation to offer  for  her  failure  to  delete  the
         electronic copy, and it  was  this  failure  which  the  Judge  was
         commenting upon adversely. Her claim that she  had  overlooked  the
         need to do so, is not in  this  context  an  explanation  that  was
         overlooked. The Judge's point, which was a reasonable one, was that
         she had been at great pains to tell him how dangerous it  would  be
         to be caught in Iran with such a book, and so given that knowledge,
         he did not believe that she would have acted as she had claimed  to
         have done. That finding was well open to him on the  evidence,  and
         it was adequately reasoned.

     15. The second limb was a complaint that  the  Judge  should  not  have
         found that the Appellant's father had  access  to  the  Appellant's
         email account, even though that was her evidence.  The  reason  for
         the complaint was that her father had only been given  such  access
         for banking purposes. Again there is no merit in the complaint. The
         purpose for the grant of  access  to  the  email  account  was  not
         relevant to the point  the  Judge  was  making.  At  interview  the
         Appellant had claimed that the electronic copy of the book was  not
         in any way hidden from view in her computer, or in any part of  her
         computer that her father did not have access to. She said  "it  was
         on my email account which was kept open because my  dad  also  used
         it, so when they saw the laptop they could see  the  email"  [Q63].
         The Judge was therefore perfectly entitled  to  make  the  findings
         that he did make in relation to this evidence [6.19 - 6.21].

     16. The third limb was a complaint that the Judge failed to  take  into
         account in his decision [6.22] the Appellant's claim that when  she
         most recently left Iran, she did so illegally. The point  that  the
         Judge was making however in  this  passage  was  that  on  her  own
         account  she  had  been  able  to  enter  and  leave  Iran  without
         difficulty twice. There was no error in his doing so, and there  is
         no merit in the complaint.

     17. The fourth limb was a complaint that the Judge failed to take  into
         account the answer given at interview [Q93] about her attendance at
         a heavy metal music concert in Iran. That answer  did  not  however
         offer the Judge any assistance with the issue that  the  Judge  was
         addressing. On the Appellant's own account she believed herself  to
         already be of adverse interest to the Iranian authorities, yet  she
         claimed to have taken what on her account was the very serious risk
         of attending such a music concert, although she could not name  the
         band that had played. The Judge was perfectly  entitled  to  assess
         the weight to be given to that evidence in the way that he did, and
         for the reasons that he gave.

      Conclusion

     18. I am satisfied that the criticisms that have been advanced  of  the
         decision are, at best, no more than a disagreement with the Judge's
         conclusions. The approach taken by the Judge to the evidence in his
         decision does not disclose any error  of  law  that  requires  that
         decision to be set aside and remade.

   DECISION

      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      15 January 2015 contains no error of law in the  decision  to  dismiss
      the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set  aside
      and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Signed
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 7 July 2015






Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.



Signed
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 7 July 2015
