
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Aa/09144/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 7 July 2016                                |On 5 October 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     R S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pickering instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is an Iranian national. On 14 October 2014  the  Respondent
   refused his application for asylum and concluded that his return to  Iran
   would not breach his rights under the European Convention on Human Rights
   (ECHR). His appeal was allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Suffield-
   Thompson in a decision promulgated on 9 March 2015. Upper Tribunal  Judge
   Poole allowed the Respondent's  appeal  against  that  decision  and  the
   matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker for a de novo  hearing
   on 6 January 2016. She dismissed his appeal on all grounds. The Appellant
   sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  that  decision
   which was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 26  March  2015
   and then granted on renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker  on  13  April
   2016. Permission was granted on all grounds.


   The Grounds


2. There are three grounds of appeal. The First-tier Tribunal had before  it
   a report by Dr Kakhki an Iranian country expert  dated  4  January  2016.
   Firstly it is asserted that the First-tier Tribunal's  treatment  of  the
   expert evidence  was  "irregular",  secondly  it  is  asserted  that  the
   Tribunal erred in approach to SB (risk on return - illegal exit) Iran  CG
   [2009] UKAIT 00053 and BA (Demonstrators in Britain  -  risk  on  return)
   Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) and thirdly it is asserted that  the  First-
   tier Tribunal erred in relation to findings regarding obtaining a  travel
   document. In relation to Ground 1, the renewed  grounds  state  that  the
   grounds to the First-tier Tribunal are still relied on. In summary, those
   grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  finding  that  the
   expert's assessment of risk was "inextricably  linked"  with  the  claims
   which were found not to be credible that he had  been  directly  involved
   with the KDPI. The grounds argue that the expert made it clear  that  the
   Appellant would be at risk even if the KDPI links were found  not  to  be
   credible. The Appellant would have to disclose on return that he  claimed
   asylum and why and  this  would  then  amount  to  further  risk  to  the
   Appellant.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  expert  had  not
   specifically addressed how the Iranian regime would view the illegal exit
   and draft evading given the Appellant's age when he left Iran but it  was
   clear that the expert knew the Appellant's age. The  background  evidence
   showed that once detained the conditions were likely to meet the  Article
   3 threshold.


3. Ground 2 asserts that the First-tier Tribunal should have  departed  from
   the country guidance on the basis of the expert's report  and  background
   evidence, to which she did not refer. The  Judge  had  not  given  proper
   reasons for rejecting the Appellant's  evidence  and  the  situation  had
   moved on since SB (Iran). The Appellant's expert had  confirmed  that  he
   was not asked to address the additional factors of the return  of  failed
   asylum seekers when he provided  an  expert  report  for  SB  (Iran)  and
   therefore it did not have to be followed.  Alternatively,  if  SB  (Iran)
   gave proper guidance then it could have been applied in  so  far  as  the
   'aggravating factors' could be applied to its guidance.

4. Ground 3  states  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  address  the
   procedure to obtain a  travel  document  (as  described  by  the  country
   expert) and the questions that would be asked before the travel  document
   would be issued. The expert made it clear that  even  if  issued  with  a
   travel document there could still be a risk as there would not be an exit
   stamp in the document. The First-tier Tribunal, it is asserted,  did  not
   give adequate weight to that.  The renewed grounds add to the grounds for
   permission to the First-tier Tribunal in asserting  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal had made no reference to  a  print  out  from  the  Respondent's
   guidance which stated that "Oman now represents Iran's interests  in  the
   UK via its London  Embassy,  but  is  not  currently  providing  consular
   services to Iranians".

   The Rule 24 response


5. The Respondent opposes the Appellant's appeal and submits that the  Judge
   gave a detailed and thorough determination and  considered  the  expert's
   report at some length. The First-tier Tribunal gave  sustainable  reasons
   for finding that the Appellant was not at risk. It is contended that  the
   grounds have no merit and merely disagree with the adverse outcome of the
   appeal without identifying any arguable material error of law.


   The Hearing


6. Ms Pickering  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  given
   consideration to the report of Dr Kakhki. The Judge rejected  the  report
   concluding it was based on the premise  that  the  Appellant  would  have
   problems due to involvement with the KDPI  but  there  was  more  to  the
   report than this point. There were a number of references in  his  report
   to instances of those claiming abroad facing problems on return. At pages
   33 to 37 of the report Dr Kakhki referenced examples of ill-treatment  on
   return to Iran  which  was  misinterpreted.  The  Judge  found  that  the
   Appellant would be sent back on a travel document and then went onto look
   at comments of expert. If returned  on  a  travel  document  the  Iranian
   authorities would know of his  asylum  claim.  The  Judge  erred  in  her
   approach to SB. Mr  Palmer's  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal at page 3 made it clear that there was a change in  the  country
   conditions. Further reports were  contained  in  the  Appellant's  bundle
   detailed from paragraph 3.3 to 3.10 of the skeleton argument.  This  case
   was not on all fours with SB and the Judge said  that  it  was  only  the
   issue of illegal exit that was relevant to this  Appellant  which  missed
   the point. It was the cumulative effect of the lack of the  documentation
   and travel document that would reveal the nature of the asylum claim  and
   the Judge had erred. Further, there was  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
   conduct being interpreted  as  being  anti-Islamic  conduct.  The  expert
   report dealt with it at pages 90, 92, 102, 106, 121 and136.


7. Mr Richards submitted that there was  no  material  error.  The  expert's
   report was dealt with at some length and  the  Judge  concluded  properly
   that there was not the evidence which would cause her to depart from  the
   country guidance. If there were any doubt on that matter one only had  to
   look at the subsequent country guidance case of SSH and HR (illegal exit:
   failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) . Dr Kakhki  sought
   to make the same arguments and those arguments were in effect rejected at
   paragraph 32 in particular and the SB principle still applied. There  was
   no risk on return to those who exited illegally and made a claim  abroad.
   The fresh country  guidance  underscored  the  fact  that  there  was  no
   material error of law and it ought to stand.

8. In reply Ms Pickering argued that this case was not  on  all  fours  with
   country guidance and particularly in respect of Judge's view of  the  way
   Appellant gave evidence and with a mind to the comments that were made at
   paragraph 23 of the country  guidance  case.  There  was  a  query  about
   cooperation. It could not be characterised as a case  where  there  would
   not be a material error notwithstanding the Country Guidance.


   Discussion and Findings


9. The Appellant's previous appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Hart in 2010. Judge Hart  found  the  Appellant's  account  of  his
   material history in Iran not to be credible.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Baker found that Devaseelan applied  and  adopted  his  findings  as  her
   starting point. No issue has been taken in the  grounds  of  appeal  with
   that approach. In consequence therefore the material facts on  which  she
   was obliged to determine the Appellant's appeal were that he exited  Iran
   illegally, had no travel documentation and was a putative failed  asylum-
   seeker.


10. Her consideration of the expert's report starts at paragraph 20  of  the
   decision. She comments in that paragraph  that  it  is  unclear  why  the
   expert was asked to comment on the risk to the Appellant in light of  his
   claimed association with the Kurdish  Democratic  Party  of  Iran  (KDPI)
   given the findings of Judge Hart in  2010.  The  grounds  assert  and  Ms
   Pickering argued that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  rejecting  the
   report on the grounds that it was premised on the Appellant's association
   with the KDPI. I do not find that this criticism is made out.  Dr  Kakhki
   was instructed to comment on the risk faced  by  the  Appellant  on  this
   ground and the first 30 pages of his report are dedicated to that  issue.
   At paragraph 25 (ii) of the decision, Judge Baker finds that the expert's
   assessment of risk to the Appellant in relation to his Kurdish  ethnicity
   is linked with association with the  KDPI  which  was  found  not  to  be
   credible. She was undoubtedly correct about this as it is manifestly  the
   case from Dr Kakhki's reasoning at  page  27  cited  at  25  (i)  of  the
   decision. It is clear from paragraph 25 (iii) of the decision that  Judge
   Baker did not reject the expert's report in its entirety on this basis as
   she  states:  "Accordingly  only  some  aspects  of  the  report  are  of
   assistance to me, for example, Section 2  "returning  to  Iran  following
   illegal exit". She then embarked on  a  full  analysis  of  the  expert's
   evidence in relation to illegal exit, the risk as a failed asylum  seeker
   and returning without having performed military service.


11. The grounds assert that Judge Baker misunderstood the argument  advanced
   that SB did not provide an answer for the Appellant's  argument  that  he
   would be at risk as a failed asylum seeker. At paragraph  25  (iv)  Judge
   Baker cites paragraph 31 of the report where Dr Kakhki states that in  SB
   he was not instructed to conduct specific research on the risk of  return
   and provided a general overview of  the  risks  associated  with  illegal
   exit, without reference to the question of whether seeking asylum  abroad
   triggered any  additional  risk  factors  for  a  returnee.  She  clearly
   therefore properly  apprehended  the  ambit  of  the  report's  remit  in
   relation to the risk to failed asylum-seekers.

12. She then assessed the expert's evidence in relation to each of the  risk
   factors he discussed. Firstly she addressed section two of the report  on
   returning to Iran following illegal exit. She found at paragraph 25  (vi)
   that the Appellant would be sent back on a travel document.  The  grounds
   assert that she failed to address the evidence in relation to obtaining a
   travel document and failed to give reasons for concluding that  he  could
   return on one. Dr Kakhki set out in pages 31 and 32  of  the  report  the
   procedure and requirements of the process of obtaining a travel  document
   and stated that if the Appellant was not in possession  of  any  official
   travel document and was returned to Iran without prior  arrangement  with
   the Embassy he would not be accepted by Iranian immigration officials  on
   arrival. Judge Baker found, in accordance with the  expert's  opinion  at
   page 33, that if the  Appellant  arrived  without  a  passport  or  valid
   documentation that the Appellant would be placed on the next  flight  and
   returned. She found that this would not be relevant to the  Appellant  if
   he was removed if his appeal was dismissed.


13. Dr Kakhki did not state in  his  report  that  the  Appellant  would  be
   unable to obtain a travel document. Judge Baker referred at paragraph  25
   (x) of her decision to the Respondent's Country Information on entry  and
   exit  procedures  updated  on  15  December  2015  at  page  312  of  the
   Appellant's bundle in concluding that the  Appellant  would  be  able  to
   obtain a travel document. She further found at paragraph 25  (xiii)  that
   Iranian nationals are able to access consular services and request travel
   documents through the Sultanate  of  Oman  Iranian  Interest  Section  in
   London or through competent  Iranian  authorities  outside  the  UK.  She
   therefore gave  sufficient  reasons  for  her  finding  grounded  in  the
   evidence. The grounds assert that she failed to refer to a  print-out  in
   the Appellant's supplemental bundle stating that Oman was  not  currently
   providing consular services to Iranians. It  does  not  appear  that  the
   Judge was specifically referred  to  this  in  the  Appellant's  skeleton
   argument. In any event, the Upper Tribunal found in SSH and  HR  (illegal
   exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) after  having
   heard Dr Kakhki's evidence on the issue that an Iranian male who does not
   possess a passport will be returnable on a laissez passer. Therefore even
   if the First-tier Tribunal had erred in relation to her findings  on  the
   evidence it would not be material, or viewed alternatively, the  decision
   would have to be remade in the same way.


14. She then turned to the expert's evidence on  then  treatment  of  failed
   asylum seekers at paragraph 25 (vii) of the decision. She  sets  out  the
   expert's conclusion that the Appellant  would  be  at  risk  having  left
   illegally, stayed abroad for a prolonged period and having claimed asylum
   which would be perceived as an act  of  dissension  against  the  Islamic
   Republic of Iran and that this would  increase  the  likelihood  that  he
   would face persecution at the hands of the authorities. She concludes, in
   respect of the expert's conclusions with  regard  to  draft  evasion  and
   illegal exit that the expert did not address how  the  authorities  would
   deal  with  an  individual  who  left  at  the  age  of  14,  well  under
   conscription age and who  would  have  been  under  the  control  of  his
   relatives. She the directed herself appropriately at paragraph 25  (viii)
   with regard to the test for departing from country guidance and  set  out
   the ratio of the cases of SB and BA.  She  found  that  the  only  factor
   relevant to the Appellant from the guidance would be his illegal exit and
   that the evidence supplied by Dr Kakhki was not sufficient to  cause  her
   to depart from the country guidance (paragraph 25 (x)).

15. Judge Baker gave reasons for finding that the Appellant would not be  at
   risk as a  failed  asylum  seeker  and  as  an  individual  who  had  not
   undertaken military service because she found Dr Kakhki had not addressed
   the risk in light of the fact that the Appellant was 14 when he left Iran
   (paragraph 25 (vii)). She also preferred  the  Respondent's  evidence  in
   relation to illegal exit at page 312 of the Appellant's bundle and  found
   at paragraph 25 (xii), having taken into account all of the reports  that
   there was insufficient evidence to depart from the country  guidance  and
   insufficient evidence to find that an  individual  with  the  appellant's
   profile would be at risk on return. She added to  this  at  paragraph  25
   (xvii) that Dr Kakhki was a 'lone voice' which she found was reflected in
   the summary of his evidence and those of other well-respected sources  as
   to the risk of return in the Respondent's December 2015 guidance. It  was
   open to her to reject the  expert's  conclusions  on  the  basis  of  the
   Respondent's evidence and she gave adequate reasons for so doing. In  any
   event, the Upper Tribunal in SSH concluded after having heard Dr Kakhki's
   evidence (summarized at Appendix 1) which was materially the same  as  in
   the instant case, that there was not a risk to failed-asylum seekers  who
   had left illegally as there was  insufficient  evidence  to  substantiate
   this.   Had the First-tier Tribunal erred in relation to her findings  on
   the evidence it would not  be  material,  or  viewed  alternatively,  the
   decision would have to be remade in the same way.


16. Ms Pickering argues that the case of SSH does  not  provide  a  complete
   answer to the risk to the Appellant and  leaves  the  door  open  to  the
   Appellant to argue that that he would not tell the truth when  questioned
   on return. I have found that there is no error of law in the decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal. On the evidence before her she did  not  err  in
   refusing to depart from the Country Guidance. I further find no reason on
   the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal why the Appellant  would  not
   tell the truth when questioned on return.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue that order (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008). Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted
anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
identify him or any member of her family.  This direction applies both to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Dated  5 October 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
