

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
AA/09553/2014

                                             AA/09552/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |         Decision Promulgated      |
|On 7 July 2017                     |         On 13 July 2017           |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                    CHAMIKA THUSHANKA PALLIGODA VITHANAGE
                       ROSHANI P JAYANETHTHI KORALAGE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Murphy counsel instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The first Appellant (A1) was born on 25 June 1988 and is the wife of  the
   second Appellant( A2) who was born on 6 December 1985. Both are nationals
   of Sri Lanka.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Davies promulgated on 31  March  2017  which  refused  the
   Appellants appeal against the decision of the Respondent dated 27 October
   to refuse the Appellants claims for refugee protection  and  remove  them
   from the UK.
5. The hearing before the Judge was the second occasion that the  Appellants
   appeal had appeared before the First-tier Tribunal  a  previous  decision
   having been set aside as a result of a finding of an error of law.
The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Davies ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
   decision.
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing:  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
   apply anxious scrutiny and erred in his assessment of the  evidence;  had
   failed to make  findings  in  relation  to  key  items  of  corroborative
   evidence; had erred in his assessment of court documents;  had  erred  in
   his assessment of the objective evidence.
8.  On 25 April 2017 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pedro  gave  permission  to
   appeal.
9. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Murphy  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) He relied on his skeleton argument.

   b) He relied on Ex parte Virjon B [2002] EWHC 1469 where Forbes  J  found
      that an Adjudicator had been wrong to use adverse credibility findings
      as a basis for rejecting medical evidence  without  first  considering
      the medical evidence itself to argue that in this case the  Judge  had
      'put the cart before the horse'.

   c) The Judge in stating that there was no medical evidence to support the
      Appellants claim failed to take into account or make any  findings  in
      respect of the evidence of Mr Mason at AB152-160 which found  evidence
      of injuries that were consistent with the Appellants claim.

   d) The Judge failed to make adequate findings as to why he  rejected  the
      evidence of  the  Attorney  Mr  Fernando.  He  acknowledged  that  the
      decision recorded at paragraph 50  a  concession  made  by  Ms  Anzani
      counsel then representing the Appellant that the certificate  produced
      showing that Mr Fernando was a member of the Bar  Association  of  Sri
      Lanka was misleading but the Judge's rejection of  that  evidence  was
      not based on this concession.

   e) The Judge made no finings in respect of the evidence of  Mr  Ekanayake
      an independent attorney who also addressed  the  issue  of  the  court
      documents produced by the Appellant and his claim that  there  was  an
      extant arrest warrant for the Appellant in 2015.

   f) The Judge made no findings in respect of the newspaper articles at 61-
      73 at least one of which specifically referred to A2.

   g) The Judges assessment of the court documents themselves was flawed and
      his conclusions at paragraph 117 suggests that  he  has  rejected  the
      documents on the basis of adverse credibility findings.

   h) The Judges findings at paragraph 116  were  inadequate  in  that  they
      failed to take into account the background material relied on  by  the
      advocate in the course of the hearing and  in  the  skeleton  argument
      together  with  the  caselaw  that  showed  that  there  was   nothing
      incredible in the Appellants not  being  required  to  relinquish  his
      passport or leave the country using his passport even when  of  active
      interest to the authorities.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Bates submitted  that :

   a) The errors relied on were not material because the Judge considers  at
      paragraph 106 in the alternative that there had been a  fight  between
      the A2 and Party members and this  is  relevant  because  he  had  not
      dismissed the possibility that a  fight  occurred  and  therefore  the
      medical evidence was, at  best,  corroboration  for  the  injuries  he
      displayed. There may therefore  have  been  a  criminal  investigation
      after a fight but not in the context that A2 claims.

   b) The medical evidence was not determinative.

   c) The Judge looked at  the  core  of  the  Appellants  claim  and  found
      discrepancies in that account:  he  found  discrepancies  between  the
      account of the arrest at the hotel and the TID documents from AB35 and
      26.

   d) The rejection of the documents at paragraph is the conclusion  of  the
      findings not the starting point.

   e) In relation to the documentary evidence  Mr  Fernado  accompanied  his
      letter with a certificate suggesting he was a life member of  the  Sri
      Lankan Bar Association. If that was not the case it should  have  been
      explained.

   f) Given that questionable evidence had been reduced from the first layer
      the second lawyers evidence was contaminated.

11. In reply Mr Murphy on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

   a) The second lawyers evidence was not dealt with and the suggestion that
      the evidence of the first  lawyer  contaminated  that  of  the  second
      lawyer went too far.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.
13. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge erred in four respects and that those errors were material
   to the outcome of the decision.
14.  The Appellants case is that in essence his troubles began in 2008  when
   he claims that he received a CD showing the murder of a  colleague  Kumar
   and that two Government Ministers  were  involved  in  the  killing.  The
   Appellant handed this CD to the police as a result of which he and two of
   his colleagues were attacked by  party  members  and  the  Appellant  was
   stabbed in his  right  foot  with  broken  glass.  Then  in  2011  during
   detention by the authorities he had chilli paste placed on his  face  and
   hot water thrown at him.
15. The Judges finding at paragraph 119 is challenged :
   " Having been carried out a thorough examination of the  evidence  before
   me I would point out that I  have  not  found  any  medical  evidence  to
   support the Appellants claim  that  during  the  altercation  with  party
   members he was stabbed with a broken glass in his right leg nor is  there
   any indication regarding his claim that he was beaten and tortured whilst
   detained by the authorities."

16. It is argued that the finding  is  based  on  a  failure  to  take  into
   account the evidence of Mr Mason but also coming as it does at the end of
   the decision the Judge has used adverse credibility  findings  to  reject
   the medical evidence.

17. I am satisfied that the Judge has not fallen into  error  as  argued  is
   using adverse credibility findings to reject medical evidence because  he
   has failed to note that such evidence exists. I  am  satisfied  that  the
   Judge has not engaged with the medical report of Mr Mason and indeed I am
   concerned that there is no reference at all to it in the decision  as  of
   course it may have been a matter  that  he  took  into  account  and  for
   whatever reason  gave  little  weight  to.  However  the  report  clearly
   provides support for A2s account in  that  his  examination  found  (3.2)
   scarring to A2s right foot which was consistent (6.6) with his  claim  to
   have been stabbed in his right foot (not the right leg as stated  by  the
   Judge). Mr Mason also found deeper pigmentation to A2s face that was  the
   result of an inflammatory process (4.2)  that  was  consistent  with  his
   claim of being injured with chilli  paste  and  hot  water  (6.1).  I  am
   satisfied that the mistake in failing to acknowledge and engage with  the
   medical evidence must have played a  material  even  if  not  necessarily
   decisive part in the Judges reasoning and could have made a difference to
   the outcome.

18. The Appellant produced a number of documents in support  of  his  appeal
   and among them was a letter from an Attorney Mr Fernando who  is  essence
   confirmed that he represented the Appellant at  court  proceedings  where
   the Appellant was not formally  charged  but  released  on  bail  pending
   further investigations. Mr Fernando stated in his letter (AB23)  that  he
   was a member of the Bar Council and gave his Bar Association of Sri Lanka
   membership number and annexed as evidence his to his Bar  Association  of
   Sri  Lanka  Enrolment  Certificate  dated  5  October  1992  (AB21)  This
   certificate showed he was a lifetime member of the Bar Association. A DVR
   report found the certificate to be 'false' although a  subsequent  letter
   from the Bar Association it is asserted confirmed  that  the  certificate
   was not false but rather at the time of the DVR enquiry Mr  Fernando  was
   not registered on their records. A statement was  given  by  Mr  Fernando
   that he ceased to be a member of the Bar Association in 2004 because of a
   disagreement over human rights issues but nevertheless pointing out  that
   the Supreme Court in  Sri  Lanka  it  is  the  regulatory  authority  for
   Attorneys in Sri Lanka and that it is optional for attorneys  at  law  to
   obtain a membership of the Bar Association

19. It is contended that against this background it  was  not  open  to  the
   Judge to find that 'the lawyers evidence can be wholly discounted by  the
   fact that the lawyer  had  used  deception  in  providing  evidence.   He
   produced a certificate showing that he was a lifetime member of  the  bar
   association when that was not the case and even in his letter at  claimed
   to be a member of the bar association.  I have low taken into account his
   explanation for doing so that but that does not persuade he is in any way
   he a witness whose evidence can carry weight.'

20. I have considered this argument and I am satisfied that the finding  was
   open to the Judge.  He recorded  at  paragraph  50  that  Ms  Ansari  who
   represented the Appellant before the Judge conceded that the  letter  was
   misleading, as well she might: the  letter  from  Mr  Fernando  dated  19
   January 2015(AB23) stated that he was at that time a member  of  the  Bar
   Council and produced a certificate as evidence of that fact. Mr  Fernando
   was not a member of the Bar Council: the fact that he was not required to
   be in  order  to  practice  as  an  Attorney  and  the  reasons  for  him
   withdrawing his membership were considered by  the  Judge  but  the  fact
   remains that he made a statement that was factually incorrect at the time
   he made it and the Judge  was  entitled,  having  noted  that  Ms  Ansari
   categorised it as misleading, to confirm why he rejected his evidence.

21. Neverthless he had other potentially  important  evidence  from  another
   Attorney, Mr Ekanyake , whose bona fides had not been challenged  by  the
   Respondent. There are no findings made in respect of  that  evidence  and
   only the very briefest mention of 'second verification of the  documents'
   in his summary of the Appellants case at paragraph 50.   While  Mr  Bates
   seeks to argue that this Attorneys evidence was tainted by  that  of  the
   previous lawyer that is not  the  inevitable  conclusion  that  would  be
   reached. I am satisfied that the failure therefore to  make  findings  in
   respect of this evidence was material to the outcome of the decision.

22.   It is contended that the Judges finding at paragraph 116  that  if  he
   was sought in connection with assisting the LTTE or  a  plot  to  kill  a
   government minister he would not be bailed with reporting conditions  and
   was not required to surrender his passport and leave  the  country  using
   his  own  passport  failed  to  engage  with  the   background   material
   highlighted in the hearing and the skeleton argument at paragraphs 22 and
   23 and in particular was  contrary  to  the  findings  of  the  court  at
   paragraph 275 of GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG
   [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)  and MM (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  36
   which explicitly stated that  the  seriousness  of  the  charges  is  not
   determinative of bribes being paid for release  and  it  is  possible  to
   leave through the airport while being actively sought  or  on  bail  with
   reporting conditions and this was no indication  of  a  lack  of  adverse
   interest. There is no  reference  to  by  the  Judge  to  the  background
   material and caselaw relied on  by  the  Appellant  and  I  am  therefore
   satisfied that the conclusion in failing to engage with this material  as
   inadequately reasoned.

23. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address  and  determine  these
   issues constitutes a clear error of law. This  error  I  consider  to  be
   material since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome could
   have been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

24. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety.
   All matters to be redetermined afresh.

25. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

26. In this case I have determined that the case should  be  remitted  as  I
   have found there were a number of  errors  of  law  in  relation  to  key
   credibility findings In this case none of the findings  of  fact  are  to
   stand and the matter will be a complete re hearing.

27. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me.

28. I made the following directions for the resumed hearing:

      . List for 4 Hours

      . Sinhalese interpreter.

      . A consolidated bundle to be provided by the Appellants  and  served
        on all parties 5 days before the hearing.


Signed                                                              Date
12.7.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell









