
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/10510/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 February 2016                       |On 29 February 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    j l m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khushi, Counsel, instructed by Bedfords
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Asjad (the judge), promulgated on 12 February  2015,  in
    which she dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  The appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal had been against the Respondent's decision of 18 November
    2014, refusing her protection and human rights  claim  and  seeking  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom as an illegal  entrant.   It  is  of
    importance to note that the Appellant has at all material times been  a
    minor.
 2. In essence her protection claim was based upon the assertion  that  she
    had been and/or would in the future be a street child, and in  addition
    at risk of ill-treatment because of her responsibility for the death of
    a child of whom she was caring.


The hearing before the judge
 3. The  hearing  took  place  on  16  January  2015.   The  Appellant  was
    represented by Counsel, and the Respondent  by  a  Presenting  Officer.
    Between paragraphs 11 and 20 of her decision the judge set out a number
    of  adverse   credibility   findings   based   in   large   part   upon
    inconsistencies as between four  sources  of  evidence:  the  screening
    interview; the  asylum  interview;  the  witness  statement;  and  oral
    evidence.  As a result of her findings the  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant would not be at risk on any of  the  bases  asserted  in  the
    claim.  In respect of Article 8 the judge concluded that the  Appellant
    could not satisfy the relevant Immigration Rules, and having considered
    the claim outside of  the  Rules,  she  found  that  removal  would  be
    proportionate.
 4. At paragraph 26 of her decision the judge considered section 55 of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and found that it was  in
    the best interests of the Appellant to return to Angola where she would
    be reunited (at least in  theory)  with  her  older  brother  (who  was
    eighteen at the time) and possibly a cousin (who was only sixteen).

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission
 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal primarily on the  basis  that
    the judge had failed to take the  Appellant's  age  into  account  when
    assessing credibility. There is also a challenge to the conclusions  on
    Article 8.
 6. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  but  then
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Taylor  on  4  November  2015.   Upper
    Tribunal Judge Taylor  makes  specific  reference  to  the  Appellant's
    minority and the lack of any references to that fact  in  the  material
    parts of the judge's decision.
 7. The Respondent submitted a Rule 24 response dated 18 December 2015.


The hearing before me
 8. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the judge was clearly aware  of  the
    Appellant's age and she referred me to paragraphs 1, 3, 11, 20, 24  and
    26 of the decision.  She urged me to look at the decision  as  a  whole
    and referred to the recent Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  JA  (Ghana)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 1031: I should assume  that  the  judge  was  aware  of
    relevant Practice Statements and/or Directions.  It was also noted that
    the witness statement mentioned in the grounds  of  appeal  was  not  a
    rebuttal statement, as claimed.  I was asked to take into  account  the
    fact that the Appellant had been legally represented throughout.
 9. In the event I did not call upon Mr Khushi to make submissions.


Decision on error of law
10. In my view there is a material error of law in  the  judge's  decision.
    This error relates to a failure to  have  taken  any  or  any  adequate
    account of the Appellant's age when assessing credibility.
11. As Upper Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  accurately  noted  in  her  grant  of
    permission, there is no reference whatsoever in the relevant paragraphs
    to the Appellant's young age at the hearing, when  interviewed  by  the
    Respondent, and at the time when the alleged events in Angola occurred.
     It is right that there were on the face of the evidence  a  number  of
    inconsistencies, some of which appear to be  perhaps  more  significant
    than others.  It is right as well that there is no 'sub-species' of the
    lower standard of proof applicable to  minor  appellants,  as  is  made
    clear in the recent Upper Tribunal  decision  in  KS  (benefit  of  the
    doubt) [2014] UKUT 552 (IAC).
12. However, what is important in a case involving a minor is that the  age
    is actually taken into account, and is done so  in  a  manner  that  is
    identifiable  from  the  face  of  the  decision   itself.    This   is
    particularly so when credibility is an issue and when there are  issues
    relating to consistency or the lack thereof as between different  items
    of evidence.  It may have been that if the judge had applied  her  mind
    expressly to this issue and dealt with it in substance that some or all
    of her findings may not have remained as they are.  However, that it by
    no means a forgone conclusion.
13. In respect of the submission that one should assume that the judge  was
    aware of the Appellant's age and guidance, the point is that  awareness
    of the fact of age and/or guidance is simply not the same  as  relevant
    consideration of this in the context of a credibility assessment.
14. In the present case the complete absence of  any  apparent  appropriate
    consideration of age in the  section  on  credibility  (as  opposed  to
    simply stating the fact of age),  coupled  with  the  failure  to  have
    regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note Number 2 of 2010 (either
    in form or, more importantly, in  substance),  results  in  a  material
    error of law.
15. In respect of the Article 8 claim  I  find  that  the  judge  has  also
    materially erred in law.  Her approach is, with  respect,  unclear  and
    insufficient.  At paragraph 25 she refuses the Article 8 claim  outside
    of the Rules and only then goes on to look at the best interests of the
    child. In addition, and perhaps more importantly,  the  best  interests
    are predicated upon the existence of a brother who is only a year older
    than the Appellant, a cousin who was younger than her, and  the  belief
    that the Appellant could somehow locate them in Angola.   There  is  no
    finding that the Appellant could live with her mother  (if  indeed  her
    mother was still living in Angola), and there is no  finding  that  her
    father could or would to go back with her.  In my view  the  assessment
    of the best interests of this minor Appellant was inadequate.
16. For these reasons I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Disposal
17. Both representatives were agreed, rightly in my view, that if  material
    errors of law existed this appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Having regard to paragraph 7 of the Practice Statements this
    must be the right course of action. The  rejection  of  the  protection
    claim is based upon credibility, and the findings on  this  core  issue
    are flawed. In respect of Article 8, the judge's assessment is  lacking
    in clear and comprehensive findings of fact.
18. The appeal will need to be re-heard afresh with no  preserved  findings
    of fact, other than that relating to the Appellant's age.
Anonymity
19. A direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal and I maintain it.




Notice of Decision
The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date: 25 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

