
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10533/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House Stoke                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th October 2016                           |On 13th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    A R O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Middleton of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Togo who appeals against the decision  of
    Judge V Jones of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on  11th
    May 2016.

 2. The appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian  protection,  and  human  rights
    application was refused by the Respondent on 20th July 2015.

 3. The Appellant's appeal was heard on 21st April 2016,  the  FTT  hearing
    oral evidence from the Appellant and one witness.  The FTT did not find
    either the Appellant or his witness to be credible, and did not  accept
    that the Appellant would be at risk from the  Togolese  authorities  if
    returned to that country.

 4. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant's solicitors applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grounds are lengthy running to 71  paragraphs  and
    eleven pages.  Permission to appeal was  refused  by  Designated  Judge
    Woodcraft.

 6. The Appellant's solicitors submitted a renewed application  in  a  more
    succinct form, but maintained reliance upon the original grounds.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Pitt  in  the
    following terms;

         2.   I am mindful of the head note of VHR  (unmeritorious  grounds)
             Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367 (IAC) which states:

             Appeals should not be mounted on the  basis  of  a  litany  of
             forensic criticisms of particular findings of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal, whilst ignoring  the  basic  legal  test  which  the
             Appellant has to meet.

         3.   The grounds here seek to raise a wide range of  challenges  to
             the reasons set out by the FTTJ.  Some have little merit,  for
             example challenging the failure of the FTTJ to put  the  point
             about claiming  asylum  in  Ghana  to  the  Appellant  at  the
             hearing.  It is  not  necessary  for  a  judge  to  put  every
             negative conclusion to an  Appellant  whether  or  not  it  is
             something relied  upon  by  the  Respondent  or  raised  at  a
             hearing.

         4.   It remains arguable that the FTTJ did  not  take  the  correct
             approach  to  the  Appellant's  evidence,  for  example,   the
             negative inference  at  [26]  from  the  Appellant's  employer
             having  been  "tortured"   rather   than   questioned   "under
             pressure", there being nothing to indicate the Appellant  used
             the term "torture" in his witness statement or the  Record  of
             Proceedings.  The challenge at [13]-[16] of the grounds to the
             comments at [14] of the decision  about  when  the  flyer  was
             provided and what it said is also arguable.

         5.   The grounds are arguable.

 8. Following the grant of permission to appeal  the  Respondent  lodged  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  The author of the response acknowledged that  he  did  not
    have access to the evidence that had been before the FTT, but contended
    that the FTT had directed itself  appropriately  as  the  grounds  were
    challenges on immaterial matters, or a "simple  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the judge."

 9. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Appellant's Oral Submissions

10. Mr Middleton relied upon the  initial  grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal, the renewed grounds, and a skeleton argument dated 3rd  October
    2016.

11. In very brief summary it was contended that the FTT had erred by making
    mistakes of fact which amounted to errors of law, failed to  take  into
    account relevant considerations, allowed procedural unfairness to  take
    place, failed to  provide  adequate  reasons,  and  gave  perverse  and
    irrational reasons for findings.

The Respondent's Submissions

12. Mr Bates relied upon the rule 24 response and stated  that  he  was  in
    some difficulty, as he did not have a Record of Proceedings prepared by
    the Presenting Officer who appeared before the FTT, and there  were  no
    post-hearing notes.

13. Mr Bates accepted that the grounds disclosed some difficulties with the
    FTT decision, and by way of  example  acknowledged  with  reference  to
    paragraph 26 of the FTT decision, that it did not appear to be the case
    that the Appellant had given an account that  his  employer  had  given
    evidence "under torture."

14. Mr Bates' position was  that  it  was  not  conceded  that  there  were
    material errors of law, but he had no further oral submissions to make,
    and was content for the Tribunal to make  a  decision  based  upon  the
    examination of the grounds  and  the  FTT  Record  of  Proceedings  and
    decision.

The Appellant's Response

15. Mr Middleton pointed out that a section of the FTT decision was  headed
    'Findings of Fact' which commenced at  paragraph  9  and  concluded  at
    paragraph 26, which did not in fact contain specific findings  and  was
    not clear.

16. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. I find that some of the grounds  amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings made by the FTT but I find there is merit in some of the other
    grounds, which causes me to conclude  that  the  decision  of  the  FTT
    contains material errors of law and is  therefore  unsafe  and  is  set
    aside.  I reach this conclusion for the following reasons.

18. I agree with Mr Middleton that although the findings of fact purport to
    commence at paragraph 9, there are no specific findings in paragraphs 9-
    22.  However this without more is not a material error of law.  I  find
    that the FTT is mistaken  at  paragraph  26  when  drawing  an  adverse
    inference from an inconsistency, that  being  the  Appellant's  account
    that his employer gave evidence to the police "under torture" which was
    inconsistent  with  the  employer's   own   statement   that   he   was
    "interrogated under pressure and threat."  Both representatives  stated
    that they were not aware of the Appellant giving  such  an  account  in
    relation to torture, and I could  find  no  such  reference.   The  FTT
    therefore erred in finding an inconsistency.  At paragraph 31  the  FTT
    found that the Appellant's claim that two of the demonstrators  in  the
    demonstration that took place on 21st November  2014  were  killed  and
    found that this claim was  not  supported  by  objective  evidence.   I
    accept the submission that the  Appellant  had  not  claimed  that  two
    people who attended  the  demonstration  on  21st  November  2014  were
    killed.  The Appellant had explained in an online interview that two 12
    year old pupils had been shot dead, but he did not  attribute  this  to
    the demonstration on 21st November 2014.  The record of this  interview
    is contained at page 120 of the Appellant's bundle.  Therefore the  FTT
    misunderstood the Appellant's evidence and appears  to  have  drawn  an
    adverse inference from objective evidence not supporting a claim, which
    the Appellant had not in fact made.

19. At paragraph 33 the FTT concludes that the Appellant "has added to  and
    embellished his account  of  his  involvement  at  the  rally  on  21st
    November as his claim and appeal have progressed."  I do not find  that
    the evidence before the  FTT  indicates  this  to  be  the  case.   The
    Appellant produced a flyer when he made  his  asylum  claim.   This  is
    exhibited in the Respondent's bundle at D5.  The flyer relates  to  the
    rally, and refers to the Appellant by name and indicates  that  he  was
    scheduled to give a brief  initial  introduction  lasting  one  minute,
    followed by a five minute presentation.  That was his  claim  from  the
    outset.

20.  In  addition  the  Appellant  had  produced  photographs  of   himself
    apparently at the  forefront  of  the  rally,  those  photographs  were
    submitted to the Respondent and are contained within  the  Respondent's
    bundle.  The FTT made no finding in relation to those photographs,  and
    appears not to have made a  specific  finding  as  to  whether  it  was
    accepted that the Appellant attended the rally on 21st  November  2014.
    I find that the FTT has failed to make findings on potentially material
    evidence, and misunderstood the aspect of the Appellant's evidence that
    relates to his participation at the rally.

21. At paragraph 30 the FTT  gives  three  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant's credibility is damaged, the first of those  being  that  he
    did not claim asylum in Ghana despite living there  for  several  weeks
    after fleeing Togo.  Secondly he delayed making an asylum claim in  the
    UK, and thirdly he deceived the UK immigration authorities by  entering
    as a business visitor when the ostensible  reason  for  that  visit  no
    longer applied (the conference that he was due to  attend  had  already
    taken place).

22. In my view it was in fact unfair to make an adverse finding against the
    Appellant for not claiming asylum in Ghana.  This is because  this  did
    not form part of the reasons for refusal.  This was not  raised  either
    in the refusal letter, or by the Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing,
    neither was it raised by the FTT.  Therefore the Appellant did not have
    an opportunity to comment upon that issue or  provide  an  explanation.
    In addition, I accept  the  point  made  in  the  Appellant's  skeleton
    argument, that Ghana is not a safe country listed  in  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.  This, in my view,
    amounts to an error of law.

23. At paragraph 25 the FTT places no weight on the statement made  by  the
    Appellant's former employer.  This is because "there is nothing in  the
    documentation to support it, the Appellant's employer was  not  at  the
    hearing and so could not be cross-examined  and  there  is  no  way  of
    assessing the truth of what an unidentified police officer  told  him."
    I do not find that adequate reasons have  been  given  for  placing  no
    weight on the written evidence.  The Appellant's  former  employer  was
    not at the hearing, because he was in Togo and it is wrong to place  no
    weight upon evidence simply because the maker of the statement does not
    attend the hearing because he is not in the UK.

24. It is well established that if a document is produced, it  is  for  the
    person producing it to show  that  it  can  be  relied  upon,  and  the
    decision-maker must consider whether reliance  can  be  placed  upon  a
    document, after considering all the evidence in  the  round.   In  this
    case, it is not clear that these principles  have  been  followed,  and
    inadequate reasons have been given for placing no weight whatsoever  on
    the witness statement.

25. At paragraph 34 the FTT notes that the Appellant failed to claim asylum
    as soon as he arrived in the UK, despite gathering all the evidence  he
    needed to make his claim before travelling.  It is clearly relevant for
    the FTT to consider  why  the  Appellant  did  not  claim  asylum  upon
    arrival, and the FTT makes a finding  that  the  Appellant  formed  the
    intention of claiming asylum in the UK when he obtained his visit  visa
    which appears to have been granted to him on 13th  October  2014.   The
    FTT finds that the Appellant used the events of 21st November  2014  to
    enhance  his  claim  for  asylum.   This  conclusion  is   inadequately
    reasoned, as if the Appellant had formed an intention to  claim  asylum
    when he obtained his visa, it would be  reasonable  to  expect  him  to
    travel to the UK soon after being granted that visa, rather  than  wait
    until 12th January 2015 which is when he  arrived  in  the  UK,  having
    flown from Ghana.

26. For the reasons given above I conclude  the  decision  of  the  FTT  is
    unsafe and therefore must be set aside.

27. Both representatives  agreed,  at  the  hearing,  when  I  reserved  my
    decision, that if a material error of law was found,  as  contended  by
    the Appellant, then it would be appropriate to remit the appeal back to
    the FTT to be heard again.

28. I have considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements, and find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal back to
    the FTT because of the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding  that
    will be necessary in order for this decision to be re-made.





29. The appeal will be heard by the FTT at the Stoke Hearing Centre and the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by an FTT Judge other than Judge V Jones.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 6th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to be considered by the FTT.


Signed                              Date 6th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


