
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa109812015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd June 2016                              |On 13th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DePUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                   Z.E.M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Franco, (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of Lebanon appeals with permission against  the
    decision of a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Clarke) which  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 7th March  2016  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant's claim to international protection is that she is  under
    threat from Hezbollah in Lebanon, on account of her husband refusing to
    join them and fight with them in Syria.

Background

 3. The Appellant's appeal came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  22nd
    February 2016 at Harmondsworth.  This was the date that  had  been  set
    down for a substantive hearing. Despite indicating,  in  a  pre-hearing
    review document, that she wished to give evidence at an  oral  hearing,
    neither the Appellant nor her representative  attended  on  that  date.
    The judge proceeded in the absence of the Appellant and  dismissed  her
    appeal.

 4. The judge noted in his decision at [52]

         "I make an adverse inference against the Appellant for  failing  to
         attend her appeal or forward an explanation for her  non-attendance
         to the Tribunal.  I also make this adverse  inference  because  the
         Appellant's solicitors failed to attend the hearing or contact  the
         Tribunal in any way to explain why neither they  nor  their  client
         were in attendance.  This failure is compounded by  the  fact  that
         the Appellant's solicitors on 18th February 2016 - two working days
         before the appeal - sent a  fax  to  the  Tribunal  confirming  the
         client's address and  asking  for  their  client's  address  to  be
         updated on the Tribunal records.  I found the contents of  the  fax
         to be somewhat odd  as  the  address  that  was  provided  for  the
         Appellant is the same address that has  been  held  throughout  the
         proceedings by the Tribunal.  To ask the Tribunal to 'kindly update
         your system accordingly' (sic) when the address was already held by
         the Tribunal, on the face of it  and  without  further  explanation
         makes little sense."

 5. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis  that  the  appellant  had
    been deprived  of  the  opportunity  of  a  fair  hearing.  In  seeking
    permission from the FtT, it was claimed that the judge had erred in law
    by proceeding in the Appellant's  absence  when  neither  she  nor  her
    representative had been given notice of the  hearing  date.  Permission
    was refused by the FtT.  It  was  said  that  it  was  clear  that  the
    Appellant received a notice of the pre-hearing  review  which  included
    the "notice of an adjourned hearing" specifying 22nd February  2016  as
    the hearing date.

 6. There was also before the FtT when refusing permission, a series of fax
    letters transmitted by  the  Appellant's  representatives,  dated  30th
    December 2015 showing

       . they had come on record;

       . apparently acknowledging they had been sent notice of  the  hearing
         date of 22nd February 2016.

 7. Following refusal of permission by the FtT, the Appellant  renewed  her
    application before the Upper Tribunal.  The  renewed  application  came
    before Upper Tribunal Judge Southern who, after consideration,  granted
    permission in the following terms:

         "The challenge being pursued is a narrow one.  It is said there was
         uncertainty as to the correct date of the hearing such that on  the
         day upon which this appeal was  in  fact  determined,  neither  the
         appellant nor her representatives were present, although they would
         have been had they been aware of the listing of the appeal.

         The ground go too far in saying that,  as  the  appellant  did  not
         appear and was not represented  'the  judge  was  obliged,  in  the
         interests of justice and  fairness,  to  adjourn  the  hearing  and
         direct that the Appellant provide an explanation for his  absence'.
         However, considered as a whole, the grounds give rise to an  uneasy
         feeling that something has gone seriously  wrong  in  this  appeal.
         The grounds are unacceptably ambiguous as to what was and what  was
         not  received  by  the  appellant  and  by  her  solicitors.   That
         ambiguity must be eliminated.   On  the  other  hand,  the  grounds
         assert also that:

             "... we had received three  dates  of  hearings.   To  clarify
             which was the exact relevant date we phoned to the  court  and
             also sent two faxes but we never got a reply  from  the  court
             ..."

         If that which is asserted can be established, then it  is  arguable
         that there has been a procedural irregularity such as to amount  to
         an error of law.  On that basis, permission is granted.

         Directions:  Not later than 3 working days before the date  of  the
         hearing before the Upper Tribunal, the appellant is  to  file  with
         the Upper Tribunal  and  serve  upon  the  respondent  an  indexed,
         paginated bundle of all documentary  evidence  to  be  relied  upon
         which must make completely clear (1) which documents  are  accepted
         to have been received by the appellant;  (2)  which  documents  are
         accepted to have been received by the  appellant's  representatives
         and (3) which documents, now known to be sent out by the First-tier
         Tribunal (if any) were received by neither the  appellant  nor  her
         representatives."

    Thus the matter comes before me to  determine  if  the  FTT's  decision
    discloses an error of law requiring the decision to be  set  aside  and
    remade.

The UT Hearing

 8. Before me Mr Franco appeared for the Appellant and Mr  Norton  for  the
    Respondent.  Mr Franco made submissions along  these  lines.   He  said
    that the Appellant speaks  no  English.   On  15th  December  2015  she
    received three notices in the post.  Two notices informed her that  the
    hearings fixed for 22nd April 2016 and 26th April 2016 were  adjourned.
    Both those notices said that a ' new notice of hearing' would follow in
    due course. However she also received on 15th December 2015 a  combined
    notice of a pre-hearing  review/full  hearing  notice  fixed  for  22nd
    February 2016. That latter notice did not come in 'due course' it  came
    at the same time as the other two notices.   It  would  seem  that  the
    later hearing dates had been adjourned and the case brought forward  to
    22nd February 2016 to utilise available court time.

 9. At the time the Appellant received  these  notices  she  did  not  have
    representatives. Therefore the notices were sent to her  directly.  She
    instructed  her  representatives  on  23rd  December  2015  and  a  fax
    transmission was sent by her solicitors on 30th December  2015  to  the
    Tribunal at Hatton Cross, stating that they had now come on  record  to
    act as her representatives.

10. For some reason, the Appellant's  representatives  faxed  the  Tribunal
    Service on 15th January 2016 and again on 10th  February  2016  stating
    they had not received the notice of hearing. They requested  that  they
    be served with that notice, but  received  no  response  to  their  fax
    letters.

11. Mr Franco said that because the Appellant did not speak English she was
    unaware that she must attend the  Tribunal  hearing  on  22nd  February
    2016.  It had been her intention all along  to  attend  and  give  oral
    evidence on her own behalf. She relied upon her representatives to keep
    her informed.

12. So far as the fax transmission apparently sent by  her  representatives
    to the Tribunal Service on 30th December 2015 is concerned,  Mr  Franco
    was unable to explain who signed Box 6 of the PHR form.  That  form  is
    signed acknowledging that Roli Solicitors now represent the  appellant.
    That form is attached to a series of faxes showing the hearing date  of
    22 February 2016.  There was a representative from the solicitors  firm
    at the hearing before me.  That representative could not  identify  who
    it was who had apparently signed Box 6 "on behalf of client".

Error of Law

13. I am bound to observe that whilst  I  can  accept  that  the  Appellant
    placed reliance on her representatives to inform  her  of  any  hearing
    date, there has to date, not been  any  satisfactory  explanation  from
    those representatives as to why they seemingly acknowledged by  fax  on
    30th December 2015, the hearing date of 22nd  February  2016.   Nor  is
    there any satisfactory explanation as to why they started to  send  fax
    letters on 15th January and 10th February 2016 claiming  they  had  not
    received notice of the hearing date of 22nd February 2016.

14. As I said in paragraph 12 above, a representative from the  solicitors'
    office  was  present  at  the  hearing  before  me.   Mr  Franco   took
    instructions but no explanation was forthcoming to shed  any  light  on
    the identity of who signed Box 6 of the AI 29 form.

15. I am satisfied, however that there has been  a  lack  of  communication
    somewhere along the line -  possibly  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    representatives.

16. I am also satisfied because Mr Franco tells me so, that  the  Appellant
    speaks no English and there  is  a  possibility  that  receiving  three
    notices in the way she did caused confusion in her mind. I  am  further
    satisfied that it has always been the Appellant's wish to have her case
    dealt by way of an oral hearing; one where she can attend and take  the
    opportunity to give evidence in person.

17. On that basis alone I am satisfied it is in the  interests  of  justice
    and fairness to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    and direct that a fresh rehearing of the appeal take place  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross.

18. I stress in reaching this decision, I make no criticism of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge who originally dealt with this matter.  The  course
    of events however has meant that the Appellant has been deprived of  an
    opportunity to give evidence to support  her  claim  when  she  clearly
    wishes to do so.  The original First-tier Tribunal Judge was not  aware
    of all the information which I had before me.

19. I am grateful to Mr Norton who in addressing me agreed that remittal of
    this matter to the First-tier is the appropriate course of disposal  of
    this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  for  procedural
irregularity amounting to an error of law.  None of  the  findings  of  fact
shall stand.  The appeal shall be  considered  de  novo  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal (not Judge Clarke) and that Tribunal shall remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     10 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts
