
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10566/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 September 2016            |On 16 September 2016            |
|Prepared on 14 September 2016   |                                |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    S. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
                    Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally and  claimed  asylum
    on 5 February 2015. That application was refused on 22 June 2015, and a
    decision to remove her from the UK was made in consequence.
 2. The Appellant's  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against  those  immigration
    decisions was heard on 18 April 2016, and dismissed on all  grounds  by
    decision of Judge Hillis, promulgated on 26 April 2016.
 3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by
    decision of Judge Robertson of 13 July 2016. Her complaint was that she
    had identified herself not only as a member of  the  minority  Sheikhal
    clan  (which  had  been  conceded  by  the  Respondent)  but  also,  at
    interview, as a member of the Gandhershe sub-clan [Q94]. The Respondent
    had not specifically disputed this claim, and the consequences of  this
    claim appeared to have been overlooked by both the Respondent  and  the
    Judge.
 4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice dated 26 July 2016 in relation to
    the grant of permission to the  Appellant,  but  the  content  of  that
    notice did not  engage  with  the  central  point  to  the  Appellant's
    complaint.
 5. Thus the matter comes before me.


    The Appellant's ethnicity
 6. The Appellant's case in relation to her ethnicity, was as  set  out  at
    interview, when she stated that she was a member of the Sheikhal  clan,
    and Gandhershe sub-clan [Q94]. The Respondent did not formally  dispute
    either element of that claim, and indeed she formally conceded that the
    Appellant was a member of the Sheikhal clan. It is accepted  before  me
    by Ms Petterson that the Judge was simply wrong  to  state  as  he  did
    [48], that there was no evidence before him to identify to  which  sub-
    clan she belonged, and that both he and the author of the  decision  to
    refuse the asylum claim must have overlooked the relevant part  of  the
    Appellant's account as given at her interview.


    The Appellant's credibility
 7. Mr Hussain accepts that the Appellant was  not  an  impressive  witness
    under cross-examination, and that the grounds offer no challenge to the
    Judge's conclusions in relation to the weight that he could  attach  to
    the Appellant's evidence upon the elements of her claim  that  were  in
    dispute [31-34, 40-46]. The conclusions that the Appellant had not told
    the truth about the family members she had living in Somalia, where she
    had lived in Somalia from time to time, or, whether she was in  contact
    with the members of her family outside the UK, were all  well  open  to
    the Judge, and they were adequately reasoned, and followed the  correct
    application of the burden and standard of proof. In short the Judge was
    entitled to conclude as he did that the Appellant was prepared  to  lie
    to him, and, that she had done so about material aspects of her case.


    Conclusions
 8. Country guidance status was withdrawn from the decision of FK  (Shekhal
    Gandhershe) Somalia CG [2004] UKIAT 127  on  18  March  2008  upon  the
    promulgation of HH and Others (Mogadishu armed conflict  risk)  Somalia
    CG [2008] UKIAT 00022. The decision of AM & AM  (armed  conflict;  risk
    categories) Somalia CG [2008]  UKIAT  00091  retains  country  guidance
    status even now.
 9. Both FK and AM deal with the manner in which the Shekhal Gandhershe are
    perceived as a sub-clan in Somalia, and whether they would be likely to
    be considered as part of the Benadiri  group.  Since  the  decision  in
    Mohamed [2002] UKIAT 08403 the Tribunal has accepted that  the  Shekhal
    are a collection of discrete sub-clans, and that the Shekhal Gandhershe
    are ethnically distinct from other sub-clans of the Shekhal,  and  that
    historically they have not been protected by,  or  affiliated  to,  the
    Hawiye.  Ms  Petterson  accepts  before  me  that  there  has  been  no
    adjustment to that position in the country guidance decisions that have
    been promulgated since AM.
10. Unless the Tribunal  were  in  a  position  to  reject  as  untrue  the
    Appellant's claim to be Gandhershe, to conclude that she had lied about
    that sub-clan membership, and that she was  in  truth  a  member  of  a
    different sub-clan of the Shekhal as the Respondent  had  conceded  she
    was, then the Tribunal should on the appropriate standard of proof have
    accepted that element of her claim. The Tribunal's approach ought  then
    to have been to resolve the disputed primary facts, and then to  assess
    the risk of harm faced  by  the  Appellant  upon  return  to  Mogadishu
    airport as a result of that ethnicity.
11. In this case the Appellant would return to Mogadishu airport as a  lone
    woman (since she admitted to having no male  relative  in  the  UK  who
    would accompany her on return). She would upon arrival be likely to  be
    perceived to be Benadiri by virtue of her membership of the Gandhershe.


12. Accordingly the Appellant's position as  such  should  then  have  been
    assessed through the lens of the guidance to be found in AMM  &  Others
    (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT  445,
    MOJ & Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 442, and Said
    [2016] EWCA Civ 442.
13. Regrettably there is no  express  reference  to  any  country  guidance
    within the decision. This omission prompted Mr Hussain  to  argue  that
    the appeal ought to be remitted to the First  Tier  Tribunal.  However,
    having considered that submission at some length with  him,  I  am  not
    satisfied that this submission was well founded, or that this would  be
    a pragmatic course to follow. The findings of primary  fact  (which  Mr
    Hussain  accepts  are  not  challenged  as  unsafe,  or,   inadequately
    reasoned) did  not  depend  upon  any  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence in the context of a particular set of  country  guidance,  but
    rather followed from the Appellant's  own  inconsistency  and  lack  of
    credibility as a  witness  under  cross-examination.  The  findings  of
    primary fact that the Judge made are adequate in my judgement to permit
    the assessment of the Appellant's position  upon  return  to  Mogadishu
    airport through the lens of the guidance to be found in MOJ,  upon  the
    assumption in her favour that she is a member of the Shekhal Gandhershe
    as claimed, rather than some other sub-clan of the Shekhal.
14. To return to live in her home area of Afgoye in  safety  the  Appellant
    would first need to be able to travel there in safety as  a  woman  who
    was returned to the Mogadishu airport alone, and as one  who  would  be
    perceived to be a minority clan member/Benadiri.
15. Afgoye is less than 50km from Mogadishu, and  the  area  is  considered
    sufficiently safe for IDP camps to have  been  created  in  the  Afgoye
    corridor and for NGOs to operate there. The Judge found, and again this
    is not the subject of challenge in the Appellant's  grounds,  that  Al-
    Shabaab was forced out of Afgoye in 2011, and that it was no longer  in
    control of the area [38]. Indeed the Appellant is  recorded  as  having
    conceded this point before the Judge, and Mr Hussain did not suggest to
    me that the Judge was mistaken in this respect.
16. The Judge rejected as untrue the Appellant's claim that she was not  in
    contact with either her family members in Somalia (who include her  two
    sisters and their respective families, her husband, her mother, and her
    daughter), or, her uncle in the USA who was said to have  financed  her
    journey to the UK [41-44]. There is no challenge to this finding.
17. Accordingly, it is difficult to see why the Appellant would  be  unable
    to make arrangements for male members of  the  family  to  travel  from
    Afgoye to meet her upon arrival at Mogadishu airport and then accompany
    her upon the journey to return to her home in Afgoye.  Having  returned
    home to Afgoye there is no basis upon which it could be  inferred  that
    she was at risk of persecution for a convention reason, or a breach  of
    her Article 3 rights. The Judge rejected as  untrue  her  claim  to  be
    perceived within Afgoye as a government spy. Her past  ability  to  run
    her own business, and, the ability of her extended family  to  live  in
    safety in Afgoye since her departure from Somalia, point  firmly  to  a
    lack of any real risk of persecution for a  convention  reason,  or,  a
    breach of her Article 3 rights upon her return to Afgoye.
18. Even if the Appellant were to take the view that it would not  be  safe
    to return to Afgoye, she would in my judgement  be  in  a  position  to
    relocate in safety to Mogadishu following the guidance to be  found  in
    MOJ. There is no clan based violence in Mogadishu, and  no  clan  based
    discriminatory treatment. Thus her membership of the Shekhal Gandhershe
    would not, of itself. give rise to a real risk of harm  to  her  within
    Mogadishu.
19. The Appellant would also be able to request  her  immediate  family  of
    husband, mother and daughter to relocate to Mogadishu  with  her.  That
    assumes of course that they have not already relocated to that city, as
    the Judge plainly suspected was the case, given the problems  with  her
    evidence.
20. The Appellant would thus either have the help and support of members of
    her family who were already based in the city,  or,  who  could  settle
    there with her. It is also reasonable to infer that she would also have
    the financial help and support of  the  family  members  that  she  has
    living outside Somalia, such as the uncle in the USA who she identified
    as having paid for her travel to the UK. Given the  credibility  issues
    with her evidence there is no basis to  infer  in  her  favour,  as  Mr
    Hussain suggested I should, that this individual would not be  able  to
    provide significant financial support to her in Mogadishu.
21. The Appellant advanced no credible explanation to the Judge below as to
    why she would be unable to access the economic opportunities  generated
    by the economic boom in  Mogadishu,  particularly  given  her  historic
    ability to rune her own business in Afgoye. I can  see  no  basis  upon
    which it could properly be inferred that she would be unable to do so.
22. In the circumstances the Judge did make an error of law in his decision
    to dismiss the appeal on all grounds. I set  that  decision  aside  and
    remake it, with the result that the appeal is, once again, dismissed on
    all grounds.

DECISION
    The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  26
    April 2016 did not involve the making of an error of law that  requires
    that decision to be set aside and remade.
    The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 15 September 2016



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 15 September 2016

