
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/10687/2014
                                                               AA/10769/2014
                                                               AA/10770/2014
                                                               AA/10771/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd November 2015                |On 18th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

         SH                                         First Appellant
           HH                                    Second Appellant
          AH                                        Third Appellant
          MG                                      Fourth Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T Mahmood of Counsel instructed by Syeds
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 9th July  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grimmett  gave
    permission to the appellants to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Lowe who dismissed their  appeals  against  the
    decisions of the respondent to refuse asylum and to  refuse  to  extend
    leave to remain.  The first appellant is the mother of the  second  and
    third appellants and they are all citizens  of  Pakistan.   The  fourth
    appellant is also a child of the first  appellant  but  is  a  Canadian
    citizen.

 2. In granting permission to appeal Judge Grimmett noted that the  grounds
    asserted that Judge Lowe  had  failed  to  consider  Article  8  issues
    although acknowledging that  she  had  considered  the  application  of
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  Judge
    Grimmett also rejected the claim that Judge Lowe had  failed  to  apply
    the correct evidential test, had  failed  to  consider  affidavits  and
    failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  core  of  the
    appellants' claims.  However, permission was granted on the basis  that
    it was arguable that the judge had not  dealt  with  Article  8  issues
    although Judge Grimmett commented that it was difficult to see how  the
    decision  of  the  judge  adversely  affected  family  life  or  how  a
    significant private life could have been established in the short  time
    the appellants had been in the United Kingdom.

 3. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal before  me  Mr  Mahmood  confirmed
    that he relied only upon the ground  upon  which  permission  had  been
    granted.  He  thought  that  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of the child appellants as set out in  paragraph  43  of  the
    decision was inadequate. There had been no identification of compelling
    or exceptional circumstances which might  allow  for  consideration  of
    human rights issues outside the Rules.   Additionally,  the  judge  had
    failed to consider adequately the involvement of the first  appellant's
    father-in-law in paragraph 42.  The  judge  had  also  failed  to  give
    specific consideration to the ages of the child appellants  at  17,  15
    and 4 years respectively.  He agreed that the children had been in  the
    United Kingdom since 2014.

 4. Ms Johnstone relied upon the response filed on 22nd July 2015 in  which
    it was contended that the judge had directed herself appropriately in a
    "very  detailed  and  thorough  determination".   The  "core"  of   the
    appellants' claims had clearly been considered in detail in  paragraphs
    32 to 42 and adverse credibility findings had been made which were open
    to her.  It was also contended that the children's best  interests  had
    been adequately considered in paragraph 43 on the basis that their best
    interests were to remain in a family unit.  Ms Johnstone also  drew  my
    attention to the original grounds of appeal before the First-tier Judge
    in which there was reference to ill-treatment issues but not  to  human
    rights under Article 8.  She added that the skeleton argument submitted
    at the First-tier hearing made no attempt to expand the  grounds.   She
    emphasised that under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules, any  private  life
    claim would fail as none of the child appellants had been in the United
    Kingdom for seven years.

 5. Mr Mahmood concluded his submissions by indicating  that  human  rights
    issues had been raised at the hearing. The judge was therefore required
    to deal with them in considering whether or not there were  exceptional
    and compelling circumstances which might warrant consideration  outside
    the Rules  applying  the  Razgar  five  stage  tests  and  taking  into
    consideration the ages of the children.

Conclusions

 6. I agree with the statement in the response that the First-tier decision
    is "detailed and thorough".  In the 23 page decision  the  judge  gives
    very careful consideration to the claims made by  the  first  appellant
    concerning her marriage and the attitude  of  her  father-in-law.   The
    judge fairly concluded that the father-in-law was a  significant  rural
    landowner in Sukkur District who was able to influence political voting
    and the judge regarded it as  not  inconsistent  for  him  to  have  an
    authoritarian attitude towards his family, particularly  the  women  in
    it.   However,  the  judge  identified  inconsistencies  in  the  first
    appellant's evidence which enabled her to conclude that a Jirga had not
    been held or a sentence formally pronounced against the first appellant
    as to the parentage of her youngest child, the fourth  appellant.   The
    reasons given by the judge for this significant conclusion are  copious
    and cogent, resulting in a conclusion which she was entitled  to  reach
    and that meant that a death sentence had not  been  pronounced  on  the
    first and fourth appellants.  In reaching  her  conclusions  the  judge
    also noted that the first appellant's husband had reassured her that it
    was safe to return to Pakistan which  suggested  that  nothing  of  any
    consequence had, actually, happened.

 7. The judge was also entitled to reject claims that the  first  appellant
    did  not  wish  to  remain  married  to  her  supportive  husband  and,
    therefore, find she could return to Pakistan where there  would  be  no
    influence from the father-in-law outside his local area or Karachi.  In
    this respect the judge noted that the appellants  had  been  unmolested
    despite the father-in-law's alleged hostile attitude towards them  from
    2011 onwards.  With these reasoned conclusions in mind, the  judge  was
    not wrong to find that the first appellant,  who  was  not  a  divorced
    woman or lone parent, could seek help from and reconciliation with  her
    husband who clearly had his children's interests at heart.

 8. It follows, from the unimpeachable credibility  findings  made  by  the
    judge, that the best interests of the minor appellants could only be to
    remain with their parents, returning to live in Pakistan  although,  as
    the judge notes, foreign travel together may  also  be  involved.   The
    judge specifically considers the position  of  the  youngest  child  in
    paragraph 43.  She was evidently aware of  the  short  period  of  time
    which the appellants had been in the United Kingdom from 15th May  2014
    and thus any private and family life in UK was  limited.   Even  though
    the judge does not refer to any exceptional or compelling circumstances
    which might allow for consideration outside the Immigration  Rules  her
    consideration of the  salient  issue  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    children shows that she had this in mind.  It cannot be said  that  the
    judge could have found any factors in her exhaustive  consideration  of
    the circumstances of the appeal would have led to the identification of
    compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances  and   a   more   favourable
    conclusion on Article 8 matters.  She had  found  that  the  appellants
    could return to Pakistan to live in safety with the  first  appellant's
    husband and away from the attentions of her father-in-law who had  not,
    despite his threats, caused serious harm to any of the appellants.

 9. For the reasons I have given I am not satisfied that the decision shows
    an error on a point of law.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

As this  appeal  involves  the  interests  of  young  children  I  make  the
following direction:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
