
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10472/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |               Decision & Reasons    |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 20 January 2016                       |               On 3 February 2016    |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     mAJ
                         (anonymity direction Made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss H Foot, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   MAJ had appealed on various protection grounds against the  refusal  of
    his claim by the Secretary of State. The hearing of his appeal had come
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Crosfill sitting at Taylor House on  1
    September 2015.  The Judge's decision apparently "allowing" the  appeal
    was promulgated on 26 October 2015. The  Secretary  of  State  appealed
    against the Judge's decision. This is my extempore  decision  following
    the hearing before me this morning.

2.   In a very detailed and conscientious decision the Judge set out why  it
    was that the evidence was accepted and where  relevant,  not  accepted.
    There was a detailed consideration of the expert evidence and there was
    a detailed analysis of the case law including of Country Guidance.  The
    Judge decided in the penultimate subheading on page 20 of the  decision
    that the appeal was being allowed on asylum grounds and being dismissed
    on grounds relating to humanitarian protection, the  Immigration  Rules
    and Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

3.   This morning Miss Isherwood has very helpfully  taken  me  through  the
    determination where it is plain to see that  the  Judge  in  very  many
    paragraphs found against the Appellant and it was said  in  very  clear
    terms that the basis of the Appellant's claim was  not  made  out.  For
    example, it is said towards the end of paragraph 67: "Even on the lower
    standard of proof I do not accept that he  would  be  targeted  by  the
    Taliban in Kabul".

4.   At the end of paragraph 68 the Judge said, "As I have found it to be  I
    do not accept that he would  be  of  any  particular  interest  to  the
    authorities."

5.   At paragraph 69 the Judge considered internal relocation and  concluded
    that same was a viable option in this case. The Judge at  paragraph  74
    referred to the applicable Country Guidance and saw no reason to depart
    from it. At paragraph 77 the Judge  explained  that  the  appeal  under
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 was being dismissed.

7.   Therefore it is quite understandable why Miss Foot today on  behalf  of
    the Appellant takes a stance whereby she agrees that there  appears  to
    have been a slip on the part of the  Judge  where  it  says  under  the
    subheading of "Decision" that the appeal was being  allowed  on  asylum
    grounds. As Miss Foot points out,  there  is  no  cross-appeal  by  the
    Appellant against the Respondent's  application.   It  is  said  it  is
    agreed that the Judge meant to say that the appeal was being  dismissed
    on asylum grounds and not being "allowed".

8.   Miss Foot makes clear that,  neither  she  nor  her  client,  like  the
    adverse findings which had been made but nonetheless she is  not  in  a
    position to challenge those before me today.

9.   This  however  raises  quite  an  interesting  procedural  issue.   For
    whatever reason the slip was not  acted  upon  at  the  First-tier  and
    instead the case has come for hearing before me.   Although Rule 42  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 states as follows:

         "The Upper Tribunal may at any time correct any clerical mistake or
         other accidental slip or omission in a  decision  or  record  of  a
         decision by -
         (a)  sending notification of the amended decision, or a copy of the
             amended record, to all parties; and
         (b)  making any necessary amendment to any information published in
             relation to the decision or record"
     I am not persuaded that that necessarily applies to  decisions  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  once  permission  has  been  granted  and  once  a
    substantive  permission  application  is  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Therefore if the clerical mistake cannot be corrected by virtue of Rule
    42 and through an abundance of caution I go on to apply the more  usual
    approach to cases here at the Upper Tribunal.  On that basis  I  assess
    whether or not there has been a material error of law  in  relation  to
    the Judge's decision where she appeared to allow the appeal  on  asylum
    grounds. It is my clear  judgment  that  there  obviously  has  been  a
    material error of law in respect of the appeal being allowed on  asylum
    grounds. The appeal should have been dismissed on asylum grounds as  it
    was in respect of  the  other  grounds  and  as  the  findings  clearly
    indicated would be the case. The parties were content for  me  to  take
    this approach.

Notice of Decision

11.  Therefore my decision is that there was an error of law in  respect  of
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Crossfill. I set it aside.  I
    remake the decision by allowing the Secretary of State's appeal  and  I
    thereby dismiss the claimant's asylum appeal.  There  was  a  direction
    regarding anonymity made by the First-tier Tribunal and because this is
    a protection claim then the direction in respect of anonymity  remains.
    There was no fee award and in the circumstances no fee award is made.



Signed                                  Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood




