
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN/DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10062/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           miss ranitha thiyagesu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Talacchi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 8th October 1994.   The
    Appellant left Sri Lanka on 10th June 2010 and travelled  via  Malaysia
    arriving in the UK on 20th January 2011.  The Appellant claimed  asylum
    on 4th February 2011.  The Appellant was  refused  asylum  and  granted
    discretionary leave till 8th May  2012.   An  application  for  further
    leave to remain was made on 4th May 2012.  The Secretary of State noted
    that the Appellant's original claim for asylum was based  upon  a  fear
    that if returned  she  would  face  mistreatment  due  to  her  imputed
    political opinion as a member of a particular social group and that she
    contended that her risk arose because her brother had connections  with
    the LTTE.  By Notice of Refusal dated 4th November 2014 the Appellant's
    application for further leave to remain in the UK was refused.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal McDade sitting at Stoke  on  12th  January  2015.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 22nd January 2015  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  and  the
    Appellant was found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 3. On 2nd February 2015 the Appellant lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  It is noted that the sole basis upon which  permission
    to appeal was sought was based on  a  contention  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had erred in law in relation to his findings pursuant to
    Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 4. On  13th  February  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Fisher  noted  that  the  grounds  seeking
    permission  asserted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in   law   in   his
    consideration of Article 8 by failing to  undertake  a  proportionality
    exercise outside the Rules by concluding that there was no family  life
    between  the  Appellant  and  her  relatives  in  the  UK  and  in  his
    consideration of Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Judge Fisher noted that in  his  decision  the  judge
    dealt with Article 8 issues in one paragraph and concluded  that  there
    was no evidence of dependency which would  establish  family  life  and
    found that there were no compelling or exceptional circumstances  which
    warranted consideration outside of the Rules.  In terms of Section 117B
    the judge simply said that he had regard to that provision.

 5. In granting permission Judge Fisher considered  that  it  was  arguable
    that the judge erred in imposing a threshold  test  before  considering
    Article 8 outside the Rules and that given the lack of reference to the
    evidence given by the Appellant's cousins  it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge had also erred in finding that there was no element of dependency
    between them which was sufficient to engage Article 8.  Furthermore  he
    considered that the judge may have failed to explain the  weight  which
    he attached to the various factors under Section 117B.

 6. On 24th February 2015 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24 submitting that the judge was entitled to  find
    that there was no family life between the Appellant and her cousins  in
    the UK based on the evidence before the Tribunal and that the judge had
    also been correct to find that the provisions of  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules were not met.  The Rule 24 response  went  on  to
    state that authority should not be read as seeking to  suggest  that  a
    threshold test was being suggested as opposed to making it  clear  that
    there was a need to look at the evidence to see if there  was  anything
    which had not already been adequately considered in the context of  the
    Immigration Rules and which could lead to a successful Article 8  claim
    and that the judge had correctly considered that there was nothing that
    has not already been considered in the context of the Immigration Rules
    which could do so.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Talacchi.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office
    Presenting Officer Ms Johnstone.

Submission/Discussion

 8. Mr Talacchi states that this is an appeal outside the Immigration Rules
    and  takes  me  to  paragraph  6  the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge's
    determination where the judge has found that there  was  no  particular
    dependency between the Appellant and her cousin and therefore held that
    a family life in the context of Article 8 did not  exist.   He  submits
    there was no reason given for this finding and takes me to the  witness
    statements of the Appellant's cousin that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He refers to the relevant paragraph (paragraph 4) where  the
    Appellant's cousin states:

         "The Appellant arrived in the UK as a  minor  in  2011  and  sought
         asylum in the UK and since her arrival she has been living with  me
         and I take full care of her welfare ..."

 9. He submits that there is  no  findings  of  the  evidence  relating  to
    dependency between the two to be found within the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's determination.  He submits that the  approach  adopted  by  the
    judge is wrong, that the judge has not directed himself to the  concept
    of exceptional circumstances and submits that the  error  is  that  the
    judge has given weight to immigration control and  not  considered  the
    other factors of Section 117B especially Section 117A(2).   He  submits
    that  the  judge  has  failed  to  properly  address   the   issue   of
    proportionality.

10. He further points out that the Appellant has had no  access  to  public
    funds (save child benefit) and  that  there  has  been  an  element  of
    integration by the Appellant into UK society pointing out that she  has
    attended some twelve courses.  He comments that the judge has failed to
    make any findings with regard to the Appellant's cousin's evidence  and
    submits that there is a material error of law therein.

11. In response Ms Johnstone points  out  that  the  issue  that  is  being
    addressed is a claim pursuant to Article  8  and  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that the Appellant had no dependency upon  her  cousin
    pointing out that she is an adult and that she had no medical problems.
     The fact that she had eight months' discretionary  leave  as  a  minor
    does not, Ms Johnstone submits, imply that the Appellant has  any  form
    of dependency.  She states that the judge  has  given  due  and  proper
    consideration to the issues.  She has made a finding that as far as the
    Appellant's private life is concerned there is nothing  exceptional  or
    compelling that would  cause  her  to  consider  it  outside  paragraph
    276ADE.  Ms Johnstone points out  the  Appellant  is  a  failed  asylum
    seeker with precarious status  and  no  private  life  under  paragraph
    276ADE.  She submits that  the  judge  has  had  regard  to  all  these
    factors.

12. She comments that for the Appellant's legal representative  to  contend
    that there has been no reliance on public funds is in  fact  not  true.
    While she acknowledges that the Appellant was  for  a  short  period  a
    minor and was granted discretionary leave child benefit was claimed for
    the Appellant during that  period.   She  points  out  that  that  does
    constitute public funds and further  that  this  is  an  Appellant  who
    cannot show that she can speak English.  She submits that there  is  no
    material error disclosed in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on the Error of Law

15. I start by reminding myself that the issue  outstanding  before  me  is
    whether or not there was a material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The thrust  of  the  Appellant's  Counsel's
    submissions are that the judge may have imposed  the  wrong  test  when
    considering Article 8 outside of the Rules.  I  do  not  think  such  a
    contention is sustainable.   To  start  with  at  paragraph  2  of  the
    determination the judge sets out  the  oral  testimony  that  has  been
    considered including that of the three Appellant's  witnesses  and  her
    cousin Jeyakanthan Kanapathipillai with whom the Appellant stayed.  The
    judge expresses clearly that he has  given  due  consideration  to  the
    witness evidence and made findings that the relationship she  had  with
    her cousins are those between adults and that there  is  no  particular
    dependency one for the other.  These are findings that  the  judge  was
    perfectly  entitled  to  make.   The  fact  that  the  judge  has   not
    specifically referred to paragraph 4 of  Mr  Kanapathipillai's  witness
    statement is not material he has considered all the evidence  and  made
    findings with regard to dependency that he was perfectly  entitled  to.
    There is consequently no material error of law in that finding.

16. It is appropriate however to go further.  The  judge  thereafter  found
    that family life in the context of Article 8 did not  exist.   He  then
    gave due and proper consideration to the submission that the  Appellant
    would return to Sri Lanka as a person with no political profile and  as
    such did not fall within any of the risk categories and  therefore  was
    not at risk of serious harm.  The  judge  went  on  to  find  that  her
    removal would be wholly proportionate to  the  legitimate  purposes  of
    immigration control and had regard to Section 117B of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act.  That seems to me to be a perfectly  proper
    approach.

17. The authorities show that there is nothing to suggest that a  threshold
    test has ever been suggested as opposed to making it clear  that  there
    is a need to look at the evidence to see if there  was  anything  which
    has been adequately considered in the context of the Immigration  Rules
    and which could lead to a successful Article 8  claim.   This  approach
    appears to have been quite properly adopted by the judge.  As  is  held
    in Ganesabalan, R (on the application  of)  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWHC  2712
    (admin) there is no prior threshold which dictates whether the exercise
    of discretion should be considered; rather the nature of the assessment
    and the reasoning which  are  called  for  are  informed  by  threshold
    considerations.

18. The Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) restated the context  and  considered
    the role of  public  policy  as  expressed  within  the  Rules  in  the
    proportionality  assessment.   SS  (Congo)  sets  out  that  this  will
    necessarily involve deciding whether there is a gap between  the  Rules
    and Article 8 and then whether there are circumstances within the  case
    under consideration which take it outside the class of cases which  the
    Rules properly provide for.  Whether the circumstances are described as
    "compelling" or "exceptional" is not a matter of substance.  They  must
    be relevant, weighty and not fully provided for within the  Rules.   In
    practice they are likely to be both compelling and exceptional but this
    is not a legal requirement.  Further the authority confirms there is no
    prior "threshold" of whether there are arguably good grounds  to  grant
    leave to remain  outside  of  a  pre-condition  to  conducting  a  full
    proportionality assessment.

19. The public interest provisions are now contained in primary legislation
    and they override existing case law and whilst Section 117A(2) requires
    a Tribunal to have regard to the considerations listed in Sections 117B
    and 117C there is no duty upon  the  Tribunal  to  reach  any  specific
    conclusions or findings as the facts as  listed  are  ones  that  would
    normally have always been  taken  into  account.   I  acknowledge  that
    Section 117A(3) imposes upon a judge  a  requirement  to  carry  out  a
    balancing exercise where an Appellant's  circumstances  engage  Article
    8(1) in deciding whether the proposed interference is proportionate  in
    all the circumstances.  This addresses the basic principles set out  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  Sections 117A to 117D are essentially a further
    elaboration  of  Razgar's  question  5  which  is   essentially   about
    proportionality and justifiability.  It is not an error of law to  fail
    to refer to Sections 117A to 117D considerations  providing  the  judge
    has applied the test he or she was supposed to apply according  to  its
    term; what matters is substance, not form.

20. This is what the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  done.   I  acknowledge
    that his considerations are not detailed and they come at the end of an
    appeal relating to predominantly asylum grounds but the judge has given
    the issue full and proper consideration.  In her submissions to  me  Ms
    Johnstone has made reference to Forman (ss117A-C considerations) [2015]
    UKUT 412 (IAC).  It seems to me that the rational of that authority  is
    appropriate namely the public interest in firm immigration  control  is
    not diluted by the consideration that a person pursuing a  claim  under
    Article 8 ECHR has at no time been a financial burden on the  state  or
    is self sufficient  or  is  likely  to  remain  so  indefinitely.   The
    significance of these factors is that where they are  not  present  the
    public interest is  fortified.   Further  the  list  of  considerations
    contained  in  Section  117B  and  Section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is  not  exhausted  and  the  court  or
    Tribunal is entitled to take  into  account  additional  considerations
    provided that they are relevant in the sense that they properly bear on
    the public interest question.

21. I emphasise that I am not re-trying this matter but the combination  of
    all the above authorities indicate quite clearly  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge carried out properly his assessment albeit his  findings
    are succinctly  put  within  one  paragraph.   That  in  itself  cannot
    constitute a material error of law providing  the  judge  has  properly
    carried out the assessment and consideration.  In this instance for all
    the above reasons I am satisfied that he has and the decision discloses
    no material error of law and the appeal is dismissed and  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  maintained.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.

Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
