
                                                             [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/10942/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                          |                            |
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 30 July 2015                           |     On 14 August 2015      |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                            SABER RAHEL AL ENEZI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr Saddique of Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes promulgated on 12 May 2015
   which  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  dated  25
   September 2014 notifying him that he no longer met  the  requirements  of
   the Rules under which he was granted refugee status and the  reasons  for
   cancelling the refugee status had been granted to him on 16 May 2013 were
   set out in a letter dated 24 September 2014.

Background


3. The Appellant claimed that he was born on 9 June 1959 and he entered  the
   United Kingdom on 20 April 2013 claiming asylum in the name  Saber  Rahel
   Al Enezi born in Al Jahra Kuwait. The Appellant claimed to be  a  Kuwaiti
   Bidoon and as was granted asylum  and  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
   Kingdom until 15 May 2018  on  the  basis  of  his  claim  to  be  an  un
   documented Bidoon from Kuwait.
4. On 25 September 2014 the Secretary of  State  cancelled  the  Appellant's
   status on the basis of evidence from the US Homeland  Security  that  the
   Appellant was an Iraqi citizen.


The Judge's Decision
5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Heynes ("the Judge") allowed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision to revoke his asylum status.
6. The Judge found that the burden of proving that  there  was  a  basis  to
   revoke the status rested with the Respondent.
7. The evidential  basis  for  that  decision  had  been  a  statement  from
   Christine Cafferkey the designated Protocol manager for the  exchange  of
   data as part of the High Value Data Sharing Protocol. The witness  stated
   that the fingerprints provided by the Appellant to the Respondent matched
   a set of fingerprints captured on 5 March 2013 in Baghdad by an applicant
   for a US visa and that the applicant was an Iraqi citizen.
8. The Judge examined that evidence in detail and also heard  evidence  from
   the Appellant.
9. He did not find that the Appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness  however
   whatever suspicions arose from this he found were not relevant given that
   the Respondent bore the  burden  of  proving  the  grounds  advanced  for
   revoking the Appellant's status.
10. He did not accept that the Respondent had discharged the burden  because
   there was no evidence before him of the fingerprints  in  issue,  nothing
   from an expert to confirm the match  or who it was who  carried  out  the
   examination and indeed no paper record of any kind.
11. The Judge concluded by stating that he allowed the 'asylum appeal'
12. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge failed  to  make  a
   finding as to whether the Appellant was a refugee and that the Judge  was
   wrong in fact to  state  that  the  Appellant  could  not  challenge  the
   fingerprint evidence as there was a procedure in place  in  published  on
   line guidance.
13.  On 28 May 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Ford  gave  permission
   to appeal stating that it 'is  arguable  that  the  failure  to  consider
   whether the Appellant was or  was  not  an  undocumented  Kuwaiti  Bidoon
   renders the decision that he is entitled to asylum a  material  error  of
   law.'

14. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Harrison  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that he relied on the grounds of appeal. There  was  no  clear
   finding of fact on the central issue in this case which was  whether  the
   Appellant was an undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait.

15. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Saddique submitted  that  while  conceding
   that the decision was brief it  was  an  unusual  appeal  which  was  not
   against a refusal of asylum but rather against the revocation of  refugee
   status under paragraph 339A of the Rules. Therefore  the  Judge  was  not
   obliged to make a finding as to whether the Appellant was an undocumented
   Bidoon.

Finding on Material Error

16. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

17. I am satisfied that  the  Respondent  appealed  this  decision  and  was
   indeed granted permission to appeal on the erroneous basis that this  was
   an appeal against a refusal of asylum.

18. I am satisfied that the Judge made a 'typing error'  in  concluding  his
   decision by stating that he 'allowed the asylum appeal' as he  made  very
   clear in paragraph 1 and 13 of his decision that he understood  that  the
   appeal was against the revocation of the Appellant's  refugee  status  on
   the basis that he had falsely represented himself to be  an  undocumented
   Bidoon.

19. I am satisfied therefore that the Judge  was  not  required  to  make  a
   finding as to whether the Appellant was  an  undocumented  Bidoon  as  he
   asserts  in  paragraph  13  but  rather  the  decision  was  whether  the
   Respondent had met the evidential burden of establishing that he had made
   false representations about his identity.

20. I am satisfied that the findings made by the Judge that  the  Respondent
   had not met this burden based  on  the  witness  statement  of  Christine
   Cafferty and the complete absence  of  any  direct  evidence  as  to  the
   fingerprints, who analysed  them  and  the  results  of  the  fingerprint
   analysis were open to him.

CONCLUSION

21. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
8.8.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell





