
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10665/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination sent         |
|On 5 March 2014                                 |On 28 March 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                rehana arshad

                          (no anonymity direction)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah of Counsel instructed by Sony Sadaf Haroon
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to allow on human rights grounds the claimant's
    appeal against her decision to set removal directions to Pakistan after
    refusing her asylum, humanitarian protection and/or leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Sanderson dismissed the claimant's asylum and
    humanitarian protection claims and her appeal under Articles  2  and  3
    ECHR.  He was satisfied that she could not  bring  herself  within  the
    provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules
    which bring Article 8 within the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).



 3. He then considered Article 8 outside the Rules and whether  there  were
    any exceptional  circumstances  or  insurmountable  obstacles  to  this
    family continuing their family life  in  Pakistan.   The  circumstances
    which he took into account are set out at paragraphs 30 to  41  of  the
    determination.  The claimant married her husband, a recent widower with
    three very young children, in an Islamic ceremony  in  Pakistan  on  16
    June 2013.  Her husband and his children are all British citizens.

 4. A civil marriage ceremony is booked in the United Kingdom for a date in
    March 2014, and the claimant is six months' pregnant with her husband's
    child.  The parties  were  found  to  be  credible  witnesses  and  the
    relationship between them genuine and subsisting.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found that the children had been badly affected
    by the loss of their mother and that  there  was  a  warm  and  genuine
    relationship between the claimant and  her  three  step-children,  (the
    youngest is 5 and the eldest is 12 years old).  Her  relationship  with
    the children had been of significant assistance to them  in  recovering
    from the death of their mother. At paragraphs 40 to 41 the  Immigration
    Judge says this:-

         "40. I am satisfied that questions 2, 3 and 4 posed in  Razgar  can
             be answered in the affirmative and I therefore move  on  to  a
             proportionality assessment.  I find, in terms of the  judgment
             in EB (Kosovo) that the effect  of  the  [claimant's]  removal
             would be  to  sever  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
             between the [claimant] and her step-children and her  partner.
             In carrying out my assessment I have also taken  into  account
             s.55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
             which  recognises  that  the   interests   of   a   child   in
             circumstances such as this is a primary consideration and  the
             decision of the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) v  SSHD  [2011]
             UKSC 4 where it was stated that in making the  proportionality
             assessment under article 8, the best interests  of  the  child
             must be a primary  consideration  which  means  they  must  be
             considered first but  can  be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative
             effect of other considerations.  In terms of the case of Beoku-
             Betts, the family unit must be considered as a whole  and  all
             family  members  are  potential  'victims'  of  removal.   The
             [claimant's] partner is a British citizen as are each  of  his
             children.  They are settled in this country, the children  are
             educated here and family and  other  relationships  have  been
             formed here.  The partner is employed here.  It would  not  be
             reasonable to expect the partner and his  children  to  follow
             the [claimant] if she were returned to her country of  origin.
             Nor, given the  disruption  that  could  occur,  would  it  be
             reasonable to expect the [claimant] to make an entry clearance
             application from her country of origin given the close  family
             ties that  have  been  formed  here  and  the  fact  that  the
             [claimant] is expecting a child, the biological  father  being
             her partner.  The interests of  the  children  are  a  primary
             consideration and other factors in this case either singly  or
             cumulatively do not outweigh  this  consideration.   It  falls
             therefore   to   determine   whether   the   interference   is
             proportionate to the legitimate public  end  to  be  achieved,
             namely the control of immigration.

         41.  Having considered the question of proportionality and striking
             a balance between the rights of the [claimant]  together  with
             the victims of the  interference  and  the  interests  of  the
             community I find, for the reasons given above, that the public
             benefit in effecting the [claimant's]  forced  departure  from
             the United Kingdom does not outweigh the interference with her
             family life.  The decision requiring the [claimant]  to  leave
             the United Kingdom is disproportionate  when  looking  at  the
             case  in  the  round  having  considered  all  the   competing
             considerations and has led the United Kingdom to be in  breach
             of our obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR."

 6. The Secretary of State  appealed  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had failed to consider the  observations  in  R  ota  Nagre  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)
    relating to insurmountable obstacles and whether it was  reasonable  to
    expect the family to leave together for Pakistan.  In  the  grounds  of
    appeal she says this:

    "    ...It is submitted that the changes to the Immigration Rules  with
         the Article 8 provisions  introduced  in  July  2012  clarified  an
         important issue on this point.  Prior to that time case law  listed
         possible relevant factors but left it to the  individual  decision-
         maker in an individual case to determine how best  to  balance  the
         relevant factors, based  on  that  person's  perception  of  public
         policy considerations.  This  resulted  in  divergent  outcomes  as
         decision-makers had to reach their own view on  the  public  policy
         imperatives, without a clear statement from the Secretary of  State
         and Parliament on where the pubic interest  lies.   Since  the  new
         Rules came into force,  decision-makers  no  longer  operate  in  a
         policy vacuum.

         It is acknowledged that the facts of the individual  case  are  the
         starting point when considering proportionality, but they are  also
         the starting point which then has to be balanced against the public
         interest as reflected  in  the  new  Rules.   The  public  interest
         achieved by applying clear Rules must be measured by the effect  of
         the Rules across the board, not just in relation to  an  individual
         case.  In this case the Tribunal did not apply  this  approach  and
         thereby misdirected itself in law."

 7. The grounds of appeal do not engage with the facts  of  the  individual
    case  in  this  appeal.   Nevertheless,   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Hodgkinson granted permission to appeal, noting that:

         "...the respondent relied on recent relevant case law such as Nagre
         and Gulshan and  that  whilst  the  judge  made  reference  to  the
         decision in Gulshan in his determination he  nevertheless  arguably
         applied the wrong test when considering proportionality."

 8. I have heard submissions from Mr Avery in similar terms to the  grounds
    of appeal.  Mr Avery acknowledges that now that  the  claimant  is  six
    months' pregnant it would be very difficult to remove her  to  Pakistan
    and was unable to assist me much, beyond the very general terms of  the
    grounds  of  appeal.   He  contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    proportionality conclusion is erroneous at the level  of  an  error  of
    law.

 9. I did not consider it necessary to call upon Mr  Miah,  who  represents
    the claimant.  The grounds of appeal do not identify  why  it  was  not
    open to this judge,  on  these  facts,  to  conclude  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to return to Pakistan.  The evidence was  that
    the claimant had lawfully married a British citizen with three  citizen
    children, who were in a bad way following the  recent  death  of  their
    mother.   The  relationships  were  genuine  and  subsisting,  and  the
    children had already lost one mother.  The claimant is carrying a child
    which is their sibling and her husband's child, and as they are British
    citizens, the Secretary of State has accepted that the father's future,
    and that of his children, lies in the United Kingdom.   On those facts,
    I consider that it was unarguably open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    to conclude that this was a case in which removal was disproportionate.

10. Despite his best efforts Mr Avery has not persuaded me to the contrary.
     There  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Consequential Directions

Forthwith on receipt  of  this  decision  the  respondent  shall  grant  the
claimant leave to remain for such period as is necessary to give  effect  to
this determination.

[pic]
Signed                              Date  14 March 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

