
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10094/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2016                   |On 28 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              muhammad siddique
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVittie, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Pickering, instructed by Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department ("SSHD").  For  convenience  I  will  refer  to  Mr
    Siddique as the claimant herein.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan, born 1 January 1945.  He entered
    the United Kingdom on 18 September 2014 on a lawfully issued visit visa
    and claimed asylum on 8 November 2014.  This application was refused by
    the SSHD in a decision dated 30 June 2015.

FtT's Decision

 3. In a decision of 4 May 2016, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge A  C  Holt)
    dismissed the claimant's appeal on Refugee Convention and  Humanitarian
    Protection grounds, but allowed it on human rights grounds  -  both  in
    relation to both Article 3 and Article 8 ECHR.

 4. The crux of the FtT's reasoning is to be found within paragraphs 23  to
    26 of its decision, which read as follows:

         "23. ... I have to consider the  appellant's  state  of  health.  I
             remind myself of the very high threshold set out in  the  case
             of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31  and  I  am  quite  sure  that,  in
             principle, the appellant would be able to source  painkillers,
             morphine, in Pakistan.

         24.  I also note the letter of the appellant's GP Dr F Karam  dated
             16 March 2016 ...  In terms of the appellant's  prognosis,  he
             says, 'He has been admitted to the Royal Liverpool  University
             Hospital several times in the last four weeks.  The palliative
             care  team  in  the  community  is  looking  after  him.   His
             oncologist has advised that there are no plans for any further
             palliative radiotherapy due  to  the  advanced  state  of  his
             illness'.  The appellant was also asked at the hearing if  his
             treating doctors had discussed his life expectancy  with  him.
             The appellant was tearful and clearly very distressed at being
             asked about this topic and simply said that he had  been  told
             that he had 'very little time' and 'a short time' and  'little
             time, God knows'.

         25.  Having seen the medical evidence  and  heard  the  appellant's
             answers to the questions about his remaining  life  expectancy
             and observed the appellant's very obvious discomfort and pain,
             I am satisfied that this is one of  the  rare  cases  that  to
             return the appellant to Pakistan in these circumstances  would
             give rise a breach of his Article 3 rights. I very much  doubt
             that he would make it through an airport and  cannot  envisage
             any airline agreeing to take him given the abundantly  obvious
             health problems that the appellant manifested.   Whilst  I  am
             not medically qualified and  there  was  no  medical  evidence
             specifically on point it was  glaringly  obvious  to  me  that
             there would be significant doubts  that  the  appellant  would
             survive a long-haul flight to Pakistan.

         26.  Further, I find that circumstances of this case are such  that
             requiring the appellant to leave the United Kingdom  would  be
             an  unlawful  interference  with  his  private  rights  for  a
             dignified death pursuant to Article 8.  In relation to Article
             8 and the five-stage test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27,  I
             find that Article 8 is engaged here on the very specific basis
             that the appellant is clearly in the  end  stage  of  terminal
             cancer where no further treatment is planned. I also  have  no
             hesitation in finding that it is in the  public  interest  for
             the respondent to maintain and enforce policies of immigration
             control. However, I also have no hesitation in finding that it
             would be disproportionate to require such a sick  and  elderly
             man to attempt a long-haul  flight  simply  on  the  basis  of
             bolstering, albeit entirely  legitimate,  the  enforcement  of
             immigration control."

 5. The Secretary of State sought, and obtained  from  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Robertson, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Thus  the
    matter came before me.

Discussion and Decision on setting aside FtT's decision

 6. Having  considered  carefully  the  parties'  submissions,  I  have  no
    hesitation in concluding that  the  FtT's  decision  contains  numerous
    errors of law - each capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.  I
    come to this conclusion for the following reasons.

 7. Ostensibly this is what has become known as a  "health  case".   Whilst
    the FtT properly identified that such cases  require  an  appellant  to
    surpass a very  high  threshold,  supported  by  the  citation  of  the
    decision of their Lordships House in N v  Secretary  of  State,  in  my
    conclusion the FtT failed to lawfully apply  such  directions,  and  in
    particular failed to lawfully consider the evidence in its proper legal
    context.

 8. There were effectively two limbs to the consideration undertaken by the
    FtT.  First, the FtT purported to undertake an assessment as to whether
    there would be a breach of the claimant's human rights by virtue of him
    being required to undertake the journey to  Pakistan,  irrespective  of
    the circumstances that would pertain upon his arrival there. The second
    consideration related  specifically  to  the  circumstances  after  the
    claimant's arrival in his homeland.

 9. In relation to the former, the  FtT  found  there  to  be  'significant
    doubts' that the claimant would survive a long haul flight to Pakistan.
     In my view  the  rationale  deployed  by  the  FtT  in  reaching  this
    conclusion discloses a number of legal errors.

10. First, there has never been any indication from the SSHD that she would
    attempt to remove the claimant by air.  The  mechanism  of  removal  is
    entirely a matter for the SSHD and until the SSHD  shows  her  hand  in
    this regard it cannot be assumed that she will use a particular form of
    transport. Second, there is no assessment of the level of care the SSHD
    would provide for the duration of the journey. There  are  policies  in
    the public domain which seek to identify the provision of such care  on
    the journey, if necessary. Although these policies were not before  the
    FtT, it was not entitled to proceed on the basis that there would be an
    abject absence of any care. To do so is to take as a starting point the
    fact that the SSHD would not comply with her obligations under  section
    6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

11. In any event, and this is an error of such significance that of  itself
    it vitiates the aforementioned conclusion by  the  FtT,  there  was  no
    evidence available to the FtT which  could  have  led  it  to  lawfully
    conclude that there were significant doubts  that  the  claimant  would
    survive a long haul flight to Pakistan.  The medical evidence  did  not
    touch at all on the consequences of the claimant  undertaking  a  long-
    haul flight, nor was there any evidence that an airline would not  take
    the claimant in his current condition - as was found to be the case  by
    the FtT.  In reality the FtT put itself  in  the  place  of  a  medical
    expert and came to conclusions in relation to the claimant's health  on
    this basis. Such an approach is in my view unlawful.

12. The aforementioned errors each impinge on the lawfulness of  the  FtT's
    conclusion in relation to both the Article 3 and Article 8.

13. As to the second limb of the FtT's  reasoning  i.e.  the  circumstances
    that would pertain for the claimant in Pakistan; duly scrutinised it is
    clear that the FtT failed to  undertake  any,  let  alone  a  rigorous,
    analysis of the evidence before it in this regard, save to say that the
    claimant would in all likelihood be able to obtain the necessary  drugs
    that he requires there.

14. In N Lady Hale [at 69] had this  to  say  about  the  considerations  a
    decision maker in a case such as the instant one must undertake:

         "69. In my view, therefore, the test, in  this  sort  of  case,  is
             whether the applicant's illness has reached  such  a  critical
             stage (i.e. he is dying) that it would be  inhumane  treatment
             to deprive him of the care which he is currently receiving and
             send him home to an early death unless there is care available
             there to enable him to meet that  fate  with  dignity."   (See
             also Lord Brown at paragraphs 89 to 94)

15. There is no analysis in the FtT's decision as to whether  the  claimant
    will meet an early death in Pakistan and, equally significantly,  there
    is no analysis of the level of care (if any) that would be available to
    him there. In short, there is a palpable lack of analysis of any of the
    features identified in N as being  of  significance.   This  vacuum  of
    consideration on a core issue in the Article 3 claim is  self-evidently
    an error of law. Absent a  reasoned  consideration  and  conclusion  in
    relation to the exact circumstances which will likely pertain  for  the
    claimant upon return to Pakistan, the finding that Article 3  would  be
    breached by such return must inevitably be flawed.  Once again the same
    conclusion must be reached  in  relation  to  the  Article  8  analysis
    undertaken by the FtT.

16. Further errors can be identified, in particular with the FtT's  Article
    8 considerations, but, given what I say above, I need not  extend  this
    decision any further by setting those errors out.

17. For these reasons I conclude that the FtT's decision is flawed by legal
    error and should be set aside.

18. Both parties sought to persuade me that the appeal should  be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a consideration afresh.   I  agree  that
    that is so given the extensive fact finding that needs to be undertaken
    in this case. None of the findings of FtT are to stand.

19. I made the observation at the hearing that the  SSHD  should  file  and
    serve, in good time for the hearing before the FtT, all of her relevant
    polices in relation to the  removal  of  individuals  with  significant
    health  problems.   The  claimant  should  produce  up-to-date  medical
    evidence relating to his condition.



Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains  an  error  of  law  capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal and it is  set  aside.   The  matter  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined de novo.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

