
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10266/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th November 2016                         |On 7 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                              mr Ilango Sinniah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Halse, Counsel for Patricks Solicitors, Essex
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 31st  March  1990.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated  1st  July  2015
    refusing him asylum, human rights protection and leave to remain in the
    UK on human rights grounds.  His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Swinnerton on 25th  August  2016  and  dismissed  on  all
    grounds in a decision promulgated on 7th September 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was made.  Permission to appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on 4th October 2016.  The
    permission states that the Tribunal may have erred in not finding  that
    the Appellant falls within the risk categories mentioned in headnote  7
    of the case of GJ and Others Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00319  (IAC).   This
    refers to journalists/activists  in  the  post-conflict  diaspora/human
    rights activists.  In this case, Mr Sinniah, the Appellant,  relies  on
    his  sur  place  activities  which  he  claims  were  critical  of  the
    government in Sri Lanka.  Although the Respondent did not  accept  that
    the Appellant played a significant role in the diaspora activities  the
    judge, apart from recording this at paragraph 13 of the decision, makes
    no further mention of it in her findings of fact or in  her  assessment
    of the risk to the Appellant on return.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response which states that the First-tier Judge  has
    noted the Appellant's claimed activities in the  UK  at  paragraph  13.
    When paragraph 20  is  read,  in  which  the  judge  records  Counsel's
    submissions, Counsel did not  specifically  refer  to  the  Appellant's
    claimed diaspora activities so it was understandable  that  the  First-
    tier Judge did not undertake a forensic analysis of this element of the
    claim.  The response goes on to state that even if there  was  such  an
    error it was immaterial to the outcome of the appeal as the  judge  has
    comprehensively  rejected  the  Appellant's   claimed   abduction   and
    detention.  The response refers to another  issue  which  is  that  the
    Appellant only started his limited diaspora  activities  in  2014  long
    after he arrived in the United Kingdom in 2011.  The response refers to
    the said case of GJ which makes it clear that risk category  7(a)  only
    applies  where  the  authorities  perceive  an  individual  to  have  a
    "significant role" in post-conflict Tamil separatism and  at  paragraph
    351  of  GJ  it  is  stated  "attendance  at  one,  or   even   several
    demonstrations in the diaspora is not of itself evidence that a  person
    is a committed Tamil  activist  seeking  to  promote  Tamil  separatism
    within Sri Lanka.  That will be  a  question  of  fact  in  each  case,
    dependent  on  any  diaspora  activities  carried  out   by   such   an
    individual".  The response states that the  Appellant's  claim  at  its
    highest with the accepted and unchallenged credibility findings, do not
    suggest that the appellant would be perceived  to  have  a  significant
    role in relation to Tamil separatism.

The Hearing

 4. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the  judge  did  not  consider
    risk or potential risk to this  Appellant  because  of  his  sur  place
    activities and this must be a material error.  She submitted  that  the
    judge ignored the guidance from the case of GJ.  She  took  me  through
    the headnotes in GJ.   This is the case  which  replaces  all  existing
    country guidance on Sri Lanka and she pointed out that at number  3  it
    is stated that the government's present objective is to identify  Tamil
    activists in the diaspora who  are  working  for  Tamil  separatism  to
    destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan State enshrined in Amendment 6(1) to
    the Sri Lankan Constitution of 1983 which prohibits the  "violation  of
    the territorial integrity" of Sri Lanka.   She  submitted  that  a  new
    government was put in place in Sri Lanka in  January  2016  and  it  is
    trying to stop any activity which criticises the Sri Lankan  government
    and draws attention to the human rights  failings  of  the  government.
    The intention is to placate international opinion and  it  was  pointed
    out that the General who was in charge of the Sri Lankan Army when  the
    war ended in 2009 is now a member of the government.  Headnote 4 states
    that if a person is detained by the Sri Lankan security services  there
    is a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring  international
    protection.  Counsel also submitted that internal relocation is not  an
    option for a person at real risk from the Sri  Lankan  authorities  and
    when Tamils return they require to return  to  a  named  address  after
    passing through the airport. She submitted that this is so that  Tamils
    can be monitored.

 5. I was referred again to the said case of GJ which  confirms  that  very
    few people are detained at the airport and that there is a small  "stop
    list".  She submitted that the Appellant is unlikely to be on the "stop
    list" but there is also a watch list  and  because  the  Appellant  was
    detained and released on a bribe he may well be on that watch list  and
    if he is he will be monitored on return.  She  submitted  that  by  the
    Appellant's sur place activities, he brought to international attention
    the criticisms levelled at the Sri Lankan  government.   She  submitted
    that the government considers the LTTE to be a spent force but they are
    afraid of any threat to the division  of  Sri  Lanka  coming  from  the
    diaspora and she submitted this Appellant  could  be  perceived  to  be
    actively  involved.   She  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  not   a
    journalist but at number 8 of the headnotes it is stated that  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities' approach is  based  on  sophisticated  intelligence
    internally and in the diaspora.   Counsel  asked  me  to  consider  the
    Appellant's detention of sixteen days and what he suffered during  that
    period although he had had no major involvement with  the  LTTE.   This
    happened a year after his minor activities.

 6. Counsel submitted that this Appellant's  family  members  are  involved
    with the LTTE and that must put the Appellant in danger.  She submitted
    that the Appellant will be returning from the United Kingdom  and  this
    is another reason he may be on the "watch list" which means he will  be
    monitored by the security forces on return.

 7. I was referred to the case of MP and NT and asked to give  this  weight
    in particular Lord  Underhill's  judgment.   Tamils  are  considered  a
    threat by the authorities in Sri Lanka.

 8. Counsel submitted that on return this Appellant could be considered  to
    be involved in activities against the government  particularly  because
    of his family's connection to the LTTE and although he  only  played  a
    minor role he could still be in danger.  She submitted that it  is  not
    clear what his situation will be as he was detained and  only  released
    on a bribe.  He may be considered to have escaped.

 9. She also submitted that the judge found that it was unlikely that  this
    Appellant would be unable to return safely, five or six years after  he
    left.  She submitted that the judge did not believe that the  Appellant
    was detained but she submitted that nowhere in  the  decision  did  the
    judge mention whether the Appellant's activities in  the  diaspora  are
    such as to  bring  him  to  the  attention  of  the  authorities.   She
    submitted that foreseeably this Appellant will be at risk on return.

10. The judge has also referred to credibility issues under  Section  8  of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004.
    Counsel submitted that the Appellant's evidence is that he had  a  visa
    and did not realise he should claim asylum when he had this visa.   She
    submitted that this is a credible explanation.

11. She submitted that the Appellant is involved in two organisations being
    the  TCCE  (UK)  which  has  been  ongoing  for  many  years  and   the
    Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam  (TGTE).   She  submitted  that
    although he is only a foot soldier in these groups he went to meetings,
    delivered leaflets and has been attending since 2014.

12. Counsel submitted that the judge did not believe that the Appellant had
    been detained in 2010 for something he did in 2006.   Because  she  did
    not believe this she did not grant asylum  to  the  Appellant  but  she
    submitted the  judge  fell  into  error  in  failing  to  consider  the
    activities of the diaspora in England and the  Appellant's  involvement
    with them and the serious new take on diaspora activities  by  the  Sri
    Lankan government.  She submitted that  the  government  has  developed
    technology and intelligence to a high degree and this Appellant will be
    in danger on return and his appeal should be allowed.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is  relying  on  his  Rule  24
    response.  There is nothing in the decision to suggest that  the  judge
    did not consider all the evidence before her.  He submitted that  based
    on this, this Appellant will not be at risk on return  because  of  his
    sur place activities in the United Kingdom.

14. The Presenting Officer referred me to paragraph  13  of  the  decision.
    The judge does not accept that the Appellant has played  a  significant
    role within the diaspora in the UK.  The activities  of  the  Appellant
    within the Tamil diaspora in the UK are at best, limited.  He submitted
    that the Appellant therefore has not come into a risk category in terms
    of the said case of GJ.  He submitted that the appellant is a  man  who
    had no high profile in the diaspora.  He was not a  journalist  and  he
    will not be at risk on return.  The judge made it clear  that  she  did
    not believe the Appellant's evidence and noted that the  Appellant  had
    left Sri Lanka on his own passport.  The judge  also  noted  that  this
    Appellant only claimed asylum when he was  encountered  and  there  are
    credibility issues under said Section 8.   The  Appellant  was  in  the
    United Kingdom for four years before he claimed.

15. I was referred to paragraph 19 of the  decision  which  refers  to  the
    Appellant not being involved with pro Tamil activities in the UK  until
    2014 despite having lived with Tamil people since he came to the United
    Kingdom.  At paragraph 21 the judge states that  there  is  a  lack  of
    credible evidence to support the Appellant's claim and at paragraph  26
    the judge states that she did not find the Appellant's evidence  to  be
    credible about his abduction and detention.  At paragraph 27 the  judge
    does not find the Appellant's explanation of failing  to  claim  asylum
    until 2014 to be plausible.   The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that
    there is no real risk of persecution to this Appellant on return to Sri
    Lanka and I was again referred to headnote 7 in the case  of  GJ.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that the Appellant would have had to  play
    a significant role in his activities against  the  authorities  in  Sri
    Lanka to come under this risk category and his sur place activities are
    clearly not enough, based on paragraph 351 of the said case of GJ.

16. With regard to the  Appellant  returning  and  being  perceived  to  be
    involved in Tamil separatism, again the judge does not accept this  and
    the  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the  judge  has   considered
    everything that was before her and come to the correct conclusion based
    on the country guidance case.  I was asked to find  that  there  is  no
    material error of law in the judge's decision.

17. Counsel submitted that the Appellant's explanation of why  he  did  not
    claim asylum earlier is perfectly plausible and the decision  does  not
    make it clear that the judge has considered all the  headnotes  in  the
    said case of GJ.  She submitted that if the appellant is  returned  and
    falls into the hands of the security forces he will be tortured,  based
    on the objective evidence.

18. Counsel submitted that the judge found the Appellant's account  not  to
    be credible and finds that the fact that a bribe was paid  and  he  was
    released from detention means he will not be at risk but she  submitted
    that that is not the case as he could be thought of as having  escaped.
    She submitted also that if the Appellant is found to be from  a  family
    who have money this could put the Appellant in danger as his guards may
    well be seeking bribes for themselves.

19. Counsel submitted that what has to  be  considered  are  the  different
    backgrounds and cultures and what  may  seen  rational  in  the  United
    Kingdom is not necessarily rational in a country like Sri  Lanka.   She
    submitted that the Appellant is not claiming that he was very prominent
    but  he  has  been  involved  in  sur  place  activities  against   the
    authorities in Sri Lanka since 2014 and I was asked  to  find  that  he
    would be at risk on return.  I was asked to allow this appeal.

Decision and Reasons

20. The First-tier Judge's decision in this case is  based  on  a  lack  of
    credibility.  The judge has properly considered the said case of GJ and
    Others and she has noted many credibility factors  in  the  Appellant's
    evidence.

21. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2011 but he did  not  claim
    asylum until 2014 when he was encountered.  This was in spite of having
    lived with Tamil people since he came to the United  Kingdom.   It  was
    only in 2014 that he started  his  sur  place  activities  against  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka.  These activities are low level at best.

22. After the Appellant was released from detention he continued to live in
    Sri Lanka for more than a year and he left  Sri  Lanka  using  his  own
    passport.  He only applied for asylum after his  leave  was  curtailed.
    The judge clearly finds that he does not  fit  into  any  of  the  risk
    categories referred to in the said case of GJ and the judge finds it to
    lack credibility that if he only carried out minor activities  in  2006
    he would be detained and abducted and beaten in 2010.

23. At paragraph 24 the judge refers to the lack of documentation provided,
    particularly relating to  the  appellant's  injuries  and  any  medical
    treatment received. She finds that the medical report from Dr Vig  does
    not support the Appellant's account of his detention and beatings.

24. The Appellant states that his family have been  frequently  visited  by
    the authorities in Sri Lanka but as the judge found  the  Appellant  to
    lack credibility this was not believed.

25. The judge has clearly considered all of the evidence before her.   Shee
    has considered the country guidance case  of  GJ  and  Others  and  for
    reasons given in the decision has found that this Appellant is not in a
    risk category and will not be at real risk if he  is  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka today.  He came to the UK to study and has  been  here  for  five
    years.  His family is living in Sri Lanka and the  judge  finds,  again
    based  on  what  was  before  her,  that  there  are   no   exceptional
    circumstances in this claim and for proper reasons  has  dismissed  the
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

26. There is no material error of law in the First-tier  Judge's  decision,
    promulgated in September 2016, and this decision must stand.

27. Anonymity has not been directed.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray         7 December 2016



