
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10353/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd June, 2013                            |On 4th July 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                              BEHNAZ BOROOMAND

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran, who was born on 28th  April,  1979.
    She, her husband and their son are all present in the  United  Kingdom.
    The appellant's husband  and son are her dependants.   On 4th December,
    2012, the respondent refused to vary leave and decided  to  remove  the
    appellant.

2.   In a notice dated 4th December, 2012, addressed to  the  appellant  the
    Secretary of State said:

         "On 19th April, 2011 you were granted leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom until 16th May,  2012  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  dependant
         partner.  You applied on 26th November 2011 under paragraph 327  of
         HC 395 as amended the Immigration Rules for variation of your leave
         to enter or remain in the United Kingdom on  the  grounds  that  it
         would be contrary to the UK's obligations under the United  Nations
         Convention and Protocol relating to the status of refugees for  you
         to be removed from or required to leave the United  Kingdom  but  I
         have refused your application under paragraph 336, your  claim  for
         asylum has been recorded as determined on  29th  October  2012.   I
         have considered whether you should be granted asylum in the  United
         Kingdom in accordance with paragraph 334 but  I  am  not  satisfied
         that you meet the criteria. I also consider whether you  should  be
         granted humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom in accordance
         with paragraph 339C but I am not satisfied you  meet  the  criteria
         and have also refused your application under paragraph  339F.  Your
         application has been recorded as being determined on  29th  October
         2012."

3.   The appellant appealed that refusal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark-Bell heard her appeal on 17th  December,
    2012.  In his  determination  promulgated  on  3rd  January,  2013,  he
    dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian
    protection  grounds,  and  on  human  rights  grounds  and  under   the
    Immigration Rules.

4.   The appellant's husband applied for a Tier 4 (General) Student visa  on
    19th April, 2011, in Abu Dhabi and on the same date the  appellant  and
    her  son  also  applied  for  visas  as  dependants  on  her  husband's
    application.  All three were granted a one year  visa  from  29th  May,
    2011, to 16th May, 2012, and left Iran on 12th June, 2011, arriving  in
    the United  Kingdom  on  the  same  day.   They  travelled  on  Iranian
    passports which had been issued with leave to enter visas which allowed
    them to enter and reside in the UK for twelve months.

5.   The appellant subsequently claimed asylum on 23rd September, 2011,  and
    her son and her husband were dependants.  The reasons why the appellant
    claimed asylum are set out at some length in the Secretary  of  State's
    letter addressed to the  appellant  dated  29th  October,  2012.    She
    qualified  as  a  lawyer  in  Iran  and  became  associated   with   an
    organisation  known  as  "Defending  Prisoners'  Rights"   and   as   a
    consequence, she was involved in what the Iranian authorities  regarded
    as being, political cases. As a result, she was on two occasions called
    to security officers and was warned not  to  involve  herself  in  such
    cases in the future. She was threatened that her husband  and  her  son
    may come to harm and her office may be closed down, should  she  ignore
    that advice.   The appellant responded by  indicating  that  she  would
    continue to take on such cases.

6.   While she was in the United Kingdom she contacted a  former  colleague,
    who is a prominent human rights lawyer in Iran, who told her  that  the
    media agent of  Defending  Prisoners'  Rights  had  been  arrested  and
    confessed  to  having  been  a  member   of   the   Mujahedeen   Khalid
    organisation, and that the authorities in Iran had  evidence  that  she
    was involved with him.  She decided to claim asylum.

7.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, the judge  appears
    to  have  assumed  that  the  appellant  represented  a  client  called
    'Gambari', a political prisoner, and assumed that she appeared in court
    on his behalf.    The  Immigration  Judge  makes  various  findings  in
    relation to credibility based on this assumption.

8.   There were two challenges  to  the  judge's  determination.  The  first
    relates to the alleged misunderstanding of the evidence before  him  in
    respect of the appellant's role with the political prisoner Mr Gambari,
    and the second alleges that there was an  error  in  that  issues  were
    raised during the course of  the  hearing  about  the  quality  of  the
    interpretation being provided by the interpreter.

9.   At paragraphs 11 and 12 of  the  determination,  the  judge  deals  the
    quality of the interpretation being provided by  the  interpreter.   He
    points out  that  Counsel  had  informed  him  that  a  friend  of  the
    appellant, who was in the hearing, was concerned that  the  interpreter
    may have inaccurately interpreted a phrase or words  for  qualification
    and graduation.  The Immigration Judge had earlier received indications
    that dates being translated from the Persian calendar or the  Gregorian
    calendar also contained errors and  after  hearing  representatives  he
    proposed and they agreed over a lunch time adjournment that they  would
    identify the errors. The representatives, he  records,  were  confident
    that they could do so. After the hearing resumed they  identified  what
    he described as being a small number of minor  inaccuracies  where  the
    preceding month or the following month had  been  given.   He  recorded
    that he had noted the corrections in red in his notes and informed  the
    representatives  that  he  believed  those  errors  to  be  minor   and
    inconsequential.

10.  Mr Brown appeared on behalf of the appellant and the  Home  Office  was
    represented by Mr Clive Dewison.  Mr Dewison told me that  he  accepted
    that there was evidence that the judge had misunderstood  the  evidence
    before him and that this amounted to a material error of law.  Mr Brown
    invited me to remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  the
    powers in Section 12(2B)(ii) of the 2007 Act and Mr Dewison was content
    that the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

11.  I am satisfied that this is a case which falls to be  within  paragraph
    7 of the  Senior President's Practice Statement, given  the  length  of
    time the parties will have to wait for the matter to be relisted before
    me in North Shields or Field House and  that  it  could  conversely  be
    heard relatively speedily by the First-tier Tribunal, and  in  view  of
    the overriding objective informing the onwards conduct of the appeal  I
    decided that the appeal be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Mark-
    Bell. I have marked the file but it is important that when  the  matter
    is reheard the Farsi  interpreter  should  not  be  Mrs  Pourmirza  the
    interpreter who appeared previously.
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
