
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10605/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2016                    |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                            mr thanusan thayalan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by Jacobs & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, Mr Thanusan Thayalan, a citizen of Sri  Lanka,  appealed
    against the refusal  of  the  Respondent  to  grant  him  international
    protection.  His ensuing appeal was heard at Taylor House  on  24  June
    2015  by  Judge  Bart-Stewart.   Both  parties  were  represented,  the
    Appellant by Counsel.  In a decision of  21  July,  promulgated  on  11
    August, 2015, the appeal was dismissed on political, asylum and Article
    8 human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was refused to the Appellant on 7  September  2015
    by  Judge  Astle,  essentially  on  the  basis  that  the   application
    represented disagreement with the judicial findings.  It was granted on
    second application on 12 October 2015 by Judge Perkins in the following
    terms:

         "1   I have given permission on each ground.

         2    It may well be that the First-tier Tribunal  gave  no  express
             consideration to a letter from  'Minnalkili'  and  no  express
             consideration to sur-place activities.   The  grounds  do  not
             refer expressly to the sources  of  these  arguments  and  the
             Applicant must  be  able  to  explain  clearly  to  the  Upper
             Tribunal how the points were raised before the First-tier  and
             how  the  failure  to  consider  them    (assuming   that   is
             established) is material.  Even if they  are  material  errors
             they may be errors that are easy to correct.

         3    The criticism that the First-tier Tribunal wrongly decided  to
             disbelieve the appellant before considering the medical report
             is potentially a serious error.  I am far from satisfied  that
             a fair reading of the Decision requires  a  finding  that  the
             judge erred as alleged but the point is reasonably arguable".

3.   The Respondent submitted  a  Rule  24  response  on  20  October  2015,
    essentially submitting that the judge had given a  clear  and  reasoned
    approach to the evidence and had reached findings which  were  open  to
    her from it.

4.   The Appellant, accompanied by his  aunt,  attended  the  error  of  law
    hearing, which took the form of submissions.  Explaining that  she  had
    only recently been  instructed,  Miss  Jegarajah  submitted  additional
    grounds, to which Mr Norton raised no objection and which I admitted.

Decision

5.   When he arrived in the  UK  the  Appellant  was  aged  14.   The  judge
    recognised in her decision that aspects of his  asylum  interview  were
    unsatisfactory.  In the Refusal Letter  the  Respondent  accepted  some
    aspects of his claim.

6.   The central submission was that in considering the claim the judge  had
    not recognised nor therefore given due weight to  the  significance  to
    the claim of  the  Appellant's  family.   Within  the  LTTE  they  were
    regarded as a Heroes Family and a family of  prominent  martyrs.   Such
    families were held up as inspirational role  models  within  the  LTTE.
    The authorities knew of this family connection.  When they  interviewed
    the Appellant in detention they questioned him whether he was  a  tiger
    cub and whether he  was  helping  to  rebuild  the  LTTE.   His  family
    connection contributed to the ill-treatment  to  which  they  subjected
    him.  In post conflict Sri Lanka it was enough for them to treat him as
    hostile  to  the  unitary  state.   The  failure  to   appreciate   the
    significance of this connection fed into  the  assessment  of  risk  in
    terms of  the  risk  categories  in  GJ  and  Others  (Post-civil  war:
    Returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).  In finding that it  was
    implausible that the Appellant would have been released from  detention
    on payment of a bribe, the judge did not have regard to the findings to
    the contrary at paragraphs 146 and 275 of GJ.

7.   It is also submitted that, in rejecting at  paragraph  37  the  medical
    report for want of corroborative evidence, the judge erred in law.

8.   The judge did refer to the Appellant's family at paragraphs 40 and  48.
     However this was in terms of there having been  nothing  to  link  the
    Appellant to relatives who had been killed fifteen or twenty years ago.
     To have stated that they  did  not  bear  the  same  family  name  was
    erroneous, as Sri Lankan family names do not work in this way.

9.   The permission application can be considered to represent  disagreement
    with the judicial findings, and the Respondent so  argued.   However  I
    have concluded that the  core  of  the  Appellant's  narrative  is  his
    membership of a high profile LTTE family.  This fact was known  to  the
    authorities, who interrogated him about it.  It contributed to his ill-
    treatment, and contributes to  the  assessment  of  risk.   It  was,  I
    conclude,  accorded  insufficient  weight.   The   rejection   of   the
    Appellant's  evidence  was  compounded  by  the  error   of   requiring
    corroborative evidence  of  the  medical  report.   These  errors  were
    material, because they were capable of affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

10.  I accordingly conclude that the decision must  be  set  aside  and  the
    appeal reheard.  In this event both parties agreed that  it  should  be
    reheard in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

11.  The original determination contained an error of law and is set aside.

12.  The appeal is to be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor  House
    by any judge other than Judge Bart-Stewart.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Dated: 11 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
