

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10111/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 13 January 2017                            |On 20 January 2017           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                    B. B.
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B. Bundock, counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb,
solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz  who,  by  a  determination
      promulgated on 4 October 2016, dismissed his appeal against a decision
      of the respondent, made on 30 June 2015, to refuse his application  on
      asylum and human rights grounds. This  is  the  second  occasion  upon
      which the appeal  has  come  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  first
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal was found to disclose legal  error
      material to the outcome of the appeal and so was  set  aside  and  the
      appeal remitted to be determined afresh. The appeal came before  Judge
      Aziz on 20 September 2015.

   2. The  parties  are,  of  course,  well  aware  of  the  detail  of  the
      appellant's  claim.  The  following  brief  summary  was  set  out  at
      paragraph 2 of the  appellant's  grounds  for  seeking  permission  to
      appeal:


           "The appellant is a 18-year-old national of Albania. He  entered
           the UK on 19 June 2014 aged 16, and claimed asylum the following
           day. He did so on the basis that  he  fears  persecution  and/or
           harm for reasons of (a) his membership of  a  particular  social
           group, (i) as a member of his family  which  is  involved  in  a
           blood feud and (ii) as  a  member  of  the  "Jevg"  ("Egyptian")
           ethnic minority; and/or (b) his race."


      At paragraphs 6-22 of his decision the judge summarised the  claim  as
      it was advanced before him. The appellant spoke of being  bullied  and
      beaten up when at school on account of being of  the  Jevg  tribe.  At
      home, his father drank heavily and was  abusive  towards  his  mother.
      About two years ago she left the family home  so  that  the  appellant
      remained under the sole care  of  his  father  and,  after  2014,  the
      appellant was taken out of school and worked full time with his father
      at their market  stall.   There  were  problems  with  a  wealthy  and
      influential family, the Kasemis, who had taken over the running of the
      market. The appellant's father was moved to a less advantageous  pitch
      in the market. The appellant described how there was a "hate campaign"
      against them and the authorities would do nothing to  help.  In  April
      2014 the appellant said he was attacked in the market by Arjan Kasemi,
      after which he needed hospital treatment. A few days after that  Arjan
      assaulted the appellant's  father  who,  seeking  to  defend  himself,
      stabbed and killed Arjan. This, said the  appellant  gave  rise  to  a
      blood feud and as he  was  now  16  he  was  a  potential  target  for
      retribution. His father arranged an agent to bring  the  appellant  to
      the United Kingdom, concealed in the back of a lorry, where he claimed
      asylum soon after arrival


   3. The judge dismissed the appeal because he did not accept  to  be  true
      any part of the appellant's account of the experiences in Albania upon
      which he relied in advancing his asylum claim. Nor did he accept  that
      the appellant's account of his  journey  to  the  United  Kingdom  was
      accurate or reliable. The judge accepted that the appellant was of the
      Jevg  minority  ethnic  group  and   that   he   may   have   suffered
      discrimination and bullying at school on that  account.  Although  the
      judge recognised that the appellant had given a consistent account  of
      the events he said gave rise to a blood feud, the judge did not accept
      that account to be true. It is, therefore, wholly incorrect to say, as
      did First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford in granting permission  to  appeal,
      that Judge Aziz had found the appellant's  account  of  a  blood  feud
      credible up until the point where the  appellant  separated  from  his
      father in Albania and was put in the care of an agent. Having set  out
      his adverse credibility findings, the clear overall  finding  of  fact
      made by the judge was precisely to the contrary (at paragraph 79):


           "Looking at all of the evidence in the round, I  find  that  the
           multiple  adverse  findings  which  I  have  made  against   the
           appellant so materially undermine  his  credibility,  that  even
           applying the lower standard of proof, I am not persuaded that he
           has discharged the burden of proof  upon  him  and  that  he  is
           indeed the victim of a blood feud."


   4. For the appellant, Mr Bundock, who also appeared before the First-tier
      Tribunal, pursued three grounds of appeal:


     1) The reasons given  by  the  judge  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
        account of a blood feud having arisen are inadequate or  irrational
        and so legally flawed;
     2) Similarly, the judge gave  inadequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
        claim to be at risk on the basis of Jevg ethnicity;
     3) The consideration of the appellant's claim under Article 8  of  the
        ECHR was inadequate and so legally deficient.


   Ground 1: rejection of the appellant's account of a blood feud:

   5. The main thrust of this complaint is that the judge made unjustifiable
      assumptions   about   plausibility   of   the   appellant's   account,
      impermissibly imposing his own standards on how he  thought  a  person
      such as the appellant's father would conduct himself in  Albania:  see
      HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 and Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223. That
      guidance is familiar and well known and there is no need to  reproduce
      it here.


   6. First,  and  importantly,  the  judge  began  his  assessment  of  the
      appellant's evidence by reminding himself, at paragraph 62,  that  the
      events about which the appellant was giving evidence occurred when  he
      was a minor, as was the case when he was interviewed about his  claim.
      However, the judge found wholly lacking in credibility the appellant's
      account of his father leaving his son alone after the blood  feud  had
      said to have arisen on the basis that they would all be killed if they
      remained together. The judge  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's
      father would consider that the appellant would be more safe if he  did
      not remain in the company  of  either  himself  of  his  brother,  the
      appellant's uncle. Nor did  the  judge  accept  that  the  appellant's
      father would have left him without warning nor that his  father  would
      go to the trouble and expense of  arranging  an  agent  to  bring  the
      appellant to the United Kingdom without making any arrangements at all
      to maintain contact. The  appellant's  account  of  his  journey  made
      little sense and the appellant said both  that  he  was  and  was  not
      fingerprinted in France and that he did and  did  not  seek  to  claim
      asylum in Spain.


   7. In short, the judge found the whole of the appellant's account  to  be
      lacking in credibility, even if he had been consistent to some  extent
      in setting out that claim


   8. There is, though, nothing irrational about these findings of fact.  In
      any event, there was nothing to support the asserted risk of  multiple
      members of the family being killed because of the  blood  feud,  which
      would be specifically directed, if it existed, at  extracting  revenge
      from a single victim (see, e.g. EH (blood  feuds)  Albania  CG  [2012]
      UKUT 00348 (IAC). The grounds seek to  explain  the  lack  of  concern
      shown by the appellant's father on the basis that "his  father  was  a
      heavy drinker who had mistreated him throughout his childhood, beating
      him with  fists,  slaps  and  belt.  The  appellant's  father  was  an
      uneducated and abusive Albanian man, who had a drinking problem".  But
      the judge was plainly entitled to consider that was simply  impossible
      to reconcile with  the  account  of  the  appellant's  father,  having
      separated from the appellant, should have  gone  to  the  trouble  and
      expense of funding an agent to bring him to the United  Kingdom.  This
      does not establish that the judge was imposing his  own  standards  of
      behaviour, informed by his own experiences of  living  in  the  United
      Kingdom, upon the appellant and his father and how  he  expected  they
      would act in Albania. The judge had to  make  what  he  could  of  the
      evidence as  a  whole  and,  having  heard  oral  evidence  from  then
      appellant, he was best placed to do so. These findings  of  fact  were
      clearly open to the judge and he made no error of law in  arriving  at
      them.


   Ground 2:  the appellant's ethnicity


   9. The grounds complain that the judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
      appellant's account of "past mistreatment as a serious indication of a
      real risk of future mistreatment" and that he failed to  consider  the
      relevant country information. But the evidence was that the  appellant
      had attended school, even if he had  experienced  some  bullying,  and
      that his family had adequate housing and  his  father's  market  stall
      business provided for their economic needs, even generating  funds  to
      provide for an agent to bring the appellant to the United Kingdom.  It
      may well be that the appellant was withdrawn from school  before  that
      was inevitable because of age, but that is something  that  occurs  in
      many families in Albania, not just those  of  ethnic  minorities  (see
      e.g. the country report at page 20 of the  appellant's  bundle  before
      the First-tier Tribunal : "Many children left school earlier than  the
      law allows to work with their families, particularly in rural areas").
      As the judge had rejected as untrue the  appellant's  account  of  the
      events that had  led  him  to  leave  Albania,  the  appellant's  case
      disclosed noting even approaching a viable submission of being at risk
      on return of persecutory ill-treatment on account of his ethnicity.


  10. It is not arguable that  the  judge  had  no  regard  to  the  country
      evidence submitted because at paragraph 35 of his judgment  the  judge
      makes clear he  has  seen  that  country  evidence  and,  indeed,  the
      skeleton argument identifying the parts of the evidence relied upon by
      the appellant. Given the core findings of fact, it was  not  necessary
      for the judge to discuss that evidence in detail in his  judgment.  It
      was plainly open to  the  judge,  on  the  evidence,  to  conclude  at
      paragraph 81 of his judgment:


           "There is nothing within the country  evidence  relied  upon  to
           indicate that a person from the minority Jevg  community  is  at
           real risk of ill-treatment in Albania that would  engage  either
           Convention solely on the basis of their ethnic background. There
           is simply a lack of evidence to support the assertion that  such
           a fear is well founded."


      It is of some significance  that  in  his  submissions  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal Mr Bundock did not seek to identify any part of that  country
      evidence that indicated the contrary. In the  grounds  an  extract  is
      reproduced to the effect that "there have been reports" of significant
      discrimination against  members  of  the  Romani  and  Balkan-Egyptian
      communities so that some experienced exclusion  or  discrimination  in
      access to housing, health care, education and employment, etc, but the
      appellant's family, as I have observed, had adequate housing and self-
      employment and the appellant  had  access  to  education  even  if  he
      experienced some bullying. There was no suggestion that he experienced
      discrimination in access to healthcare, as the evidence suggested some
      Romai did,  as  he  himself  described  receiving  hospital  treatment
      without experiencing difficulties in accessing it.

Ground 3: the Article 8 claim:

  11. The grounds express criticism of the brevity of the assessment carried
      out by the judge of the article 8 claim and complain  that  the  judge
      failed to take account  of  the  appellant's  youth  and  his  adverse
      experiences in Albania. He might be said not to have been "integrated"
      in Albania because of discriminatory exclusion from  society  that  he
      experienced. This ground, though, fails  for  the  same  reasons.  The
      judge has  rejected  the  core  of  the  appellant's  account  of  his
      experiences in Albania  and  the  appellant's  own  account  does  not
      disclose  discriminatory  exclusion  from  housing,   healthcare,   or
      economic activity, even if he did describe difficulties encountered in
      so doing. Even if the appellant, as a member of an ethnic minority  on
      Albania, might face challenges not experienced  by  citizens  who  are
      not, the claim  that  on  that  account  there  are  very  significant
      obstacles to integration into his country of nationality on return  is
      a quite hopeless one that has  no  prospect  whatever  of  succeeding.
      There is no other basis upon which the appellant's article 8 claim can
      be considered viable or even arguable and so the judge was entitled to
      dispose of that briefly and in so doing made no error of law.

Summary of decision:

  12. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made no  material  error  of  law
      error of law and his decision to dismiss the appeal shall stand

  13. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 19 January 2017

