

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10357/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29th June 2015                             |On 30th June 2015            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR. KHANAYA THAYAKARAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Carine Patry, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood;  Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Asjad promulgated on 11th March 2015, in which she dismissed an  appeal
    against a decision  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  an
    application for asylum, and to remove the appellant from the UK by  way
    of directions under s10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ievins on
    9th April 2015.  The matter comes before us to consider whether or  not
    the determination by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Morris  involved  the
    making of a material error of law.

    Background

 3. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national who claimed asylum on account of
    his imputed political opinion, namely that he was a member of the LTTE.



 4. Five days before the  hearing  of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  the  appellant's  former   representatives,   Messrs.   Jein
    Solicitors wrote to the  Tribunal  requesting  an  adjournment  of  the
    hearing on the basis that the appellant's brother-in-law was  scheduled
    to have an asylum interview on 13 February 2015.  It was said that this
    was potentially relevant to the appellant's claim. That application was
    refused on 12th February 2015.

 5. The appellant attended the hearing of his appeal on 16th February  2015
    alone.  Enquiries made by  the  Tribunal  of  Messrs.  Jein  Solicitors
    established that although the firm still represented at the  appellant,
    no one from that firm could attend the hearing of the appeal because no
    caseworker was available.   The  Tribunal  was  asked  to  adjourn  the
    hearing to another date to enable the firm to represent the  appellant.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge put the matter back to the afternoon,  to
    allow the appellant to speak to  his  representatives  and  to  arrange
    representation.  When the matter  was  called  on  again  at  2pm,  the
    appellant renewed his application for an adjournment on the basis  that
    he was not feeling  well   and  that  he  had  'lost  his  head'.   The
    appellant was concerned that not only had he been let down by his legal
    representatives but that his witnesses had also  not  attended.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Asjad refused the application for  an  adjournment,
    and proceeded to hear the appeal.

 6. In her determination, First-tier Tribunal Judge Asjad records;

         "... Fairness in this case meant fairness in  the  proceedings  and
         not simply  to  the  appellant.   I  took  into  account  that  the
         unsuccessful application  for  an  adjournment  had  been  for  the
         purpose of awaiting the outcome of the  brother-in-law's  case  and
         not on the basis that the expert report or other evidence  was  not
         ready.  I explained my decision to the appellant who indicated that
         he would not answer any questions because he was not in a state  of
         mind to do so..";  [11]

 7. In the absence of any further evidence, First-tier Tribunal Judge  went
    on to make findings as to the appellant's membership of the  LTTE,  his
    arrest and detention and his Article 8 claim.  The appeal was dismissed
    on all grounds.

The Grounds of appeal

 8. The grounds of appeal  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  are  two-fold.
    First,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  acted  unfairly  in  all  the
    circumstances in failing to grant the appellant an adjournment. Second,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to take into account two  material
    factors in reaching her decision.  That  is,  the  risk  faced  by  the
    appellant, namely that he continued to be of interest to the Sri Lankan
    authorities because of his  involvement  with  his  brother-in-law  and
    second, the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to deal with the  separate
    risk category arising from the appellant's diaspora activities.

Discussion

 9. We have a considerable degree of sympathy with the  position  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge found herself  in,  at  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal. The matters that are set out at paragraphs [2] to  [9]  of  the
    determination  raise  serious  concerns  about  the  conduct   of   the
    appellant's former representatives and the unfortunate predicament that
    they left both the Tribunal  and  the  appellant  in.   It  is  readily
    understandable in light of the background set out, that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge may have considered that a deliberate attempt was  being
    made  to  delay  the  hearing  of  the  appeal  after  an  unsuccessful
    application for an adjournment had been made.

10. Rule 2 The Tribunal Procedure Rules (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 sets out the  overriding  objective  and
    the parties' obligation to cooperate with the Tribunal.   Unfortunately
    the appellant's former representatives failed to have any regard at all
    to their professional obligations.  The  overriding  objective  of  the
    rules is to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly  and  justly.
    Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes dealing with the case in
    ways which are  proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the  case,  the
    complexity of the issues, the anticipated costs and  the  resources  of
    the parties and of the Tribunal.  It  also  requires  the  Tribunal  to
    ensure, so far as practicable that the parties are able to  participate
    fully in the proceedings.

11.  The  conduct  of  the  appellant's  former  representatives  left  the
    appellant who was seeking to appeal a decision that refused a claim for
    asylum,  in a position where he had no choice but to attend the hearing
    of the appeal on his own. Neither the importance of the appeal for  the
    appellant, nor the fact that the appellant felt unable to take part  in
    the hearing of the appeal can be underestimated.   We  also  note  that
    the appellants witnesses had failed to attend the hearing and that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge records at [9] that;

         "... in answer to my question of  why  the  appellant  thought  his
         witnesses would  attend  the  future  hearing  when  they  had  not
         attended today's hearing, the appellants could give no reply.  This
         led me to conclude that they had been told not  to  attend  hearing
         because it would not be going ahead."

12. If it is correct that the appellant's witnesses had  been  informed  by
    the appellant's former representatives that they need  not  attend  the
    hearing of the appeal because it would not be going ahead, that  placed
    the appellant at a particular disadvantage.  The  appellant's  case  is
    that he continues to be of  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    because  of  his  involvement  with  his  brother-in-law.   One   might
    reasonably therefore expect that the appellant's  brother-in-law  would
    be called to give evidence. We note that the appellant's brother-in-law
    had attended the hearing before us today.

13. We were  informed  by  counsel  for  the  appellant  that  he  has  now
    instructed Messrs Kanaga Solicitors to act on his behalf  and  we  were
    shown a letter dated 9th March  2015  sent  by  the  appellant  to  his
    solicitors, in which he states  "...I  am  making  a  formal  complaint
    about Jein Solicitors to the Solicitors Regulation Authority."

14.  It  seems  to  us  that  the  conduct  of   the   appellant's   former
    representatives placed the  appellant  at  a  particular  disadvantage.
    The Tribunal should not be  railroaded  into  granting  an  adjournment
    unless the interest of justice and the demands of fairness  require  an
    adjournment in the particular circumstances.  We  do  however  consider
    that the background  to the application for an adjournment that is  set
    out in the determination, suggests that  it  was  the  conduct  of  the
    appellant's former representatives that placed  the  Tribunal  and  the
    appellant in particular difficulty.   Their conduct is now the  subject
    of a complaint to the Solicitors Regulation Authority.  It seems to  us
    that  against  the  particular  background  set  out,   the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in law in failing to grant an adjournment.

15.  We  allow  the  appeal  accordingly  on  the  grounds  of   procedural
    unfairness.  In the circumstances we do not need to consider the second
    of the appellants grounds of appeal.

Decision:

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error of law capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    decision.

17. We have carefully considered the appropriate course to take. Because of
    the procedural unfairness,  the matter should be remitted back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

18. During the course of the  hearing before us we were informed  that  the
    Secretary of State has made a decision upon the claim for  asylum  made
    by  the  appellant's  brother-in-law,  Mr  Sivarupan   Markandu   (born
    30.03.76).  The claim for asylum has been refused, and is  the  subject
    of an appeal before the First-tier Tribunal that  is  to  be  heard  at
    Taylor House on 21st August 2015 (AA/04962/2015).  We were informed  by
    counsel for the appellant that the appeal is ready for hearing. In  the
    circumstances we direct that the  hearing  of  the  appellant's  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal, be heard together with  the  appeal  of
    his brother-in-law.



Signed:     Date:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

