
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10048/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 June 2015                        |On 15 June 2015                     |
|Prepared on 10 June 2015               |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES


                                   Between

                                     S N
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers, Immigration Advice Centre Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Iran.  She  entered  the  UK  on  3
         September 2013 illegally, hidden in a lorry and claimed  asylum  by
         telephoning the police.

      2. On 6 November 2014 the Respondent refused  her  asylum  claim,  and
         made a decision to remove  her  to  Iran.  The  Appellant's  appeal
         against the removal decision was heard on 16 January 2015, and  was
         dismissed in a Decision promulgated on 30  January  2015  by  First
         Tier Tribunal Judge Hands. In the course of that Determination  the
         Judge made a series of  adverse  findings  of  fact,  rejecting  as
         untrue the Appellant's account of her experiences.

      3. First Tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted the Appellant  permission
         to appeal the decision on 25 February 2015.

      4. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24  Notice  dated  11  March  2015,
         opposing the appeal on the basis there was no error of law  in  the
         Judge's approach to the evidence.

      5. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Error of law?

      6. The Judge's  decision  is  probably  another  illustration  of  the
         dangers of the failure to properly proof read a draft. It is  quite
         clear that paragraph 29 has no place  in  any  decision  upon  this
         Appellant's circumstances. She did not enter the UK by air using  a
         forged passport, and she did not mislead Immigration Officers  upon
         entry. There has never been any evidence  before  the  Tribunal  to
         suggest that she did.  The  Judge's  apparent  reliance  upon  this
         mistaken account as damaging the Appellant's general credibility as
         a witness, and her reference to s8 of the 2004 Act as being engaged
         by this conduct, is in my judgement a clear error of law that  goes
         to the heart of her adverse credibility findings.

      7. There is a similar problem with paragraph 30 of the decision.  This
         refers to the Appellant as having claimed that her uncle  has  been
         responsible for the issue of a court order  against  her,  and  the
         Judge makes a finding to  the  effect  that  this  element  of  the
         account is not credible. No  such  claim  was  ever  part  of  this
         Appellant's account.

      8. There is also a further problem with  the  approach  taken  by  the
         Judge to the weight to be given to the evidence of  the  Appellant.
         In paragraph 25 the Judge comments adversely upon  the  failure  of
         the Appellant to provide corroboration of her account. Having noted
         that she was "presented with the Appellant's testimony and  nothing
         more" the Judge found the Appellant had not made a  genuine  effort
         to substantiate her claim. It is however very far from  clear  what
         issue, or element of her account, that the Judge was expecting  the
         Appellant to corroborate, or how she was expected by the  Judge  to
         do so. The Appellant had  offered  an  explanation  for  having  no
         identity documents in her possession, which turned upon her account
         of having been separated forcibly from her husband  by  traffickers
         during the course of her journey. If the Judge is to be taken to be
         rejecting that account  in  the  course  of  paragraph  25  of  the
         decision then she gives no reasons for doing so, and it is far from
         clear that she made any such finding. The Judge identifies no other
         documents that she finds the Appellant could reasonably be expected
         to have accessed and supplied using friends or family in Iran,  and
         no issue of disputed fact that they could have been relevant to.

      9. There are other criticisms of the Judge's approach, but these three
         criticisms are well made out, and  they  go  to  the  core  of  the
         Judge's analysis of the weight to give to the Appellant's evidence.
         I am satisfied that whether viewed individually,  or  cumulatively,
         they  are  such  as  to  render  the  decision  unsafe.  In   these
         circumstances the Appellant can have  little  confidence  that  her
         appeal was properly and fairly considered.

     10. I have in these circumstances considered whether or  not  to  remit
         the appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for  it  to  be  reheard,  as
         requested by the Appellant. In the circumstances of the appeal I am
         satisfied that this is the correct approach, and I note Mr  Mangion
         does not seek to suggest otherwise. In circumstances where it would
         appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been  considered
         by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that  error  of  law  has
         been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his case to be
         properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of
         the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover the extent of
         the judicial fact finding exercise is such that  having  regard  to
         the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should
         be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal;  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the
         Practice Statement of 25 September 2012.

     11. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of the parties I
         make the following directions;

          i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and  the  appeal  is
             remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. No findings
             of fact are preserved. The appeal is not to be  listed  before
             Judge Hands.

         ii) An Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required for the  hearing  of
             the appeal.

        iii) The Anonymity Direction previously  made  by  the  First  Tier
             Tribunal is preserved.

Decision


     12. The decision promulgated on 6 August 2014 did involve the making of
         an error of law sufficient to require it to be set  aside  and  the
         appeal to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the  appeal  is
         set aside and the appeal is remitted to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
         with the following directions;

          i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and  the  appeal  is
             remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. No findings
             of fact are preserved. The appeal is not to be  listed  before
             Judge Hands.

         ii) An Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required for the  hearing  of
             the appeal.

        iii) The Anonymity Direction previously  made  by  the  First  Tier
             Tribunal is preserved.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 10 June 2015
