
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10743/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|Oral determination given following   |On 26 November 2015                  |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 9 October 2015                    |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     fb
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hodson, Elder Rahimi Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against a  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Watt promulgated on 16 March 2015 in which
    the judge had allowed FB's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision  refusing  to  grant  her  either   asylum   or   humanitarian
    protection.

 2. For ease of reference I shall throughout this  determination  refer  to
    the Secretary  of  State  who  was  the  original  respondent  as  "the
    Secretary of State" and to FB who was the original  appellant  as  "the
    claimant".

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Iran who is 73 years old or certainly  was
    at the time of the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  is
    illiterate.  Having been granted a visit visa she claimed asylum whilst
    in this country.  The claim was based on her  fear  of  persecution  in
    Iran because she would be believed on return to have been  involved  in
    anti-regime activities.  The reason why she claimed  she  would  be  at
    risk is that following an inheritance dispute with her daughters  [and]
    her sons-in-law, both of whom were Revolutionary Guards, had fabricated
    allegations against  her.  The  determination  of  her  claim  depended
    essentially on  whether  or  not  her  account  was  considered  to  be
    plausible.

 4. The Secretary of State did not accept that her claim was plausible  and
    accordingly she refused  asylum  and/or  humanitarian  protection.  The
    claimant appealed against this decision  and  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 4 March 2015 her appeal succeeded.

 5. The Secretary of State was initially refused permission  to  appeal  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davidge  but  renewed  the  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and eventually  was  granted
    permission to appeal by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Chamberlain  on  3
    July 2015.

 6. In the grounds of appeal submitted to  the  Upper  Tribunal  there  are
    essential two grounds.  The first is that it is said that  Judge  Watts
    had made contradictory findings because, it is said,
         "At paragraph 35 [the judge had found] against the appellant on the
         matter of her sons'-in-laws employment with  Sepah  before  finding
         that the letter from the neighbour, in  which  the  same  claim  is
         repeated, was one on which he could  attach weight (paragraphs  54,
         59, 41)".

 7. The second ground was that in accepting the accuracy of the letter from
    the neighbour referred to above, the judge had failed  to  have  proper
    regard to the guidance given in Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] ImmAR  318,
    and he should not have accepted the veracity of that  document  without
    having regard to all the evidence in the round.

 8. Before us, on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  in  his  admirably
    concise submissions, Mr Kandola essentially relied  on  these  grounds.
    He first of all set out the Secretary of  State's  reasons  for  saying
    that the decision was not compliant with Tanveer Ahmed which  was  that
    if the judge had had reservations  about  the  evidence  given  by  the
    applicant he had to  reconcile  those  doubts  before  dismissing  them
    merely on the basis of the letter which he  accepted  as  genuine.   Mr
    Kandola also submitted that the judgment "required better reasoning and
    analysis" and that the findings were essentially so inconsistent as  to
    render the judgment itself arguably irrational, although he did not put
    it in quite those words.

 9. On behalf of the claimant Mr Hodson relies on a very  detailed  written
    argument which had been served on the Tribunal in good time before  the
    hearing and his arguments can be briefly  summarised  as  follows.  The
    judge had had full regard to various evidential difficulties which were
    apparent with the claimant's case.  There were some inconsistencies  in
    the evidence which was put forward on her  behalf  and  the  judge  had
    formed the view (see para 30) "that  some  of  her  evidence  might  be
    exaggerated".  The judge also  at  paragraph  34  had  expressed  "some
    doubts" about "the appellant's  version  that  she  was  taken  to  the
    village police station, shortly after she arrived back in Iran".

10. Then at paragraph 35 the  judge  expressed  "some  concern"  about  the
    claimant's evidence that "both her  sons-in-law  work  for  Sepah,  the
    Islamic Revolutionary Guard's corps".  The judge noted that  "It  would
    seem to me to be a considerable coincidence if two of  the  appellant's
    sons-in-law work for Sepah".

11. It is perhaps worth noting also however that the judge had "no concerns
    at all about the evidence of the appellant  concerning  there  being  a
    land dispute between herself and two of her daughters" and he  accepted
    the evidence of the claimant "that the  two  daughters  have  raised  a
    court action against her regarding the ownership of land formerly owned
    by the appellant's husband".  Also, at paragraph 37 the judge  accepted
    "completely" the evidence of the claimant that  there  is  currently  a
    land dispute ongoing between her daughters and  herself  regarding  the
    ownership of the land which formerly was owned by her  husband  and  in
    particular he also accepted her evidence "that she attended court on at
    least three occasions and was asked questions about that  land  dispute
    and also about whether or not she had forged a  signature".  The  judge
    then expressed some doubts as to the evidence given as to  the  precise
    questions she was asked in that court hearing.

12. Accordingly, the position absent the evidence  from  the  neighbour  to
    which I will turn in a moment is that part of the claimant's  case  was
    accepted but the judge had reservations as  to  whether  or  not  other
    parts of it might have been exaggerated  and  these  reservations  were
    fully and carefully considered.  However in addition to the  claimant's
    own evidence she produced a witness statement from  a  neighbour,  Miss
    Biroon, which was supportive of her case and which if true showed  that
    the claimant's house had been visited by a number  of  security  forces
    personnel who had "stated that [the claimant] is a  spy  and  an  anti-
    revolutionary and had fled to England for that  very  reason".   It  is
    also said in this statement that these personnel had "added that nobody
    was permitted to enter her house [and that] if [the  claimant]  returns
    to  Iran,  she  would  be  imprisoned  immediately   and   subsequently
    executed".

13. The claimant's representatives lodged a nationality  identity  card  of
    Miss Biroon with a photograph and her ID number in which  her  date  of
    birth was said to be 23 September 1953.  Although the judge noted there
    were inconsistencies in  how  these  documents  came  to  be  with  the
    claimant and lodged, which the judge referred to at paragraph  43,  and
    although there were concerns as to other parts of the evidence set  out
    in the following two paragraphs, nonetheless overall having  considered
    all the evidence before him including the witness statement, the  judge
    found that even though he did not accept all of the evidence  given  by
    the  claimant,  he  nonetheless  considered  that  there  was  a   real
    possibility that she would be at risk on return.

14. As he put it at paragraph 46 "I have to consider whether the  appellant
    has satisfied me on the lower standard of proof that there  is  a  real
    risk of persecution if she is returned to Iran" and with this  test  in
    mind he noted that the evidence from the neighbour was  accompanied  by
    her national identity card which showed that she was not  an  imaginary
    person, and he also had to have in mind (see paragraph  57)  "that  the
    appellant is old, uneducated, illiterate and anxious".

15. The judge had in mind "the considerable  country  information  that  is
    available regarding Iran and anti-regime activities" and in  particular
    that what he had to assess "is  not  whether  the  appellant  has  been
    involved in any  anti-regime  activities  but  the  perception  of  the
    Iranian authorities about this" (see paragraph 58).  He  accepted  that
    there was an ongoing property dispute between the claimant and  two  of
    her daughters and her sons-in-law and that "there  clearly  will  be  a
    motive for the daughters and sons-in-law to make allegations about anti-
    regime  activities  being  carried  out  by  the  appellant"  (also  at
    paragraph 58).

16. Accordingly the judge had set out the factors on  either  side  of  the
    scale, those which caused him to consider that the claimant may  be  at
    risk and those which suggested that her evidence might  be  exaggerated
    and that it might not be honest. As the judge  noted  at  paragraph  59
    "This is a difficult case" but he then went on to say that "It  is  one
    where I consider that the benefit of the doubt should be given  to  the
    appellant" and that he had "especially noted the witness statement from
    the neighbour who speaks to threats being made by the  security  forces
    when they visited the appellant's home to seal it up".

17. It seems to us that the judge directed himself properly as to the  test
    he had then to apply.  He considered all the difficulties in  the  case
    before deciding to accept the  evidence  of  the  witness  and  clearly
    considered all the evidence in the round before so doing.  While it may
    have been open to a different judge to reach a different conclusion  on
    the same evidence, it was this judge's task to consider  that  evidence
    and to decide on the basis of that evidence whether the claimant  would
    be at real risk on return.  His decision that she would be at  risk  on
    return is a decision that  was  open  to  him  on  the  evidence.   His
    findings are adequate  reasoned  and  it  follows  that  there  was  no
    material error of law within the determination.

18. Accordingly the Secretary of State's appeal against this decision  must
    be dismissed.

Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
decision refusing to grant her asylum is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  claimant's  appeal  is
affirmed.


Signed:

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 16 November 2015
