
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10083/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 April 2015                              |On 18 May 2015                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                   MS GSH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, Counsel instructed by Inayat Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and her date  of  birth  is  18
    August 1986.  She made an application for asylum which was  refused  by
    the Secretary of State in a decision of 4 November 2014.

2.   A decision was made to remove the appellant pursuant to Section  47  of
    the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.   The  appellant
    appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State and her  appeal
    was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Landes in a  decision
    that was promulgated on 22 January 2015.

3.   The appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  of  Judge  Landes  and
    permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cruthers in a decision of 23  February  2015.   Thus  the  matter  came
    before me.

4.   The appellant's case is that she worked for the HSBC in Sri  Lanka  and
    in 2008 she was approached by her brother-in-law and asked to open bank
    accounts for some of his friends.  She did what was  requested  of  her
    but it developed that her brother-in-law was a member of the  LTTE  and
    that he had provided to her  false  documents  in  order  to  open  the
    accounts.  The appellant came to the UK on 19 February 2011 in order to
    study.  Two weeks after her arrival her brother informed her  that  the
    CID had come to the house looking for her.  She was also  contacted  by
    her  sister,  in  India,  who  informed  her  that  her  husband   (the
    appellant's brother-in-law) was a member of the LTTE and  that  he  was
    wanted by the authorities which had led to them fleeing to India.   The
    appellant was contacted by her sister two weeks after  her  arrival  in
    the UK.

5.   The appellant returned to Sri Lanka  on  15  July  2012  when  she  was
    detained at the airport and subsequently  questioned  and  ill-treated.
    She was released as a result of the payment of a  bribe  and  fled  Sri
    Lanka with the assistance of an agent using her own passport.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The Secretary of State did  not  accept  the  appellant's  account  and
    raised a number of  credibility  issues  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter.  The appellant gave oral evidence at the hearing  before  Judge
    Landes.

7.   The Secretary of State accepted that the appellant  was  employed  with
    HSBC.  Judge Landes accepted the appellant's evidence  in  relation  to
    her role at the bank and found that it was plausible that the appellant
    would be involved in opening bank accounts.  At [39]  the  judge  found
    that "the only inconsistency  pointed  to  by  the  respondent  in  the
    Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  I  do  not  find  to  be  of  any   real
    significance".  The judge did not find it significant that there was  a
    difference in the reported length of detention at the  airport  in  the
    appellant's screening interview and her full asylum interview.

8.   The judge agreed with the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  appellant's
    credibility was damaged because she failed to claim asylum  for  almost
    two  years  on  return.   The  judge  did  not  find  the   appellant's
    explanation for this to be reasonable.

9.   At [46] the judge found that the appellant's claim that she was on  two
    years' study leave from HSBC is inconsistent with the letters that  the
    appellant submitted in support of her appeal, from the bank. The  judge
    explained this at [46].  The appellant's own evidence was  inconsistent
    with her claim to be on study leave.  The evidence that she produced in
    the way of letters from the bank established that she had  resigned  in
    February 2011.  The judge found  that  this  was  significant  at  [47]
    because the appellant explained that she had obtained  a  copy  of  her
    visa because the bank wanted to see it to approve her study  leave  and
    that was why her parents had a copy of it and therefore they were  able
    to show it to CID officers in order to prove  that  the  appellant  was
    indeed in the UK.

10.  The judge  found  at  [48]  that  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  was
    inconsistent in a number of respects.   First  the  appellant  was  not
    consistent in relation to the documentation given to her  in  order  to
    open the accounts at the bank.  In addition she was not  consistent  in
    relation to whether or not the CID officer who  according  to  her  had
    visited her parents had given reasons for making  enquiries  about  her
    whereabouts.

11.  The judge  went  on  to  find  at  [49]  implausible  features  of  the
    appellant's case.  The judge found it implausible in the  circumstances
    of the case that CID would not have questioned the appellant's  brother
    who is a customs officer at the  airport  considering  the  brother-in-
    law's activities.  The judge found it implausible  that  the  appellant
    did not seek to find out from her brother-in-law through her sister  in
    India the extent of his involvement with the LTTE and what exactly  the
    CID were likely to have discovered  about  the  accounts  because  this
    would have given her an  indication  of  the  likely  extent  of  their
    interest in her.  The judge noted that in oral evidence  the  appellant
    stated that an arrest warrant had been issued against her and she  knew
    this because her father had told her.  In her screening  interview  she
    indicated that she did not  know  if  she  was  subject  to  an  arrest
    warrant.  The judge found that given that the appellant's evidence  was
    that she is in regular contact with her parents it was implausible that
    the first mention of an arrest warrant would be  two  years  after  the
    appellant had been released from custody following a bribe.

12.  The appellant in her asylum interview indicated that her brother  works
    for Sri Lankan Airlines as a customs officer.   In  oral  evidence  she
    stated that her brother had lost the job  because  of  enquiries  as  a
    result of her activities.  She did not know, however, when he lost  his
    job.  Again, given the appellant's evidence that  she  was  in  regular
    contact with her family the judge found that it would  be  likely  that
    the appellant would have been  told  of  her  brother  losing  his  job
    relatively shortly after it happened and that it was  implausible  that
    if the appellant's brother's problems arose from the appellant  and  it
    would lead to his  dismissal  some  two  years  after  the  appellant's
    detention and flight from Sri Lanka.

13.  The judge went on at [50]  to  consider  general  plausibility  of  the
    appellant's account against the country guidance case of GJ and  others
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319.   She  did
    not find it plausible that the authorities would be interested  in  the
    appellant.

The Grounds Seeking Permission to Appeal and Oral Submissions

14.  The grounds are twofold.  First, it is  maintained  that  none  of  the
    inconsistencies raised by the judge in her determination  were  put  to
    the appellant at the hearing, Second, it is asserted that  the  judge's
    findings of implausibility are speculative  and  the  issues  were  not
    raised  in  the  refusal  letter.  The  appellant  was  not  given  the
    opportunity to respond to matters raised by the judge which resulted in
    procedural unfairness.

15.  I heard oral submissions from  both  representatives.   Mr  Aslam  made
    submissions in the context of the grounds of appeal.   Mr  Jarvis  made
    submissions in the context of the Section 24 response of 11 March 2015.
    He submitted the case of Y v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1223  and  SSHD  v
    Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173.

Conclusions

16.  There is no error of law established in the grounds  seeking  leave  to
    appeal.  Credibility was always in issue in this case.   The  Secretary
    of State did not accept the appellant's  claim  and  found  her  to  be
    lacking in credibility.  The appellant gave oral evidence.  Most of the
    matters on which the  judge  bases  adverse  credibility  findings  are
    grounded in the appellant's oral evidence.  The inconsistencies  raised
    by the judge are inconsistencies in the appellant's  own  evidence  and
    documentation  that  she  produced  in  support  of  her  appeal.   The
    appellant  was  represented  at  the  hearing  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.  The issues identified by the judge are  obvious  and  should
    have been contemplated by the representative on hearing the appellant's
    evidence unfold.  They are not obscure issues and they are not minor or
    peripheral but go to the heart of the appellant's case.

17.  It is a  matter  for  a  representative's  professional  judgment  what
    evidence is given in-chief and whether or not an appellant should be re-
    examined.  It is for the appellant (or her representative) to recognise
    inconsistencies and improbabilities in her account  and  to  deal  with
    them.  It was not for the judge to enter the  arena  and  cross-examine
    the appellant as the grounds seem to  suggest.  The  points  raised  by
    Judge Landes are obvious ones and it is not  made  out  that  they  are
    matters on which the appellant should have been cross-examined.  It has
    not been  shown  that  should  the  appellant  have  been  afforded  an
    opportunity to explain these points the answers  that  she  would  have
    given would have influenced the decision.

18.  The assessment of credibility may legitimately  involve  an  assessment
    of plausibility which is an aspect of credibility.  The judge considers
    plausibility in the context of the country guidance case of GS and  the
    situation generally in Sri Lanka.  Her findings are not speculative.

19.  The grounds of appeal amount to a disagreement  with  the  findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and an attempt to reargue the case.

20.  There is no error of law and the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 11May 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

