

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10659/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On Tuesday 12 July 2016                   |On Thursday 14 July 2016         |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between
                                  MRS R M N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Pennington-Benton, Counsel instructed by Duncan
Lewis & Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As this is a
protection based claim and in light of my decision, I consider it
appropriate that the anonymity direction is continued.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge R L Walker promulgated  on  14  March  2016  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 15 July 2015 rejecting her protection claim.


    2. The Appellant is from Uganda.  The background facts in  relation  to
       the Appellant's claim are set out in the Decision at [25]  to  [38].
       The Appellant was found not to be credible for reasons  set  out  at
       [49] to [53] of the  Decision.   This  followed  a  section  of  the
       Decision at [42] to [48] where the Judge deals with the  genuineness
       of a Ugandan court document on which the Appellant relies and  which
       is at the heart of the present challenge to the Decision.


    3. The main thrust of the challenge to the Decision is that  the  Judge
       failed  to  have  regard  to  an  expert  report  produced  on   the
       Appellant's behalf from Professor Aguilar which is said  to  support
       the  plausibility  of  her  account  as  well  as  to  support   the
       authenticity of the court document on which she relies.  It is  also
       argued that the Judge failed to have regard to  the  subjective  and
       objective evidence presented on the Appellant's behalf.


    4. Permission was granted mainly on those two grounds by Upper Tribunal
       Judge Reeds on 7 June 2016.  This matter comes before me  to  decide
       whether the Decision contains an error of law and if so  to  re-make
       the Decision or remit the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal for  re-
       hearing.


Submissions


    5. Mr Pennington-Benton expanded on the two grounds which I set out  at
       [2] above.  He pointed out that the expert report from [19]  onwards
       considers the background  evidence  which  mirrors  the  Appellant's
       evidence and is therefore corroborative of her account.  This report
       therefore needed to be taken into account.


    6. In relation to the court document, the expert says at [33] that  the
       document is plausible and is very probably authentic  although  does
       caveat that with the need for forensic examination.  Mr  Pennington-
       Benton submitted that consideration of the  report  could  therefore
       make a difference to the  credibility  findings  and  therefore  the
       outcome of the appeal.  Mr Pennington-Benton  also  submitted  that,
       although the Judge did deal with the additional evidence  supporting
       the authenticity of the court document, being a letter from a lawyer
       in Uganda who had produced the  document,  he  had  failed  to  give
       proper reasons for rejecting that letter as not genuine.


    7. Mr  Pennington-Benton  did  not  refer  me  to  specific  background
       evidence in support of the  Appellant's  case  but  submitted  that,
       since a volume of such material was  presented  on  the  Appellant's
       behalf, it was incumbent on  the  Judge  to  at  least  mention  the
       evidence relied upon.  I did note that there is  not  a  very  large
       bundle of such evidence in the  papers  before  me.   There  is  one
       bundle running to fifty pages and some additional  material  in  the
       second bundle.  It does not however appear quite as voluminous as Mr
       Pennington-Benton  submitted.   I  accept  however  that  there   is
       absolutely no mention of that material in the Decision.


    8. Mr Pennington-Benton also made submissions on the Appellant's  third
       ground which deals with what is said to be an increased risk arising
       from  the  Respondent's  enquiries  made   via   the   Foreign   and
       Commonwealth  Office  of  the  Ugandan   authorities   as   to   the
       authenticity of the court document on which  the  Appellant  relies.
       He pointed out that the Respondent has not produced the letter  sent
       to the Ugandan High Commission in Kenya.  There is therefore no  way
       of knowing whether  the  Appellant's  name  was  redacted  from  the
       document.  If it was not, it is said, this gives rise to a risk that
       the Ugandan authorities will target her on return.   Mr  Pennington-
       Benton therefore submitted that the Appellant has a sur place  claim
       arising from that risk. The Judge  has  failed  to  deal  with  this
       aspect of the claim.  In response to Mr Kotas' submission that  this
       did not form part of the Appellant's case as argued and as disclosed
       by the skeleton argument before Judge Walker, he pointed out that it
       was however contained in the Appellant's witness statement  and  the
       expert's report and as such it was incumbent on the  Judge  to  deal
       with it.


    9. In relation to this third ground, Mr Kotas also submitted  that  the
       increased risk asserted  is  speculative.   The  Appellant  has  not
       pointed to  any  evidence  to  support  a  claim  that  the  Ugandan
       authorities would be interested in her as a failed asylum seeker. It
       of course follows that this is what she would be perceived to be  if
       she were relying on a document from the  Ugandan  authorities  which
       they say is false.


   10. In relation to the first ground, Mr Kotas accepted  that  the  Judge
       has failed to deal with  Professor  Aguilar's  report.   He  made  a
       number of submissions about that report though which he said led  to
       the conclusion that this did not amount to a material error of law.


   11. He pointed out that the Judge was right to start with  the  evidence
       relied upon by the Respondent to show  that  the  document  was  not
       genuine.  This came from  the  Ugandan  authorities  themselves  and
       would therefore be persuasive.  He accepted  that  the  letter  from
       those authorities did not set out reasons why the document was  said
       to be a forgery.   However,  he  also  pointed  out  that  Professor
       Aguilar's expertise is  not  as  a  forgery  expert.   His  evidence
       amounts to an assertion that the document bears a stamp of the  sort
       commonly seen on court documents, in his experience.  However,  that
       experience dates back some twenty-six years to when  he  worked  for
       the Catholic Church in Kenya.  Leaving aside his lack of  expertise,
       Mr Kotas also submitted that it would be usual for a forged document
       to bear a resemblance at least to the genuine article.  There  would
       be little point in forging a document which would not be  likely  to
       be accepted as being genuine.  He also pointed out  that  the  Judge
       had considered the  Appellant's  credibility  on  a  "multi-faceted"
       basis so that the failure to consider  the  expert  report  was  not
       material to the adverse credibility findings.
   12. In relation to  the  second  ground,  Mr  Kotas  accepted  that  the
       background evidence  shows  that  there  is  corruption  in  Uganda.
       However, this case turns  on  credibility.   The  relevance  of  the
       background evidence is to the  facts  of  the  Appellant's  case  as
       found.  In circumstances where the Appellant has been found  not  to
       be credible, it is not relevant.  He also pointed out  that  nothing
       specific was highlighted by Mr Pennington-Benton as  being  material
       to the Appellant's case.


Decision and reasons


   13. I consider first the Judge's approach to the court document produced
       by the Appellant.  I agree with Mr Kotas that the starting point for
       the Judge's consideration was the letter of 11 June  2015  from  the
       Ugandan High Commission.  I accept Mr Pennington-Benton's point that
       this letter lacks reasons (and if  there  are  reasons  behind  that
       report then the Respondent should disclose those or  at  least  what
       she  is  able  to  disclose  without  causing  damage   to   forgery
       investigations).  Given the source of that  information,  the  Judge
       was clearly entitled to accept that the Respondent had satisfied any
       burden of showing that the document was forged.


   14. However, as the Judge rightly notes at [47] of  the  Decision,  that
       evidence is capable of rebuttal by the Appellant.  Whilst  I  accept
       Mr Kotas' point about the relevant expertise of Professor Aguilar in
       this context, it was not open to the Judge simply to state as he did
       that "[the Appellant] has produced no evidence  of  such  rebuttal".
       There is an error of  law  in  that  approach  as  indeed  Mr  Kotas
       accepted.


   15. As to materiality, this element of the Appellant's evidence needs to
       be linked to the other evidence on which she relied  in  support  of
       the authenticity of the document, namely the letter from M A Bwengye
       and Company.  On the face of this document, the court  document  was
       produced by a lawyer practising out of Kampala.  Whilst  it  is  not
       uncommon in this Tribunal's experience for  documents of this nature
       to be falsified, limited reasons are given for the rejection of that
       letter in this case at [48] of the Decision.  It  may  be  therefore
       that if that letter  is  considered  alongside  Professor  Aguilar's
       report, the result may be different.  I put it no higher  than  that
       and Mr Pennington-Benton did not submit that it would be conclusive.




   16. Further, and in any event, the report of Professor Aguilar does  not
       deal  simply  with  the  court  document.   He  also  analyses   the
       background evidence and the Appellant's claim and offers his view as
       to the plausibility of her account and the consistency of that  with
       the background evidence.  I accept that if the Judge had carried out
       that same exercise in relation to the  background  material  (or  at
       least that referred to in the skeleton argument) it might have  been
       difficult for the Appellant to complain.  However, the Judge did not
       do so.  A combination of the failure to refer to Professor Aguilar's
       report and a failure to independently consider the  plausibility  of
       the Appellant's account against that background evidence amounts  to
       an error of law.


   17. I do not need to deal with the third ground.  As Mr Kotas submitted,
       this was not the focus of the Appellant's case as argued before  the
       Judge.  The Appellant was legally  represented  and  the  fact  that
       evidence was produced to support this claimed  risk  does  not  mean
       that the Appellant wished to pursue it, absent submissions  to  that
       effect.  However, since I have found there to be an error of law and
       since the parties were agreed before me that, if  I  so  found,  the
       consequence should be a remittal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  I  do
       not  need  to  say  more.  If  the  Appellant  seeks  disclosure  of
       additional documents relating to this element of her case  from  the
       Respondent, that can be pursued following remittal.


   18. Mr Pennington-Benton and Mr Kotas both submitted that, if I were  to
       find a material error of law, then the proper  course  would  be  to
       remit to the First-tier Tribunal.  Having  regard  to  the  Practice
       Direction and since the  errors  of  law  which  I  have  found  may
       undermine the credibility findings at first instance, I am satisfied
       that this is the appropriate course. No findings are preserved.




    DECISION
      I am satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of law.  The
      Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge R L Walker is  set  aside.   The
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing  by  a
      different Judge.
      Signed           [pic] Date 13 July 2016


      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
