
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10705/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination sent         |
|on 3rd June 2013                                |on 5th June 2013           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           ALIREZA GHASr loghmAny

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr G P McGowan, of Quinn Martin & Langan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on  1st  September  1988.   He
    sought asylum when encountered by  police  on  arrival  in  the  UK  in
    October 2012.  He based his claim on conversion to Christianity.

 2. For reasons explained  in  a  letter  dated  14th  November  2012,  the
    Respondent did  not  find  it  credible  that  the  Appellant  had  any
    involvement in Christianity, or that he was  detained  by  the  Iranian
    authorities as a result.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  by
    determination promulgated on 21st January 2013.  Unlike the Respondent,
    the judge accepted that the  Appellant  is  a  Christian  convert.   At
    paragraph 39, the judge found that while the  Appellant  had  not  been
    involved  in  evangelism,  he  had  discussed  Christianity  and   that
    information might have become available to the authorities, leading  to
    their interest in him.  However, at paragraph 42, he concluded that the
    Appellant "... was of no significant interest  to  the  authorities  as
    claimed".  The  judge  considered  FS  and  others  (Iran  -  Christian
    converts) Iran CG [2004] UKIAT 00303 at paragraph 44.   He  quoted  the
    guidance that proselytisers, evangelists and church leaders would be at
    real risk of persecution, with  the  risk  increasing  the  higher  the
    profile and role.  He continued:

         The Appellant was not a church leader, a  proselytiser  or  a  high
         profile evangelist in Iran and has not sought to be so in  the  UK.
         He has produced little evidence that he has a prominent role in the
         Church of Scotland or that he feels compelled to share  or  expound
         his beliefs with others.  I consider that  the  Appellant  can  and
         will behave in a cautious and in a quiet manner if ... returned ...
         [he] will be  able  to  practise  his  religion  as  most  Iranians
         converts do.

 4. At paragraph 46 the judge considered HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010]  UKSC  31,
    and noted that Appellants could not be expected to conceal  aspects  of
    their sexual orientation which they are unwilling to conceal, even from
    those  whom  they  knew  might  disapprove  of  it.   The   judge   (by
    implication) accepted that the principle applies also to cases based on
    religion, but held at paragraph 47 that the Appellant would be able  to
    practise his religion and attend church in Iran.

 5. The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal  maintain  that  the  judge
    failed to have regard to the Appellant's evidence that he  does  spread
    his Christian views; that the judge failed to have regard to the proper
    test set out in the country guidance case, which is not restricted to a
    "high profile evangelist"; and that by suggesting  that  the  Appellant
    would behave in a cautious and quiet  manner  if  returned,  the  judge
    failed to have proper regard to HJ, "... which effectively abandons the
    suggestion of discreet living to avoid persecution".

 6. Mr McGowan drew attention to the note of proceedings he had kept in the
    First-tier Tribunal, a copy of which was  annexed  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  In oral evidence-in-chief the following emerged:

    Q.   How important is Christian conversion to you?

    A.   Christianity is my way of life and I have chosen to live my life.

    Q.   Could you go back to not living life as a Christian?

    A.   I don't feel I am the same person ... I have started  to  work  in
         Christ.

    Q.   Do you evangelise?

    A.   Yes I share with my friends and people and tell them I  have  been
         changed.

    Q.   How important is that aspect of Christianity to you?

    A.   I want to share the peace of Jesus Christ in my heart.  I can feel
         him in my heart, "You have to hunt  people  for  me  and  claim  my
         name".  I want to spread good news of peace.

    Q.   Could you do that in Iran without fear?

    A.   ... I had problems ... really hard to evangelise in  Iran  and  to
         share faith with others especially non-Christians.

 7. The note of evidence also shows that when questioned by the Immigration
    Judge the Appellant said that he shares his faith with friends.  He was
    asked whether he engaged in any evangelical  activities  not  involving
    friends in Scotland, and replied:

         ... with Iranians we share the same language.  My  English  is  not
         good enough.  I have introduced a mutual friend to our  church  and
         twice he came with me to the church.  For the time being I have  to
         talk to Iranians but in future I will try to ... [talk to others?].

 8. Mr McGowan submitted that the above  evidence  was  overlooked  in  the
    determination.  The country  guidance  was  to  the  effect  that  risk
    increased with a high profile, but not that an Appellant had  to  be  a
    high profile evangelist.  The finding that the Appellant would practise
    his faith in a cautious and quiet manner was problematic.  It might  be
    interpreted as meaning he would do so for  fear  of  the  consequences.
    Thus,  the  judge  cited  HJ  but  overlooked  its   principles.    The
    determination should be set aside.  Even on the evidence which had been
    before the First-tier Tribunal, the decision should have  been  in  the
    Appellant's favour.  If remaking the decision, the Appellant would also
    seek to rely on evidence which had not been available at  the  time  of
    the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  This comprises  a  certificate
    dated 3rd March 2013 of his baptism in the Glasgow  Iranian  Church  on
    24th February 2013, and a letter of support dated 19th  May  2013  from
    the Pastor of the Glasgow Iranian Church.

 9. Mr Matthews accepted that the principles of HJ and HT apply to  a  case
    in the category of religion.  He acknowledged  that  the  gist  of  the
    evidence and the findings was  not  that  the  Appellant  would  behave
    quietly and discreetly due to  his  own  nature  and  inclination,  but
    rather for fear of the consequences.  This suggested  that  either  the
    judge overlooked the Appellant's evidence  that  he  would  evangelise,
    even if at a low level, or the judge misapplied the  legal  test.   The
    judge made favourable findings on the Appellant's Christian conversion,
    following  a  hearing  at  which  the  Secretary  of  State   was   not
    represented, and  those  findings  could  not  now  be  revisited.   Mr
    Matthews also pointed out that in his statement taken on 16th  December
    2012 the Appellant said:

         Although I lied to the authorities when in detention in Iran  about
         not having converted, I do not know how much longer I can  maintain
         that position if I was to be tortured.  In any event, I do not feel
         that I should have to lie about the basis of my faith.

10. That was another item of evidence about the Appellant's intentions  and
    wishes if returned to Iran which had been overlooked by the judge.

11. Based upon the analysis of the evidence presented  by  Mr  McGowan  and
    also, fairly and correctly,  by  Mr  Matthews,  I  indicated  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal would be reversed.

12. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law, for the reasons advanced  in  the
    grounds and submissions summarised above.   The  determination  is  set
    aside.  The findings of the First-tier Tribunal,  to  the  extent  that
    they were favourable to the Appellant, stand.  Based on those findings,
    factoring in the evidence which was overlooked, and applying the  legal
    test correctly, the appeal should  have  succeeded.   In  remaking  the
    decision, it is appropriate to look also at more recent  evidence,  not
    available at the time of the First-tier Tribunal.  That reinforces  the
    conclusion in the  Appellant's  favour.   The  decision  is  remade  by
    allowing the appeal, as brought to the First-tier Tribunal, on  Refugee
    Convention grounds.

13. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.


[pic]

4 June 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
