
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10325/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2nd September 2016                     |On 14th September 2016            |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mahmood of Counsel instructed by Saracens
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Myers made following a hearing at Bradford on 15th June 2016.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Iran born on 2nd August 1980.  He  entered
    the UK as a student on 15th October 2014  and  claimed  asylum  on  9th
    January 2015.  He was refused on 10th July 2015.

 3. This is not a case where credibility is any longer under challenge.

 4. The claimant was born in  Kuwait  to  an  Iranian  father  and  Kuwaiti
    mother.  He has never lived in Iran and  does  not  speak  Farsi.   His
    mother died and his father remarried; the family still lives in Kuwait.
     His Kuwaiti residency was dependent on his mother's  nationality  when
    he was a child  and  after  she  died  he  had  residency  through  his
    employment as a sales manager with the Alhaddag Marine Company.

 5. Whilst he was in the UK studying for a Masters degree at the University
    of Bradford he was informed that he had been made redundant  and  as  a
    result his residency in Kuwait would be cancelled.  He cannot apply for
    Kuwaiti nationality because the reality is that people born to  Kuwaiti
    mothers  with  non-Kuwaiti  fathers  are   unlikely   to   be   granted
    nationality.He has since tried unsuccessfully to  apply  for  new  jobs
    there.

 6. The claimant has only been to Iran once with his father when he was 13.



 7. The claimant says that he would be subject to  persecution  if  he  was
    returned to Iran both as a Sunni Muslim and because he would refuse  to
    participate in national service as the Iranian government supports  the
    Syrian regime which is involved in war  crimes  and  also  supports  Al
    Houthis in Yemen.  Furthermore he would  be  persecuted  as  an  Ahwazi
    Sunni Muslim.

 8. The judge concluded that it was not open to  the  claimant  to  acquire
    residency in Kuwait.

 9. So far as Iran was concerned,  she  noted  that  punishment  for  draft
    evasion does not amount per se to persecution (Sepet v SSHD [2003] UKHL
    15).  She also said that there was no evidence that the claimant  would
    be forced to serve in the Iranian military in  circumstances  where  he
    would be forced to commit atrocities or human rights abuses.

10. She then wrote as follows.

         "I accept that the objective evidence relied on  by  the  appellant
         shows that as an Ahwazi Arab he may be liable to discrimination and
         oppression by the  Iranian  state,  and  that  there  has  been  an
         increase in the levels of suppression in  recent  years  of  Ahwazi
         Arab activists.  SA (Iranian Arabs  -  no  general  risk)  Iran  CG
         [2011] UKUT 41 held that an Iranian Arab does not risk  persecution
         or other ill-treatment solely by reason of ethnicity.   However  an
         Iranian Arab returned from the UK enhances other risk factors.

         I find it reasonably likely that he will come to the  attention  of
         the authorities on his return to Iran because of his ethnicity, the
         fact that he has lived in Kuwait all his life, and  has  return  to
         Iran from the UK.  I accept that he will refuse  to  undertake  his
         national service by reason of his political opinion and  will  thus
         face punishment by the authorities.  The objective material in  the
         appellant's bundle highlights that Sunni  Muslims  and  Arabs  face
         disproportionate punishment and ill-treatment in  prisons.   Taking
         all of these factors together, and applying the lower  standard  of
         proof,  I  find  that  the  combination  of  risk  factors  in  the
         appellant's case means that it is reasonably likely  that  he  will
         face persecution by reason of his political opinion."

11. On that basis she allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

12. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had failed to refer to any material, however  briefly,  which
    would establish that the claimant would either be imprisoned or be ill-
    treated in prison were he to return to Iran.  Accordingly the Secretary
    of State cannot properly understand the  reasons  why  the  appeal  was
    allowed.  For completeness, whilst the judge referred to the  cases  of
    SA and Arab ethnicity enhancing  other  risk  factors,  there  were  no
    established risk factors in this case as there was in the case  of  SA.
    The claimant would simply be an Iranian Arab returning to  the  country
    of his nationality.

13. Permission to appeal was refused by Judge Davidge who said that nothing
    in the grounds disputed  the  evidence  in  the  claimant's  bundle  or
    revealed as perverse the judge's assessment  of  the  content  thereof.
    She had plainly made the  link  between  the  refusal  to  do  national
    service and the punishment of imprisonment which would follow, and  the
    risk factors which arise from his ethnicity in that context.

14. The Secretary of State renewed her grounds maintaining that  the  judge
    had not given proper reasons for her decision.

15. On 9th August 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman granted permission  and
    wrote as follows.

         "Whilst I do not agree with the  respondent's  comments  about  the
         First-tier permission decision, which was perfectly  clear  in  its
         terms, the hearing judge found  no  Convention  reason  behind  the
         appellant's unwillingness to do military service on return to Iran,
         for the reasons she  gave  at  paragraphs  23  to  24.   While  the
         appellant may have had valid political reasons to disagree with the
         Iranian government's interventions in the Yemen, Syria or Iraq,  he
         did not express a principled objection to military service as such.
          In  the  circumstances  there  is  a  clearly  arguable  point  of
         Convention law as to whether he was entitled, even so,  to  succeed
         for the reasons given by the judge at 26,  on  the  basis  that  he
         would come to the adverse attention  of  the  authorities  for  his
         unwillingness to serve, and suffer the consequences or in terms  of
         disproportionate ill-treatment as a Sunni Muslim."



Submissions

16. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds.  She also relied on  the  external
    information cited in the reasons for refusal letter which  acknowledged
    that any treatment the claimant might face as a Sunni  Muslim  in  Iran
    may amount to discrimination but will not amount to persecution.

17. The reasons for refusal letter acknowledges that  military  service  is
    mandatory in Iran and there were no official reports  of  conscientious
    objection.  However the treatment he might  receive  for  objecting  to
    military service would be prosecution in line with the law of Iran  and
    not persecution.

18. She also relied on the COI Report for  Iran  in  relation  to  military
    service which states that it is sometimes possible to buy an exemption,
    although it is risky, expensive and highly illegal.  The report cites a
    CPTI submission which said that Iran was a country where  certification
    of military service status was a  prerequisite  for  such  purposes  as
    obtaining a passport or driving licence or  employment  in  the  public
    sector but it was also  reported  that  Iranians  living  abroad  might
    purchase exemption for a fee of between $1,000 and  $3,000.   Dr  Khaki
    had provided a translation of information on  the  UK  website  of  the
    Iranian Embassy which noted the existence of the Kefalat  Exemption,  a
    provision for exemption in cases where the conscript's father  is  over
    60, the conscript is his only male child and is over 18 years of age.

19. Finally she cited a Danish Fact-Finding Report of 2013  which  reported
    that there was an easing in the requirements to allow people  to  leave
    the country in the sense that a  young  man  wishing  to  leave  before
    having completed his military service was able to  deposit  a  bond  of
    US$12,000 and be allowed to travel abroad for study.   If  he  did  not
    return the amount was taken by the authorities.

20. In the context of that information, she submitted that  the  judge  had
    unlawfully  jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  the  claimant  would  be
    imprisoned for military service and that that imprisonment would result
    in Article 3 mistreatment and/or  persecution  because  of  an  imputed
    political opinion. Whilst he would not be expected  to  lie  about  his
    views, he had not established that he would be at  real  risk  of  ill-
    treatment on return. He had an Iranian passport, which would lessen any
    risk to him, no profile of opposition to the authorities and there  was
    no evidence that he was an activist of any kind.   She  relied  on  the
    decision of SA for the proposition that he would  not  be  at  risk  on
    account of his Ahwazi ethnicity.

21. Mrs Pettersen also relied on the translation of  the  document  in  the
    claimant's bundle which states that the holder  of  the  visa  had  the
    right to enter and exit the Iranian border twice until 20th March  2017
    based on the conditions that the total stay  should  not  exceed  three
    months.

22. She asked that the decision be set  aside  and  remade  dismissing  the
    appeal.

23. Mr Mahmood relied on his skeleton argument prepared for  this  hearing.
    He submitted that the decision was adequately reasoned and sustainable.
     He also pointed out that conscientious objection was not recognised in
    Iran.  The claimant was not an  only  child  and  could  not  meet  the
    exemption requirements.  Moreover his  case  was  distinguishable  from
    other students living abroad because he had never lived in Iran.

24. He would be immediately identified and asked about his background.   He
    would then disclose his objections to the authorities' actions in Syria
    and Iran and would be treated worse by them, not only  because  of  his
    political opinion but because of his ethnicity.  He  had  set  out  his
    views  clearly  in  his  witness  statement  and  his  credibility  was
    unchallenged.

25. He referred me to the objective evidence which was  before  the  judge.
    There was a substantial amount of  evidence  that  activists  from  the
    Islamic Republic's Sunni Minority had been executed, over  1000  people
    in 2014.  Amnesty International recorded  that  in  2015  to  2016  the
    authorities severely curtailed the rights  to  freedom  of  expression,
    association and assembly and that religious minorities faced  pervasive
    discrimination in law and in practice.  In particular  security  forces
    disproportionately  repressed  protests  by  ethnic   minority   groups
    including Ahwazi Arabs who were  systematically  discriminated  against
    particularly in employment, housing, access to political office and the
    exercise of cultural, civil and political rights.  They remained unable
    to use their own language  as  a  medium  of  instruction  for  primary
    education and those who called  for  greater  cultural  and  linguistic
    rights faced arrest, imprisonment and in some cases the death  penalty.
    An Ahwazi Arab street vendor who died on 22nd March 2015 after  setting
    himself alight in a protest against the city authorities was apparently
    left without  emergency  medical  treatment.   Subsequent  protests  by
    ethnic minorities including Ahwazi Arabs resulted in many arrests.  The
    Iran Human Rights Documentation Centre recorded, in April 2013, reports
    from human rights activists indicating that  an  estimated  188  Ahwazi
    Arabs had been arrested over the previous five  weeks  coinciding  with
    the lead up to the anniversary of protests which gripped  the  city  of
    Ahpaz in April 2005.  Human Rights Watch reported, on 29th April  2015,
    the roundup and detention of scores of Ahwazi Arabs in what appeared to
    be an escalating crackdown in Iran's Khuzestan Province.

26. Mr Mahmood submitted that the latest reports postdated the decision  in
    SA, and the situation for Ahwazi  Arabs  had  deteriorated  since  then
    which provided the context in  which  the  appellant's  refusal  to  do
    military  service,  because  he  disagreed  with  the  Iranian  state's
    policies, should be assessed.

27. With respect to the visa Mr Mahmood said,  on  instructions,  that  the
    claimant had to renew his passport whilst visiting  family  in  Kuwait.
    On his application form he had said that he  was  a  student.   It  was
    explained to him that the visa was inserted in order to enable  him  to
    visit Iran and before that he had no idea that he was  required  to  do
    military service.



Findings and Conclusions

28. This determination is overly concise.  The fact that the judge did  not
    refer in any detail at all to the objective  evidence  upon  which  she
    relied rendered it vulnerable to appeal.

29. However it is quite clear that she allowed the appeal on the basis that
    there were a number of interlinking factors which,  together,  put  the
    claimant at risk on return.  She was entitled to reach  the  conclusion
    which she did on the basis of the evidence before her.

30. First,  the  claim  has  to  be  assessed  against  the  background  of
    discrimination against Ahwazi Arabs in Iran.   Whilst  this  in  itself
    does not necessarilylead to persecutory  ill-treatment,  it  does  mean
    that the claimant is more likely to be of interest to  the  authorities
    upon removal.

31. The objective evidence in the claimant's  bundle  appears  to  indicate
    that the situation for Ahwazi Arabs is becoming  more  difficult.   The
    judge was entitled to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  claimant's
    ethnicity would enhance the authorities'  interests  in  him,  and  his
    ethnicity enhances the risk of  ill  treatment.  That  is  entirely  in
    accordance with the country guidance case of SA.

32. The risk comes about because he would be of interest to the authorities
    on account of his ethnicity and the fact that he  has  never  lived  in
    Iran.  However, once questioned he would disclose his objection to  the
    regime's  military  activities.  This  is  not   a   claim   based   on
    conscientious objection, not a principled objection to military service
    as such but  objection to the specific actions of the Iranian regime in
    Syria and Yemen.  He cannot be expected to lie.

33. Accordingly, the judge allowed the appeal primarily on the  basis  that
    the claimant would be at risk on return  by  reason  of  his  political
    opinion, which would be  disclosed  to  the  authorities  when  he  was
    required to do military service.

34. The objective evidence does  not  bear  out  the  submission  that  the
    claimant could simply buy out his obligation to do military service  by
    payment of a fine.  He is not a returning resident. He  does  not  fall
    within the exemptions as set out on  the  UK  website  of  the  Iranian
    Embassy.  The COI itself reports that buying  an  exemption  is  risky,
    expensive and highly illegal and  therefore  not  a  course  which  the
    Secretary of State could properly advocate.

35. Finally, the visa allowing the claimant to enter Iran for  two  periods
    of less than three months takes the case  no  further  so  far  as  the
    Secretary of State is concerned  and  indeed  is  confirmation  of  the
    claimant's case that he is subject to military  service  on  return  to
    Iran.

36. I have some sympathy with the Secretary of  State's  application  given
    the brevity of reasoning,  but  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to come to the conclusion which she did on the  basis  of  the
    evidence which  was  before  her.   Accordingly  no  error  of  law  is
    established.



Notice of Decision

The original judge did not err in law.  The Secretary of State's  appeal  is
dismissed and her decision stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed[pic]                             Date 13 September 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
