
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10941/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 August 2017                            |On 4 September 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     CSb
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Sierra Leone.  He appealed  to  a  panel
    of the First-tier Tribunal against  the  respondent's  decision  of  24
    November 2014 refusing further leave  to  remain.   An  earlier  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed but that  decision  was  overturned
    and remitted for a fresh hearing.

2.   The appellant had entered the United Kingdom in January  2010  when  he
    was aged 13.  He had come on a visit visa and entered with  his  father
    and two of  his  half-sisters.   His  father  left  without  the  three
    children and the appellant claimed asylum on 8 March 2010.  That  claim
    was rejected on 4 August 2010 but he was granted leave to remain as  an
    unaccompanied minor until 3  August  2013.   He  did  not  appeal  that
    decision.

3.   With regard to the instant  appeal,  the  panel  noted  expert  reports
    concerning the Poro society which the appellant claimed to be  at  risk
    of being forced to join, and also a  psychological  report  which  said
    that though the appellant did not suffer any moderate or severe  mental
    health conditions he did suffer from chronic symptoms of  psychological
    distress as a result of past  traumatic  experiences  and  feelings  of
    potential threat arising from the insecurity inherent  in  his  current
    immigration status and the expectation was  that  he  would  be  highly
    vulnerable to a worsening of symptoms should he be returned  to  Sierra
    Leone.

4.   The appellant's evidence was that he was at risk of being  required  to
    be initiated into the Poro society which would be a violent experience.
     His father was not a member of the Poro but his elder brother had been
    required to join.  His  aunt,  IB,  was  convinced  that  he  would  be
    subjected to this ill-treatment which  would  lead  to  death  and  she
    believed it was his mother who wanted this initiation.  His sisters, BB
    and JB, also gave evidence.  Their evidence included references to  the
    experiences of the older brother, A.

5.   It was common ground that the Poro is a secret society in Sierra  Leone
    and  that  initiation  into  the  Poro   was   violent   and   involves
    scarification  and  forcible  initiation   takes   place   in   certain
    circumstances.

6.   The panel said that in coming to its findings on  credibility  it  took
    into account the young age at which the appellant  was  interviewed  in
    2010, his relative youth at the time of witness statements made  during
    the history of the case and the inevitable difficulty that any  of  his
    witnesses had in recalling the events  of  2010  and  previously.   The
    panel said it took into account  Ms  Loughran's  submissions  that  the
    appellant  was  a  sensitive  witness,  in  light  of  the  psychiatric
    evidence.  They said that in fact they found his evidence to  be  clear
    and confidently presented.  The panel also took account  of  the  close
    family relationship between the siblings and the inevitability that the
    account of how and why they came to the United  Kingdom  has  been  the
    subject of discussion between them.

7.   The panel did not accept the appellant's account that  his  father  did
    not intend to leave the children in the United  Kingdom.   It  regarded
    the story told by him and by his aunt, I, as inherently  unlikely.   It
    was considered to be very unlikely that the father  would  simply  have
    got on a flight and left the children behind if he had seriously wished
    to take them back to Sierra Leone, and noted  that  there  was  minimal
    initial telephone contact with social services and little or no attempt
    made by any of the four parents or wider family to recover any  of  the
    children in the past seven years, despite  the  father  having  been  a
    frequent visitor to the United Kingdom in the past, having attended I's
    home and having a brother who also visited  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    panel also noted variations in the claim as to how the connection  with
    I came about and did not accept that the appellant, a boy of 13 from  a
    reasonably well-off family who was attending school in Sierra Leone and
    living in Freetown and not a rural area could not have known  his  age.
    Various points of credibility raised by the respondent  were  rejected.
    It was concluded that his account was not credible.

8.   Following on from that the panel did not accept that the appellant  was
    at risk of being forced to be initiated into the Poro  society  against
    his will on return,  nor  that  his  parents  would  force  him  to  be
    initiated.  Various points of the background  evidence  concerning  the
    Poro were noted, and also the fact that the appellant's father was  not
    in the Poro.  There was no evidence as to the membership of the Poro in
    the appellant's maternal family.  It was not found that  the  appellant
    was under any direct threat from the Poro itself or that it would  seek
    him out.  The panel remarked that the  only  evidence  it  had  of  the
    threat of a forced Poro initiation required by the appellant's  parents
    was from  the  appellant  himself,  supported  by  his  sisters,  whose
    evidence it was said could not be considered objective or  independent,
    and by I who could only repeat what was told to her  according  to  the
    panel.  On balance it was not accepted what was  said  about  what  had
    happened to A, which seemed to the panel to have  been  developed  over
    time requiring more detail as the years passed.

9.   Having  concluded  that  he  was  not  at  risk  on  return  the  panel
    considered Article 8 and allowed the appeal  under  Article  8  on  the
    basis that the respondent should grant further leave  to  remain  until
    the immigration status of BB and JB had finally been determined.

10.  The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the findings on risk on return, and the  respondent  challenged
    the Article 8 findings.  Permission was granted in relation to both.

11.  The first ground of appeal, which was developed by Ms Loughran in  oral
    submissions, is that the judge failed to follow the practice  direction
    of the First-tier and Upper Tribunal on child, vulnerable and sensitive
    witnesses.  In particular she argued that though the panel had referred
    to the age of the  appellant  and  also  the  psychiatric  evidence  at
    paragraph 38, it had not made a finding on whether he was  a  sensitive
    witness or not and as  a  consequence  the  credibility  findings  were
    flawed.  The panel had thereafter  come  to  adverse  findings  on  the
    appellant's credibility which would not have been made had the guidance
    been properly applied.

12.  Mr Clarke argued that the findings at paragraph  38  were  sufficiently
    clear to show that  the  guidance  had  been  taken  into  account  and
    properly applied.

13.  I am in agreement with Mr  Clarke  on  this  point.   It  seems  to  me
    sufficiently clear that the Tribunal took  into  account  the  relevant
    issues of the appellant's youth at the time when he  made  the  witness
    statement, the difficulties of the witnesses in recalling  events  from
    some years previously and the  submission  that  the  appellant  was  a
    sensitive witness in light of the psychiatric evidence.

14.  Nor do I see any error of law  as  identified  in  ground  2.   It  was
    argued that the panel had speculated and  come  to  findings  based  on
    plausibility  which  were  essentially  based  on  its  own  notion  of
    reasonableness.  It seems to me have been properly open to the panel at
    paragraph 42 to comment on the inherent  unlikelihood  of  the  account
    given, in particular that it was very  unlikely  that  the  appellant's
    father would have simply got on a flight and left the  children  behind
    if there was a serious desire to take them back to  Sierra  Leone,  and
    bearing in mind also the minimal contact subsequent to that.   Clearly,
    as was pointed out in HK [2006] EWCA Civ 1037, inherent probability can
    be a dangerous and even a wholly inappropriate factor  to  rely  on  in
    some asylum cases, but the remarks of Neuberger LJ at paragraph 29 went
    on to discuss this matter in the context of societies with  customs  in
    circumstances very different from those of which  the  members  of  the
    fact-finding Tribunal have  any,  even  second-hand,  experience.   The
    points which concerned the panel were  essentially  matters  of  common
    sense to a large extent.  Likewise the conclusion that  the  panel  did
    not accept that the appellant would not have known his age, given  that
    he was attending in a school in a city and was from a reasonably  well-
    off family, was properly open to the panel.

15.   The  difficulty  with  the  determination  however  with   regard   to
    international protection comes  in  my  view  from  ground  3  and  the
    contended failure to have regard to the witness  evidence.   There  was
    written and oral evidence from  the  appellant's  witnesses  concerning
    what had happened to the elder brother A.  I do  not  consider  it  was
    properly open to the panel to dismiss this evidence purely on the basis
    that it could not be considered objective  or  independent.   Certainly
    the panel had doubts as to the appellant's  credibility  and  that  was
    relevant to the assessment of the issue and that was factored  in,  but
    in my view more detailed consideration was required to be given to what
    was said in both the written and the oral evidence of the witnesses.  I
    also consider that insufficient consideration was given to the evidence
    of I in that context.  It is clear, as was pointed out in  the  grounds
    and emphasised by Ms Loughran that evidence from  a  family  member  is
    capable of bearing weight and rejecting evidence purely  on  the  basis
    that it was not objective or independent was not in  my  view  properly
    open to the panel.  Likewise, with regard to I's evidence, again as  Ms
    Loughran  pointed  out,  hearsay  evidence  is  permissible   in   this
    jurisdiction and consideration had to be given  in  greater  detail  to
    what weight should be given  to  evidence  she  provided  of  what  the
    children had told her.

16.  Accordingly, I consider the  panel  erred  in  this  element  of  their
    decision and as a consequence the case on international protection will
    unfortunately have to be reheard and that is best done, in my view,  in
    light of the  nature  of  the  error  in  question  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I am reinforced in  that  view  by  my  conclusions  on  the
    Article 8 point.  The Secretary of State's argument in the grounds  was
    that the findings in this regard were flawed in that precariousness  of
    the private life had not been taken into account and also  the  absence
    of financial independence was a negative factor in the  proportionality
    assessment.  Reference was made to the decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803.

17.  In this regard the point made in the appellant's grounds was  that  the
    appeal was brought under section 83 of the 2002 Act and Article  8  was
    therefore not a ground of appeal to be determined by the panel.

18.  Mr Clarke argued that since the decision was pre April 2015  and  there
    was a section 120 notice there was no bar to Article  8  being  argued.
    He adopted the grounds and argued that with regard to  the  appellant's
    siblings the problem was that they did not have leave at  the  time  of
    the hearing as could be seen from paragraph 68 where  the  judge  noted
    that all their  asylum  applications  had  been  refused  in  2010  and
    thereafter there had been an extension of the appellant's discretionary
    leave until his younger sister  came  of  age,  which  period  had  now
    expired.

19.  On this point Ms Loughran argued that it was originally  a  section  83
    appeal and the appellant had discretionary leave at the  time  and  had
    made an indefinite leave to remain application on 3 November 2016 which
    had not been decided.  Given the change in  appeal  rights  she  argued
    that if it was agreed there was an error  of  law  by  the  panel  with
    regard to Article 8 the best thing would be to remit the  matter  to  a
    First-tier Judge pending a decision of the Secretary of  State  on  the
    indefinite leave to remain application.  It  was  agreed,  she  argued,
    that there was a material error with respect to Article 8.

20.  I agree that the panel erred with regard  to  Article  8.   Although  I
    have some doubts as to whether Article 8 was not before the panel, I am
    satisfied that the evaluation of Article 8 was flawed as argued by  the
    Secretary of State in her grounds.  As a consequence this matter is  to
    be  reheard  in  any  event  in  the  First-tier  with  regard  to  the
    international protection issues, I conclude that the Article 8 issue is
    best to be considered there also, though it would be helpful I think if
    that consideration does not take place until there has been a  decision
    on the appellant's indefinite leave to remain application.

Notice of Decision

21.  In conclusion then I have found material errors of law in  the  panel's
    decision and as a  consequence  the  matter  is  remitted  for  a  full
    rehearing on all issues to a First-tier Judge at Taylor House.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 1 September 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
