
[pic]
IAC-hw-am-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10352/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 October 2014                            |On 28 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                             SYLVA TUMBA BAKAFUA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Medley-Daley, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo,
    appeals  with  permission  against  the  determination  of   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Davies promulgated on  20  May  2013,  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 2 August 2011  to
    refuse his claim for asylum and to give directions for his  removal  to
    Pakistan.

 2. The appellant's case is that he is  a  former  employee  of  the  DRC's
    National Intelligence Agency ("ANR") who  was  involved  in  the  gross
    abuses of human rights carried  out  by  that  organisation,  including
    torture.  His case is that he had been compiling  a  dossier  on  their
    activities, intending to pass this to an NGO to bring attention to  the
    abuses, but the ANR learned of his activities,  detained  and  tortured
    him, and that it was only through personal contacts that he was able to
    procure his release. He escaped from where he was being held to Uganda,
    and from there travelled to the United Kingdom where he claimed asylum.



 3. The respondent accepted the appellant's account of working for the ANR,
    and of the activities in which he had participated. On that  basis  she
    considered that he was excluded from the Refugee Convention  by  virtue
    of Article 1F. She did not, however, accept his account of compiling  a
    dossier, or that this had been discovered  by  the  ANR;  nor  did  she
    accept that he had been detained or tortured by them.  On  that  basis,
    she considered that he would not be at risk on return, either as failed
    asylum-seeker or otherwise.

 4. The appeal against that  decision  first  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 11 October  2011  when  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Irvine
    dismissed the appeal. He did so on the basis that although he  accepted
    the appellant's account of working for the ANR and  the  activities  in
    which he had participated (and thus he fell to  be  excluded  from  the
    Refugee Convention), he did not accept the claim that he had  attempted
    to compile a dossier or that this had been discovered, or that  he  had
    been arrested, detained or ill-treated by the ANR as a result. In doing
    so he rejected the medical evidence adduced by the appellant in support
    of his claim to have been tortured.

 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  on  31  January  2012
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey, primarily  on  the  basis  that
    Judge Irvine's rejection of the medical evidence was arguably in error.



 6. The appeal then came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Pickup  on  17
    January 2013. He concluded that Judge Irvine's decision did involve the
    making of an error of law. The matter was remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but Judge Irvine's findings in relation to article  1  F  were
    preserved, it being stated that;

         The issue to be determined is in relation to articles 2 &  3  only.
         For clarity, I make it clear that  the  new  issue  raised  by  the
         appellant as to risk on return as a failed asylum seeker and defect
         from the ANR may be argued in any new hearing.

 7. On 8 May 2013 the appeal was then heard again  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M Davies who had before him (see pages  1-6  of  the  appellant's
    bundle) an additional report from Alex Ntung  addressing  directly  the
    risk to the appellant as a former employee of ANR and the risk  to  him
    on return as such; and, as a failed asylum seeker.  That issue is  more
    particularly dealt with in an email from Mr Ntung dated 2 April 2013 at
    page 7.

 8. Judge Davies dismissed the appeal  finding that he did not  accept  the
    appellant's account of seeking to compile a dossier, or of  this  being
    discovered by the ANR [66]-[78].  He accepted that the appellant  would
    be returned as a failed asylum-seeker [79] but concluded  that  he  had
    left DRC trough normal immigration channels and  could  return  in  the
    same way.  He stated [79}:

         There is no reason or any evidence to suggest that those at the ANR
         would  suspect  that  the  appellant  had  given   information   in
         connection with his claim for international protection which  would
         damage that organisation. As I have found I believed that aspect of
         the Appellant's  claim  to  be  completely  fabricated,  I  do  not
         accepted therefore that the conditions in which the Appellant would
         or may be kept in during his interrogation upon return to  the  DRC
         would amount to treatment which breached rights under Article 3. It
         follows that I do  not  accept  the  he  would  be  imprisoned  and
         therefore subjected to treatment which amounts to a breach  of  his
         rights under article 3"

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    grounds that Judge Davies erred in law:

      a) In failing to consider adequately the expert evidence of Alex Ntung
         [3] and in particular  the  evidence  that  if  the  appellant  had
         disclosed ANR activities to a foreign  government,  that  would  be
         considered a crime against the state [6]; and, that the evidence of
         Mr Ntung is evidence that the ANR would suspect that the ANR  would
         suspect he had disclosed evidence of torture

      b)  In  finding  that  the  appellant  could  return  through   normal
         immigration channels as the evidence is that  he  has  no  passport
         [5];

      c) In considering that the conditions in which the appellant would  be
         detained would not breach article 3 when it  was  the  respondent's
         policy that detention would breach article 3 [7], that  observation
         applying to any detention [8],  there  being  no  qualification  on
         length.

      d) In considering the earlier determination of Judge Irvine when  that
         contained a material error in its consideration of credibility [12]
         as doing do compromised his independent assessment of credibility

10. On 10 June 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom granted  permission  on
    all grounds and it is on that basis that the appeal came before me.

11. On 20 June 2013, the respondent replied to the grant of permission in a
    letter pursuant to rule 24. In that, it is stated:

     2. The respondent does not  oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
        permission to appeal, as he did not consider the expert evidence on
        a material  point  in  question,  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
        revealing that the ANR  were  involved  in  torture  to  a  foreign
        government would essentially make him a traitor, subjecting him  to
        detention for committing a crime. Arguably the  Judge  should  have
        considered this issue, even if he then went on to reject this.

The Hearing on 16 October 2014

12. It is regrettable that there has been such  a  delay  in  listing  this
    case; all the more so given the terms of the letter referred to above.

13. It is evident from Judge Davies determination, and in  particular  from
    the passage set out above, that he did not have regard to the  evidence
    of Alex Ntung which relates to the specific dangers the appellant faces
    on return as a former member of the ANR. It is also evident that he did
    not, in concluding that  the  appellant  would  return  through  normal
    channels, take into account that he would not be returning on  his  own
    passport; nor, given the evidence  that  detention  conditions  in  DRC
    breaches article 3, is the conclusion that this  appellant's  detention
    would not engage that article  adequately  reasoned.   I  am  satisfied
    that, for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal,  and  which  Mr
    Harrison accepted, that the decision of Judge Davies  did  involve  the
    making of an error of law and I set it aside insofar as it  relates  to
    the  risk  on  return;  the  findings  of  fact  with  respect  to  the
    appellant's activities in DRC and travels to the UK are  preserved.   I
    announced this decision, and that  I  would  proceed  to  remake  Judge
    Davies' decision

Remaking the Decision

14. I heard submissions from both representatives; I  also  had  before  me
    copies of  the  respondent's  most  recent  Policy  Bulletin  dated  18
    February 2014.

15. Mr Medley-Daley submitted that on the basis of the evidence set out  in
    the Policy Bulletin supplied by the respondent it is  likely  that  the
    appellant would be questioned on return in the process of being given a
    travel document and that material would be sent back to  Kinshasa.   He
    submitted that it is likely in the circumstances of  this  case,  given
    the evidence of Mr Ntung that this appellant would be  of  interest  on
    return.  He submitted that it was likely that the appellant would be at
    risk as an ANR employee on return and that he would not be able to  lie
    about the details he had disclosed or the information that he had given
    about the activities carried out by the ANR.

16. Mr Harrison relied on the refusal letter and the policy document issued
    in February 2014.  He made no submissions regarding the evidence of  Mr
    Ntung but submitted that there  was  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the
    appellant would be asked about what he had done in the  United  Kingdom
    or whether he had worked for the ANR.  He submitted further that it was
    unlikely the ANR would have an adverse interest  in  him  and  that  he
    would be able to gain the protection of the person who had  got  him  a
    job in the ANR in the first place someone who had been able to  protect
    him in the past.  He submitted further that the appellant would be able
    to relocate to a part of the country where he would not be put in risk.

17. In reply Mr Medley-Daley submitted that the appellant's position  could
    be distinguished from that of others given that he had worked  for  the
    ANR.



Findings

18. The respondent's concession that the appellant had worked for  the  ANR
    and was involved in its activities,  including  involvement  with  ill-
    treatment of prisoners is significant; given the serious  discrepancies
    in the remainder of his claim it is perhaps  a  surprising  concession;
    had it not been for that concession, it is unlikely that the judges who
    have heard his appeal would have accepted that aspect rejecting as they
    have the remainder of his claim.  Nonetheless, I must assess  the  risk
    to the appellant on the basis of the facts conceded by  the  respondent
    and in doing so, the evidence about the ANR, its activities and methods
    must be considered.

19. It is to be borne in mind that the ANR as set out  in  the  Country  of
    Origin Information Report on DRC 9 March 2012, at paragraph  9.01  says
    that it is responsible for internal and external security.  It is  said
    [9.24] to be the most professional of the different  security  services
    and it has its own detention centres [1.38].  While its  remit  appears
    to be to investigate crimes against security of the state  [9.39]  they
    act  outside  these  powers,  making  arbitrary  arrest  of  opposition
    supporters, civil society activists and  journalists  and  also  people
    suspected of criminal offences with no impact on  state  security.   It
    appears also [13.01] that some of the facilities they run  are  illegal
    and suspects are held incommunicado.

20. It is evident from the material set out in the Fact-Finding Mission  to
    Kinshasa conducted between 18 and 28 June 2012, published by UK  Border
    Agency in November 2012 at section 2.10  to  2.104  that  the  ANR  are
    operating at the airport.  That is consistent with the material set out
    at Appendix A of the Home Office's DRC Policy Bulletin where the German
    Government responded that in  specific  cases  the  ANR  do  carry  out
    checks.

21. No suggestion was made that the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  BK
    (failed asylum  seekers)  DRC  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00098  is  no  longer
    relevant. Indeed, the respondent notes in her Policy Bulletin that  its
    conclusions are still valid. It follows from this  that  it  is  likely
    that the appellant will be questioned on return.  It has to be borne in
    mind that it is accepted that the appellant's identity will be  checked
    and information forwarded  to  Kinshasa  as  part  of  the  process  of
    obtaining a travel document for his return  -  see  the  Home  Office's
    Policy Bulletin [4.10] to [4.13].

22. The appellant is a former employee of the ANR, a body  responsible  for
    the DRC's internal and external security, and his details as a possible
    returnee will have been sent to DRC. The ANR have  a  presence  at  the
    airport to which he will be returned, and it is known that he  will  be
    questioned on return.

23. I consider that in the circumstances that it is reasonably likely  that
    the ANR would be alerted to his possible return and  that  there  is  a
    risk that they would stop him at the airport.  He has been out  of  the
    country for several years and as a  security  service  it  is  scarcely
    likely that they would not wish to question him. It is inevitable  that
    he will be asked what he has been doing here; he will not  be  able  to
    lie, and will have to explain that he claimed asylum and had  told  the
    UK authorities about his activities.

24. I am satisfied on the basis of the evidence of Mr Ntung, none of  which
    is challenged, that there is a risk that the appellant could be seen as
    having damaged the organisation's reputation  by  making  a  claim  for
    asylum and disclosing its activities.  This is,  I  accept,  likely  to
    result in him being detained by the ANR in one of its own facilities to
    which there  is  no  access  and  which,  as  is  accepted,  constitute
    conditions likely to breach Article 3 either by the  existence  of  the
    prisons in themselves or the likelihood of ill-treatment perpetrated by
    the ANR.

25. While I note Mr Harrison's submission that the ANR would not likely  to
    be suspicious of the appellant, I find that this  is  contrary  to  the
    unchallenged evidence of Mr Ntung. I also find it improbable  that  the
    appellant's sponsor within the ANR would be in a position to assist him
    in any meaningful way.  Given that  the  appellant's  fear  is  of  the
    agents of the state, and that the ANR  are  likely  to  detain  him  on
    arrival, relocation to an area of DRC where he would not be at risk  is
    not a viable option.

26. For these reasons, I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  likely  on
    return to DRC to be subjected to treatment of  sufficient  severity  to
    engage Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  Accordingly, on  that
    basis, I remake the appeal by allowing the appeal on that basis.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on Article 3 Grounds.




Signed        Date:  28 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

