
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10156/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd January 2018                           |On 2nd March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  mr s t s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Harvey (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge IJ T Davidson, promulgated on 5th June 2017, following a  hearing
    at Taylor House on 1st December 2016.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, who was born on [ ]  1980.
    He appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 24th June  2015,
    refusing his application for asylum and humanitarian  protection  under
    paragraph 339C of HC 395.

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he fears the Indian police
    authorities in India, especially the "Q" Branch, because they  consider
    him to be a member of the  Sri  Lankan  LTTE,  a  proscribed  terrorist
    organisation in India.  His father was an inspector of police in  India
    but is now retired.  The Appellant himself has a Masters in Physics and
    a MPhil in Physics in India.  He worked there as a science teacher from
    2002 to 2003.  He worked in a secondary school from 2005 to  2007.   He
    worked as a lecturer  at  an  engineering  college  until  the  end  of
    December 2008.  In the United Kingdom, he undertook  a  course  at  the
    University of Greenwich and completed an MSc in wireless  communication
    systems in September 2010.



The Judge's Findings

 4. The  judge  found  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been  lacking  in
    credibility.  He held that the Appellant was in the UK the majority  of
    the time between 2008 until 2015 but did not claim asylum until he  had
    been refused further leave to  remain.   His  application  for  an  EEA
    residence permit was refused.  He was  arrested  as  an  overstayer  in
    Plymouth in January 2014.  Having entered the UK on 16th January  2009,
    he did not make an asylum claim until 19th January 2015.  This was  six
    years later.  It was also after all other avenues had been  closed  off
    to him to remain in the UK (paragraph 37).

 5. Second, the Appellant claimed to have been arrested and tortured by the
    Indian authorities in January or February 2012.  Yet he  returned  back
    to the UK without a  problem  using  his  own  passport.   He  did  not
    immediately claim asylum upon return  either  on  28th  February  2012.
    This was despite claiming that he had been tortured.  This  appeal  was
    not plausible (paragraph 38).

 6. Third, notwithstanding ill-treatment  which  allegedly  involved  being
    stripped naked, beaten  with  plastic  pipes,  suspended  upside  down,
    having his head submerged in a bucket of water, and being  deprived  of
    sleep, the Appellant was able to leave India, claiming that he was able
    to bribe officials, and yet the  authorities  thereafter  went  to  his
    house looking for him  in  March  2012.   This  too  was  not  credible
    (paragraph 39).

 7. Fourth, the Appellant submitted an application for a residence card  on
    29th December 2012, claiming to be the partner of Mireilla Adele Manoka
    Monguma, who was an EEA national exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK,
    and this was refused on 14th February  2014.   The  Appellant  did  not
    claim asylum, as noted above, because he feared being  deported.   Yet,
    he did not fear being deported  despite  making  two  applications  for
    residence cards, both of which were refused, and  both  of  which  were
    then appealed by him (paragraph 40).

 8. Fifth, the Appellant did not claim asylum after he had been arrested as
    an overstayer in Plymouth on 30th January 2014 when he visited a friend
    (paragraph 41).

 9. Finally, even after being arrested as an overstayer  in  January  2014,
    the Appellant did not claim asylum.  The judge  concluded  his  reasons
    with the observation that,

         "The whole history of the behaviour of the Appellant  persuades  me
         that he thought that if he kept his head down and ignored  the  law
         and the directions of immigration officials, something  might  turn
         up, and as a last resort he could claim asylum, which  is  in  fact
         what he has now done" (paragraph 42).

10. The judge dismissed the appeal.



Grounds of Application

11. The Grounds of Appeal raise issues that were not the primary  focus  of
    the judge below.  They state that the Appellant was recognised to  have
    developed "quite severe" mental  health  problems.   In  fact,  at  the
    hearing he did not give evidence on medical  advice.   Second,  he  had
    undertaken sur place activities connected with the TGTE in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Third, the decision of the judge below took too  long  to  be
    promulgated.  There was a period of some six months between the hearing
    of  the  appeal  in  December  2016  and  the   promulgation   of   the
    determination in June 2017.  The judge failed to  have  regard  to  the
    medical evidence.  He placed too much weight on  the  Appellant  having
    left India on his own passport and delayed in claiming asylum.  Fourth,
    the judge made no reference to the medical evidence of Dr  Dhumad  that
    the Appellant had PTSD.  Fifth, neither did the judge take into  proper
    account the evidence of the country expert, Dr Chris  Smith,  that  the
    Appellant's sur place activities would case  him  to  be  arrested  and
    tortured on return to India.  Finally, the Appellant presented  with  a
    suicide risk, which was exceptionally high, such that  Article  3  ECHR
    was engaged.

12. On 26th October 2017, the Upper Tribunal granted permission to  appeal.





Submissions

13. At the hearing before me, Ms Alison Harvey,  appearing  as  Counsel  on
    behalf of the Appellant, began by relying upon  her  comprehensive  and
    well crafted skeleton argument, which drew upon  the  140  page  bundle
    before the Tribunal dated 28th November 2016.  She submitted  that  the
    decision of Judge  T  Davidson  was  unsustainable  for  the  following
    reasons.  First, the appeal was heard on 1st  December  2016.   Various
    letters  were  sent  by  the  Appellant's  solicitors  chasing  up  the
    determination.  Only when the letter  of  5th  June  2017,  which  drew
    attention to the Appellant's severe mental health  problems  was  sent,
    did the judge on that same day promulgate the  determination.   Second,
    the specialist  psychiatrist,  Dr  Dhumad,  did  not  have  his  report
    referred to.  Third, four witnesses who gave oral evidence did not have
    their evidence questioned.  The evidence of Mr Vijayarajah  as  to  the
    Appellant's activities in India  was  accepted.   The  evidence  of  Mr
    Yogalingam as  to  the  Appellant's  activities  in  the  UK  was  also
    accepted.  The evidence of Mr Kesavan, with whom  the  Appellant  lives
    and who provides him with practical and  emotional  support,  was  also
    accepted.  Finally, the evidence of Mr  Williamson,  a  counsellor  and
    member of the Liberal Party  who  was  familiar  with  the  Appellant's
    activities in the UK was given, but not recorded or discussed  anywhere
    in the determination.  Fourth, the risk of suicide is nowhere addressed
    in the determination under Article 3 ECHR, although it is dealt with in
    the context of Article 8 at paragraph 56 of the determination.

14. Insofar as the judge does  give  reasons,  and  does  engage  with  the
    evidence before him, the findings reached  are  unsustainable  for  the
    following reasons.

15. First, the only reason the judge gives for not believing the  Appellant
    is the delay in claiming asylum, as well as his having  left  India  on
    his own passport, but in doing so the judge failed to have  any  regard
    to the medical evidence in reaching his decision on credibility.  There
    is no detailed examination of the medical evidence.

16. Second, the approach is contrary to established  jurisprudence  because
    in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367, the Court of Appeal stated that, "where
    the report is specially relied on as a factor relevant to  credibility,
    the Adjudicator should deal with it as an integral part of the findings
    of credibility rather than just as an add-on".

17. Third, the judge applies Section 8(4) of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, to the Appellant's failure  to
    claim asylum in the UK between 2009  and  2015.   In  fact,  the  usual
    application of this Section is with regard to  a  person's  failure  to
    claim asylum in a safe  third  country.   Ms  Harvey  argued  that  the
    judge's approach offends  constitutional  principles  in  that  he  has
    treated the delay in claiming asylum, as not merely  damaging,  but  as
    destroying the credibility of the Appellant, rather than simply  taking
    the timing of the claim into account and weighing  it  with  the  other
    evidence.

18. Fourth, the judge states that there  has  been  a  six  year  delay  in
    claiming asylum (at paragraph 37), but this is not  correct.   This  is
    because the Appellant had not been tortured when he arrived in  the  UK
    in 2008, as a student, when he had also the possibility to  take  up  a
    post-study work visa.  He had no reason to claim asylum  at  the  time.
    The possibilities of work and study existed for him.  He  was  tortured
    in 2012, and in March of that year, just a  month  after  he  had  been
    tortured, the Appellant followed the instructions of an agent, who  had
    been arranged by his father, to apply for a residence card as a  family
    member of an EEA national.  The Appellant's evidence was not lacking in
    credibility that he feared deportation to India because his visa was to
    expire in December 2012.  The Appellant only grasped the importance  of
    applying for asylum, after  he  had  attempted  suicide  and  had  been
    referred to the Home Treatment Team based at Northwick Park Hospital in
    Harrow, as it was they who told him that he should claim asylum as soon
    as possible if he could not return to India (see his witness  statement
    at paragraph 32).

19. Fifth, the medical evidence of Dr  Dhumad  expressly  referred  to  the
    Appellant's inability to concentrate, insomnia,  nightmares,  and  fear
    and shame leading to antidepressant  prescription.   He  suffered  post
    traumatic stress disorder symptoms of intrusive  memories,  nightmares,
    flashbacks, avoidance behaviour and hypervigilance.

20. Sixth, the judge erred in not taking into account  Dr  Dhumad's  expert
    report, and his diagnosis, which had been accepted  by  Dr  Lange,  and
    other medical professionals working with him, insofar  as  this  report
    attested to  the  Appellant's  suffering  from  post  traumatic  stress
    disorder (see the Appellant's bundle at page 89, 108,  110,  and  112).
    On this basis, Ms  Harvey  submitted  that  the  medical  evidence  was
    plainly relevant to an assessment of whether the Appellant was  telling
    the truth about being tortured  and  thus  being  of  interest  to  the
    authorities in India.

21. Seventh, insofar as there is a country expert from Dr Chris Smith,  who
    had been commissioned by the  Independent  Advisory  Group  on  Country
    Information, by the UK government  itself,  this  report  was  not  the
    subject of any proper analysis by the judge.  Dr Smith's conclusion was
    that the Appellant's sur place activities would cause the Appellant  to
    be arrested and tortured on return to India (see the Appellant's bundle
    at page 138).  Dr Smith had also stated that it was  plausible  to  get
    through the airport by paying a bribe (bundle at page 138) and this was
    not properly taken into account by the judge.

22. Eighth, and perhaps most importantly, the Appellant's suicide risk  had
    not  been  taken  into  account  properly  as  being  one   which   was
    exceptionally high and therefore would engage Article 3  of  the  ECHR.
    This  would  bring  into  pray  the  European  Court  jurisprudence  in
    Paposhvili [2016] ECHR 11.  The judge instead, wrongly  refers  to  the
    outdated judgment in N v SSHD  [2005]  UKHL  31.   Given  the  risk  of
    suicide, it was necessary for the judge to determine whether Article  3
    was engaged.  The Appellant, after all, had made three attempts on  his
    life.  Dr Dhumad had concluded that the Appellant was at high  risk  of
    committing  suicide  and  accords  his  own  "severe   concerns   about
    committing a successful suicide" (see bundle at page 91 to 93).

23. Finally, Ms Harvey quite properly recognised that, insofar as there had
    been a six month delay in the  judge  promulgating  his  determination,
    this still did not of its own render the determination to  be  suspect.
    What had to be shown was that  there  was  a  nexus  between  the  late
    promulgation, and the recollection  of  the  evidence  and  its  proper
    assessment  in  the  determination.  My  attention  was  drawn  to  the
    jurisprudence in RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868 and Arusha &  Demushi
    [2012] UKUT 80.

24. For his part, Mr Tufan, appearing  as  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that
    there was no nexus between the late promulgation  (however  undesirable
    that was) and the assessment of the  evidence.   It  is  true  that  Dr
    Smith's report has not been considered.  The question, however, is  the
    extent to which it is materially relevant.   The  suggestion  that  the
    Indian authorities keep a close eye on dissident elements (see page 137
    to 138) does not mean that a Tamil separatist sympathiser  who  may  be
    suspected of LTTE involvement, would necessarily be at risk  in  India.
    Even in Sri  Lanka  such  a  person  would  have  to  comply  with  the
    requirements set out in GJ (Sri  Lanka)  [2013]  UKUT  319,  where  the
    Appellant had to show that he presented a threat to the unitary  nature
    of the Sri Lankan state in his diaspora activities.  This  is  not  the
    case here.

25. Second, insofar as there is a reference in Dr Smith's (at page 140)  to
    the National Investigatory Agency (at paragraph 25) having been set  up
    in India following terrorist attacks in that country,  this  was  after
    the Mumbai  attacks,  and  there  is  no  suggestion  it  has  anything
    whatsoever to do with LTTE activities which the Indian authorities want
    to monitor.

26.  Third,  in  2014  the  Appellant  actually  went  back  to  Sri  Lanka
    voluntarily.  He thereafter absconded.  None of this suggests  that  he
    was ever at risk.

27. Fourth, insofar as the Appellant has PTSD, he has  to  put  forward  an
    exceptional case.  This is what is required under EA (Article 3 medical
    cases - Paposhvili not applicable) [2017] UKUT  00445,  which  was  the
    latest Tribunal jurisprudence that had now to be taken into account.

28. It ought also not to be forgotten, submitted Mr Tufan, that the risk of
    suicide here was all about what the Appellant  himself  had  said,  and
    there was nothing at page 90 of the report to suggest otherwise.

29. In reply, Ms Harvey submitted that Dr Smith was a renowned expert  used
    by the government itself and at page 138 he had stated that there was a
    risk from the Indian authorities to  the  Appellant  for  his  diaspora
    activities.  Dr Smith was careful to say several times that credibility
    was a matter for the Tribunal.

30. In Y & Z (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362, moreover, the Court of Appeal
    rejected the argument that a track record in  failed  suicide  attempts
    did not present with a real risk in the future for  an  applicant.   It
    stated that,

         "The effect is that, apart  from  an  asylum  seeker  who  actually
         commits suicide, only one who comes close enough to  succeeding  to
         manifest a serious intent is going to be regarded as  presenting  a
         serious risk of suicide  on  return.   Yet  the  medical  logic  is
         exactly the reverse: it is that individuals  who  are  at  risk  of
         suicide  if  returned  can  be  stabilised,   using   therapy   and
         medication, and kept from self-harm so long as they feel safe here.
          For such individuals the recent past may be no guide at all to the
         immediate future" (paragraph 36).

31. The Court of Appeal went on to conclude  that  the  Tribunal's  finding
    below would be rejected because, "the concomitant findings  that  their
    fear is no longer objectively well-founded  and  that  there  exists  a
    local health service capable of affording treatment do  not  materially
    attenuate  this  risk,  which  is  subjective,  immediate  and   acute"
    (paragraph 63).

32. To this, Mr Tufan intervened to say that the Court of Appeal had  taken
    a very different approach in KH (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 1354, and
    therefore, such a statement was not a statement of law.



Error of Law

33. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  This is, however, not an easy case to determine.   There  is
    force in much of what Mr Tufan has submitted.  On the other hand, there
    are matters that have been left unconsidered by the judge below,  which
    can only be the result of a much delayed determination, and  one  which
    was eventually promulgated only after the judge was alerted to the risk
    of  suicide  by  the  Appellant's  solicitors,  following   which   the
    determination was then promptly promulgated.

34.  First,  there  is  Dr  Chris  Smith's  report.   He  states  that  the
    Appellant's sur place activities would cause  him  to  be  arrested  on
    return to India.  Dr Smith explains (at page 130) that he has over  the
    last ten years completed a large number of expert  witness  reports  in
    the British courts.  His report is not considered.  Had the report been
    considered, it would have been to the fact-finding Tribunal  to  decide
    the  impact  of  his  report  on  the  Appellant.    Without   such   a
    consideration, it is not possible to know what the actual finding would
    have been in the light of the report.  For example, it is true that the
    expert observes that, "the war in Sri Lanka ended in 2009 but  security
    considerations continue to concern both  Colombo  and  New  Delhi"  (at
    paragraph 11).  However, Dr Smith does not necessarily confirm that the
    Appellant would be at risk.   What  he  states  is  that,  "the  Indian
    authorities may well have a watch list and a stop list" (paragraph 14).
     He may have stated that, "the Appellant is clearly known to the Indian
    authorities in relation to his Tamil nationalist activities" (paragraph
    15), but that does not mean to say that the Appellant would be at  risk
    of ill-treatment and persecution upon return to India (given that  even
    in Sri Lanka he  would  have  had  to  show  that  he  came  under  the
    strictures of GJ (Sri Lanka) [2013] UKUT 319).

35. Second, Mr Tufan was also arguably right in relation to the  report  by
    Dr Dhumad.  He states (at page 90) that the  Appellant's  presentation,
    "is consistent with a diagnosis  of  severe  depressive  episode,  with
    psychotic symptoms ..." (paragraph 17.1).   He  also  states  that  the
    Appellant, "also suffers from post traumatic stress  disorder  symptoms
    such as avoidance, flashbacks and  nightmares"  (paragraph  17.2).   In
    relation to the risk of suicide, however, he goes  on  to  observe  (at
    paragraph 17.3) that, "the risk of suicide  is  significant;  the  main
    risk factors are severe depression, PTSD,  hopelessness.   He  reported
    three attempts to end his life due to fear of deportation".

36. This is, as Mr Tufan submitted, a case of self-reporting.  That  aside,
    the expert's report deals only with the consistency of the diagnosis of
    severe depressive episode that the Appellant claims to  have  suffered.
    In the same way, Dr Dhumad goes on to say (at paragraph 11.5) that, "he
    reported frequent nightmares".  He  similarly  observes  (at  paragraph
    11.4) that, "he also described intrusive memories of torture".  It  is,
    of course, for the fact-finding Tribunal to decide whether this engages
    Article 3 of the ECHR.  This was not considered by the judge below.

37. As against this, there is substance  in  Ms  Harvey's  submission  that
    given the Appellant's post traumatic stress disorder, and  the  alleged
    risk of suicide, the latest case law did not stop with  what  was  said
    more than a decade ago in N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31.   It  was  necessary
    also to consider the European Court's  decision  in  Paposhvili  [2016]
    ECHR 11. It is, of course, true that the Tribunal has given guidance in
    relation to the application of that decision in EA (Article  3  medical
    cases - Paposhvili not applicable) [2017] UKUT 00445.  Even so, failure
    to consider these matters, in a determination  which  appears  to  have
    been rushed after the latest request from the Appellant's solicitors on
    5th June 2017 was made, suggests that there is a nexus between what was
    considered and what was left unconsidered.  This brings one to what was
    actually considered.  This is the second reason why  permission  should
    be granted.

38. Third, the  judge's  emphasis  on  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had
    consistently failed to claim asylum, although meticulously set out in a
    way which shows that the period of delay in  the  promulgation  of  the
    determination did not detract from the quality of the analysis in  this
    regard (see  paragraphs  37  to  42),  should  have  been  nevertheless
    undertaken in the context of the evidence as a  whole,  which  included
    the medical evidence as well as the country report, and not  separately
    from these items of evidence.  The focus on  the  Appellant's  lack  of
    credibility went so far as to an  incorrect  approach  being  taken  in
    relation to Section 8(4) of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, in the manner alleged by Ms Harvey,  because
    the judge applied the perspective of a person who had failed  to  avail
    himself of the opportunities for asylum in a safe third country,  which
    was not applicable to the facts of this case.  All in  all,  therefore,
    'anxious scrutiny' has not been exercised in this appeal and there  are
    sufficient areas of the evidence, such as the medical evidence and  the
    country report which do need to be  properly  evaluated,  even  if  the
    decision-maker then decides to reject such evidence as  not  showing  a
    well-founded fear of persecution, or of a risk of suicide as  is  being
    alleged by the Appellant.



Notice of Decision

39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than Judge T Davidson under
    Practice Statement 7.2(b) because the nature or extent of any  judicial
    fact-finding, which is necessary in  order  for  the  decision  in  the
    appeal to be re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

40. An anonymity order is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th February 2018





