
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/10823/2015
                                                               AA/10822/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 June 2016                      |On 4 July 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     CYM
                                     CSM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Pinder, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   The Appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka.  The first  Appellant's  date
    of birth is [ ] 1986. The second Appellant's date of birth is [ ] 1985.
     The first Appellant came here on 30 September 2010  with  leave  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student.  His leave was extended until 30 August 2015.
     The second Appellant came here on 6 August 2011 as a dependant of  his
    wife who was a Tier 4 Student.  Both Appellants claimed  asylum  on  27
    February 2015.  They are gay and in a relationship with each other  and
    claimed to be as a result of this at risk on  return.  The  application
    was refused on 22 July 2015 in relation to the first Appellant  and  on
    27 July 2015 in relation to the second.

2.        They  appealed  against  the  decisions  and  their  appeals  were
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Eban in a decision  of  7
    December 2015, following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 24 November 2015.
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson granted permission on 6 May 2016.

The Findings of the FtT

3.   Judge Eban heard evidence from both Appellants.  The first  Appellant's
    evidence can be summarised. He was aged 16 when he formed an attraction
    to a male school friend. The  friend  rejected  him.   People  gossiped
    which affected him and his family.  He moved  to  Colombo  in  2008  in
    order to study and it was there he started to work as a sex worker.  In
    June 2010 there was an incident where  he  was  caught  by  the  police
    having sex with a client in a car. The police beat him up. He abandoned
    sex worker after this and he came to the UK in order  to  study  on  30
    September 2010.  He met the second Appellant  here  in  May  2012.   He
    returned to Sri Lanka in 2014 because his father was  unwell.   In  Sri
    Lanka his brother threatened him because  of  his  sexuality.   He  has
    achieved NQF levels four, five and six since he has been here.

4.   The second Appellant's evidence was that he realised that  he  was  gay
    when he was about aged 15 and had had two same sex relationships in Sri
    Lanka.  On one occasion when he was kissing another man in the park the
    police came and beat them up and he was  hospitalised  for  four  days.
    His parents arranged  a  marriage  for  him.   This  was  not  a  happy
    marriage.  He came to the UK with his wife and they lived in  Newcastle
    where he met the first Appellant.  His wife moved to London in order to
    study and the Appellants started a relationship together in  May  2012.
    His wife is aware of the relationship and she returned to Sri Lanka  in
    April 2014 and told her  family  and  the  Appellants'  families.   His
    parents told him that they have disowned him and  that  he  should  not
    return.  He received a threatening telephone call from Sri  Lanka  from
    somebody who knew about his sexuality which he believes was  instigated
    by his ex-wife.

5.   The judge made findings as follows:

    (1)  The Appellants are Sri Lankans of Sinhalese ethnicity.

    (2)  The Appellants are from the Kandy area.

    (3)  The Appellants are both gay.

    (4)  The Appellants are living together in a homosexual relationship.

    (5)  The Appellants' families know about their sexual  orientation  and
         do not approve.

    (6)  The Appellants both encountered police brutality arising from same
         sex relationships but neither has been charged with an offence.

6.   The judge considered whether the Appellants would  conceal  aspects  of
    their sexual identity on return to Sri Lanka and she stated as follows:

         "33. Even before the appellants came to  the  UK,  when  they  were
             living discreetly in Sri Lanka,  their  families  were  either
             suspicious of or  had  discovered  their  sexual  orientation.
             Since the second appellant's wife has returned  to  Sri  Lanka
             she has told both appellants' families  that  they  are  in  a
             homosexual relationship and that she has divorced  the  second
             appellant because he is gay.  I find that, as a result,  there
             are substantial grounds for thinking that both appellants will
             be identified as gay in their home area, however they  act  in
             public.

         34.  The appellants are 29 and 30 and live together  as  a  couple.
             If they go back to Sri  Lanka  they  would  hope  to  continue
             living in an open same sex relationship, without pretending to
             be anything that they are not.  There was no evidence that the
             appellants would  go  out  of  their  way  to  seek  to  bring
             attention  to  themselves,  as  gay  men,  if  they  returned,
             wherever they lived.

         35.  I have considered whether the appellants face a  serious  risk
             of harm from their own families, acquaintances and  strangers.
             Although the second appellant told me about  threats  made  to
             him over the phone and that his  ex-wife  is  connected  to  a
             politician in Kandy, there was no evidence about this relative
             or his influence.  The appellants' evidence appears to be that
             they have both been disowned by their  families,  rather  than
             targeted by them.  There was no evidence that  their  families
             were anything other than  ordinary  hardworking  middle  class
             people, and there is no reason whatsoever to believe  that  as
             such  their  families  would  seek  physically  to  harm   the
             appellants, commit an illegal assault  or  even  know  how  to
             organise such things.  The appellants  are  not  isolated  and
             vulnerable; they  have  each  other  for  support.   There  is
             absolutely no reason to  suppose  that  their  families  would
             force them to separate.  In  the  circumstances  I  find  that
             there is no reasonable likelihood that the appellants would be
             at any real risk from their families or acquaintances."

7.   The judge went on to conclude as follows:

         "37. The appellant's  encounter  with  the  police  took  place  in
             Colombo, when on his evidence he was in the middle  of  a  sex
             act in a parked car.  The second appellant  was  in  his  home
             area when he was kissing in  a  public  place.   Although  the
             appellants were beaten up by the police,  I  do  not  consider
             that either of these encounters are  any  more  than  isolated
             instances, and do not indicate that the appellants are at risk
             of facing persecution or serious harm  at  the  hands  of  the
             authorities in the future.

         38.  Whilst I do not consider that the appellants would be at  risk
             from their families, they may well prefer to  live  away  from
             them, in Colombo or some other city.

         40.  I take it from this background evidence  that  the  appellants
             could live together as an openly gay  couple,  and  that  they
             would not be at real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international  protection  for   reasons   of   their   sexual
             orientation.  The  appellants  in  this  case  are  not  in  a
             dissimilar position to the appellants in LH and IP, where  the
             UTT decided that the appellants in that case could set up  and
             maintain a household together, and that their stated  concerns
             about the state, the police, and other  government  officials,
             medical professionals, landlords and the general public,  were
             of no real substance [132-133]."

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

8.   At the hearing before me I asked Ms Pinder to clarify  the  grounds  of
    appeal which are insufficiently particularised.   Ms  Pinder  helpfully
    clarified that in relation to ground 1, the Appellants were not relying
    on paragraph 14(a).  However 14(b) was maintained. The thrust of 14 (b)
    is that the judge erred in concluding  that  the  incidents  of  police
    abuse were isolated incidents. Ms Pinder relied on and 14(c),  (d)  and
    (e). The thrust of these paragraphs is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in failing to consider that the  past  incidents  of  abuse  were
    indicative of future incidents and that the fact  that  they  had  been
    beaten up by  the  police  is  a  significant  issue  that  impacts  on
    sufficiency of protection.  In addition the judge erred in  failing  to
    engage with the first Appellant's evidence that he would have no choice
    but to return to work as a sex worker if he is removed to Sri Lanka and
    given that his sexuality would then be public knowledge this would  put
    him at risk.

9.   Ms Pinder accepted there is significant overlap between grounds  1  and
    2 but she relied on ground 2 paragraphs 15 (a), (b) (as an extension of
    ground 1) in relation to the police brutality and the judge's  findings
    that the police abuse were isolated incidents.  Ms Pinder accepted that
    there was no substance in the grounds insofar  as  the  risk  from  the
    Appellants'  respective  families  is  concerned  and   therefore   the
    Appellants were not relying on paragraph 15(c) and (d).

10.  Ground 2 15(e), (f) and (g) were still relied upon.   The  judge  erred
    in concluding that the Appellants would not go out of their way to seek
    attention (see [34]) because this is an irrelevant  consideration.  The
    judge failed to grapple with the evidence that the Appellants would  be
    returning to Sri Lanka and living openly as a gay couple for the  first
    time.  It was submitted that the decision is not in accordance with the
    guidance in LP and IP [16], [29] (gay men: risk) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2015]
    UKUT 00073.

11.  Ms Pinder referred me to  the  judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the
    incidents of police brutality and submitted that there were no  reasons
    given for the judge's finding at [37]. She referred me to page  507  of
    the Appellant's bundle and the first Appellant's witness statement  and
    made specific reference to [25] which reads as follows:

         "I told Isanka abut my problems in Kandy and he invited me to  work
         as a sex worker.  I decided to accept his  offer  and  this  way  I
         could practice as  a  homosexual.   Isanka  introduced  me  to  his
         clients and I would work  at  hotels  such  as  Thilanka  or  Munt-
         Lavinia.  I would sometimes take the client to a park.  I would get
         paid about 2,000 to 3,000 rupees from  a  client  and  sometimes  I
         would be paid more and would be receiving gifts such as clothes."

    She also referred me to [26] of  the  same  statement  which  reads  as
    follows:

         "26. It was whilst I was working as a sex worker, that I was abused
             by the police.  It was in the first week of June 2010 when the
             incident happened in Havelock Town.  I would  normally  go  to
             this place if a client could not afford to go to a  hotel  and
             that was the case with the client Azeeka.  It was  about  11pm
             and we had sex in his  car.   It  was  so  dark  that  he  had
             switched on the parking light.  We heard a vehicle  stop  next
             to the car and then the door was tapped.  It was  the  police,
             they had opened the door and saw  that  I  did  not  have  any
             clothes on.  The police took us out of the vehicle and started
             using abusive language, they believed that people such  as  us
             were destroying the country.

         27.  The police slapped me on my face and hit my head with a  baton
             and also used it to simulate anal sex.  After they hit  me  on
             the head, I felt dizzy.  I remember before I  fainted,  Azeeka
             was trying to bribe the policemen and pay them 6,000 rupees to
             let us go.

         28.  When I regained  consciousness,  I  found  myself  at  Colombo
             Hospital and was being treated for injury to my  head.   After
             this incident, I stopped having any contact with Isanka  as  I
             was scared of the police."

12.  Ms Pinder referred me to the guidance in LH and IP which  indicates  at
    [4] of the headnote that there is more risk  for  sex  workers  in  the
    cities.  Ms Pinder indicated that  the  first  Appellant  had  been  in
    Colombo since 2008 and it was two months after his arrival that he  had
    begun to work as a sex worker.  The judge was wrong  to  conclude  that
    the incident with the police was isolated. The judge failed  to  engage
    with his evidence that he would have to return to sex  work  should  he
    return to Sri Lanka  and  she  referred  me  to  [55]  of  his  witness
    statement where he stated that he will suffer hardship  given  that  he
    would have to work as a sex worker because he would not be able to work
    elsewhere due to his sexuality.

13.  I asked Ms Pinder whether there was  a  skeleton  argument  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  and  she  stated  that  Mr  Burrett  of   Counsel
    represented the Appellants at the hearing and he relied on  a  skeleton
    argument. (She was not personally aware of this and had  not  seen  it,
    but her instructing the solicitor was  in  court  and  confirmed  this.
    However, he was unable to provide a copy of it).

14.  Ms Pinder submitted that the judge had  made  an  error  in  concluding
    that the Appellants were in a similar position to the Appellants in  LH
    and IP and she referred me to [132] and [133] of the  Country  Guidance
    case, with particular reference  to  [132]  where  the  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded that the Appellants fell into the category  described  by  Ms
    Flamer-Caldera as a same sex couple in a  long  term  relationship  who
    could set up and maintain a household together.  The panel went  on  to
    recognise the caveat in Ms Flamer-Caldera's evidence about the  use  of
    discretion but concluded that it was the Appellants' preference even in
    the United Kingdom where they are not at risk and have a wide range  of
    choices. In Ms Pinder's submission this was  an  error  by  Judge  Eban
    because the Appellants in LH and IP were found to behave discreetly  in
    the UK and it was found that they would return and behave discreetly in
    Sri Lanka whereas the Appellants in this case would live  openly  as  a
    gay couple (see [34]).



Conclusions

15.  The Appellants would be returning as gay men  living  together  in  the
    same household (like the Appellants in LH and IP). The judge  concluded
    that they would not go out of their way to seek to bring  attention  to
    themselves.  It is in this context that the  judge  correctly  drew  an
    analysis between these Appellants and those in LH and  IP,  and  in  my
    view, this is a fair comparison. The focus on  the  words  discrete  or
    open can be misleading in this context. There are  clear  similarities.
    The judge understood the evidence before her and  made  clear  findings
    about how the Appellants would behave on return.

16.  It is worth noting that there was no evidence before  the  judge  about
    any behaviour or expression of sexuality  which  the  Appellants  would
    engage in that would bring attention to themselves.   It  was  for  the
    Appellants to produce evidence about how they are likely to  behave  on
    return to Sri Lanka. The findings that the judge made are  grounded  in
    the evidence that was before her and adequately reasoned.  There was no
    suggestion by the judge or expectation that the Appellants  would  have
    to conceal their behaviour on return to Sri Lanka.

17.    What is significant is that the Upper Tribunal did  not  find  in  LH
    and IP that couples who were openly gay would be at risk on  return  to
    Sri Lanka.  I refer specifically to the judgement at  [119]  where  the
    Tribunal found that there was little evidence  to  support  persecution
    for gay men  particularly  if  they  choose  to  exercise  an  internal
    relocation option to the more gay friendly cities such as  Colombo  and
    that internal relocation would normally  be  sufficient  to  enable  an
    individual to avoid risk since risks are usually from  family,  friends
    or neighbours.

18.   In relation to whether or not the first Appellant would  be  returning
    to Sri Lanka as a sex worker, whilst the judge did not engage with this
    aspect of the evidence, it is not clear to me whether the case was ever
    advanced on this basis. I have not seen  the  skeleton  argument  which
    apparently was before the judge (there is no reference to this  in  the
    decision and I have not been provided with a copy of  it).  However,  I
    note the evidence at [55] of  his  witness  statement.   There  was  no
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that as a gay man he would  not
    be able to find employment in Sri Lanka. In any event,  he  had  ceased
    working as a sex worker when the incident  occurred  and  had  spent  a
    number of months in Colombo presumably having sought alternative  means
    of income.  I am not satisfied that the case was properly  advanced  on
    the basis that the first Appellant would be returning to Colombo  as  a
    sex worker. Paragraph 55 of the witness statement is lacking in detail.
    In any event, there was insufficient evidence before the judge that the
    first Appellant would be compelled to do this. He  would  be  returning
    together with his partner and  they  have  both  gained  qualifications
    here. There is no material error arising from  the  failure  to  engage
    with this issue.

19.  The Appellants experienced one incident  each  with  the  police.  Both
    incidents are historic and one more so than the other. The most  recent
    relates to the first Appellant and occurred four months before he  came
    to the UK and when he was working as a sex worker.  It  was  unarguably
    open to the judge to conclude that they were  isolated  incidents.  The
    reasons for this finding can be reasonably  inferred  from  the  facts.
    They are, by any account historic and in relation to each Appellant one
    off incidents.  This ground is related to  whether  or  not  the  first
    Appellant would be returning as a sex worker and I refer  to  paragraph
    19 (above). The judge was entitled to conclude on the  evidence  before
    her that they were isolated incidents.

20.      There was before the FtT insufficient evidence  to  establish  that
    these Appellants would be at risk on return. The findings of the  judge
    are grounded in the evidence and adequately reasoned. There is no error
    of law and the decision is maintained.

The Decision

21.    There is no error of law and the decision to dismiss  the  appeal  is
    maintained.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 1 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 1 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
