
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10581/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London        |Determination Promulgated          |
|On 5 November 2014                  |On 6 November 2014                 |
|                                    |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                               ERNEST XHEDIKU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant: Mr S Sesay, Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the respondent: Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a national  of  Albania,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against a decision by the respondent dated 12 November  2013  to
   refuse his application for asylum and to remove him from the UK. Judge of
   the First-tier Tribunal Fletcher-Hill dismissed the appeal. The appellant
   now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

2. The appellant claims that he is an Albanian  national  and  that  he  was
   born on 5 February 1995 and was therefore 16 years old when he arrived in
   the UK on 25 November 2011. Upon claiming  asylum  then  he  was  granted
   leave to remain until 5 August 2012. He  applied  for  further  leave  to
   remain on asylum grounds. The refusal of that application is the  subject
   of this appeal. In summary he claims that his family are  involved  in  a
   blood feud in Albania and that he fears that he would  be  targeted  upon
   his return to Albania. The Judge found that the  appellant's  account  of
   events was not credible and dismissed the appeal.

3. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge erred in conducting post-hearing internet research. In the
   Rule 24 response and through Ms Sreeraman at the hearing  the  respondent
   accepts that the Judge should not  have  accessed  the  internet  without
   putting the  issues  arising  to  the  parties.  However  the  respondent
   contends that the Judge's  enquiries  were  not  material  and  that  the
   findings as to credibility are clear and reasoned and wholly  independent
   of the internet inquiries.

4. The Judge set out the details of her post hearing  internet  research  at
   paragraphs 83-86 of the determination. Paragraphs  83  and  84  state  as
   follows;

"83. I find that I have  been  able  to  access  a  variety  of  information
through the internet after the hearing, including details  of  the  province
where the appellant and his family lived (Diber) in North East  Albania  and
details of their village and the capital of the district, Peshkopi.

84. I have also been able to  find  references  to  someone,  in  Pashkuqan,
whose name is the same as the appellant's uncle on the internet."

5. I am satisfied that this research did influence  the  Judge  because  she
   found that there was no evidence to substantiate the  appellant's  claim.
   This was clearly a significant consideration for  the  Judge  because  it
   underlies all of her findings as  to  the  appellant's  credibility.  She
   referred to a lack of corroboration or  a  failure  to  substantiate  the
   claim at paragraphs 77, 78, 79, 80, 81 and 88. In fact  at  paragraph  88
   the Judge said; 'In view of all of the above it is inexplicable that  the
   appellant has not  produced  any  evidence  to  corroborate  any  of  the
   assertions that he made if they are true.' In  finding  that  documentary
   corroboration  could  have  been  produced  the  Judge  must  have   been
   influenced by the fact  that  she  was  able  to  'access  a  variety  of
   information through the internet' [83] and find reference to someone with
   the same name  as  the  appellant's  uncle.  The  post  hearing  internet
   research  was  therefore  material  to  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
   appellant's credibility.

6. Paragraphs 85 and 86 deal with the Home Office  Country  Information  and
   Guidance on blood feuds in Albania. Significantly  the  Judge  relied  on
   updates from June 2014, after the date of the hearing on 11  March  2014.
   The appellant did not have an opportunity to address this new evidence.

7. The failure to give the appellant an opportunity to address  the  matters
   found  in  the  Judge's  post-hearing  research  resulted  in  procedural
   impropriety.

8. The second ground of appeal contends that the Judge failed to follow  the
   country guidance set out in EH (Blood Feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348
   (IAC). However proper application of the country  guidance  case  law  is
   dependant on proper findings of fact and as I am satisfied that there was
   a procedural unfairness such as to undermine the findings of fact I  make
   no finding on the contention that the Judge failed to apply  the  country
   guidance.

9. I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  not  therefore  had  his  case
   properly considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  parties  were  in
   agreement with my view that the nature and extent of  the  judicial  fact
   finding which is necessary in order for the decision to be remade is such
   that (having regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to remit the case to the
   First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


Signed
       Date:  5 November 2014

A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


