
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10183/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 May 2015                                |On 3 June 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                          MR HARPREET SINGH SARNAH
                            MRS JYOTI KAUR SARNAH
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Hussain of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellants are nationals of Afghanistan born on 1  January  1984  and
   the second appellant who is his dependent and wife was born on 1  January
   1992.  As the second appellant's appeal rests or falls with that  of  the
   first appellant, I will consider the appeal of the  first  appellant  and
   refer to him as "the appellant".


2. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the determination  of
   First-tier Judge Agnew, dismissing his appeal against the decision of the
   respondent dated 9 November 2014 2014 refusing his claim for  asylum  and
   humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.


3. Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  RA  Cox
   on 11 February 2015 who considered that it is arguable  that  the  First-
   tier Judge erred in law by misdirecting herself as to the case of DSG and
   others (Afghan Sikhs; departure form CG) Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  00148
   (IAC), the expert and background evidence when assessing risk  on  return
   simply as a Afghanistan Sikh.


   The appellant's claim


4. The appellant's claim is based on his fear of persecution because  he  is
   an Afghanistan Sikh. He relies on the report of  Dr  Ballad  who  asserts
   that it is common knowledge that members of  this  community  have  found
   themselves subjected to steadily rising levels of  hostility  during  the
   course of the past four decades and they have consequently have even more
   reason to  seek  refuge  overseas  than  their  Muslim  compatriots.  The
   appellant further  relied  on  Dr  Ballard's  conclusions  that  reliable
   observation  can  be  made  about  the  current  characteristics  of  the
   community in question because "it is now a small fraction of  its  former
   size and that as its members shrink, its remaining  members  are  finding
   themselves ever more vulnerable to aggressive exploitation, against which
   they have no meaningful defence. Hence their exodus can only be  expected
   to continue"


   The first-tier Tribunal's findings


5. The First-tier Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  for  asylum  and
   humanitarian protection in the United  Kingdom  and  made  the  following
   findings.


I. The  appellant  has  not  been  consistent  with  his  personal  details,
   specifically his date of birth. When he was found  and  fingerprinted  in
   Paris on 19 April 2014, he stated his name was "Singh Harp"  which  given
   the way the British immigration authorities record names, it is taken  to
   mean that he gave his surname as "Singh" and his forename as  "Harp".  He
   gave his date of birth as 1  January  1963.  However,  at  his  screening
   interview he gave his name as Harpreet Singh Sarnah and date of birth  as
   1 January 1984. The identity document he produced purporting to be issued
   on 21 September 2013 (at paragraph 21 of the appellant's  bundle)  stated
   that "according to the register he is registered as two years old in  the
   year 1359 [corresponding to 1980] which would  make  his  date  of  birth
   sometime in 1978. There are  clearly  significant  discrepancies  in  the
   appellant's claimed date of birth.


II. The appellant's wife gave her  name  to  the  authorities  in  Paris  as
   Gurpreet Kaur and her date of birth as 3 March  1983.  At  her  screening
   interview, however, she gave her name as Joyti Kaur Sarnah with her  date
   of birth of 1 January 1992. In an identity card her date of birth is  not
   shown but her religion is stated as Hindu rather than  Sikh.....  In  any
   event whatever the religion of the appellant's wife, it is clear that she
   and the appellant have  both  given  different  dates  of  birth  to  the
   authorities in France and to those in the United Kingdom,  presumably  in
   order to mislead and to avoid being subsequently  traced.  Allowance  was
   clearly not made by them for the  process  of  international  fingerprint
   exchange.






III. The fact that the couple were in Paris and fingerprinted in April  2014
   was not something apparently known to the interviewing officer  when  the
   appellant was interviewed substantively on 28 October 2014.  It  was  not
   referred to in the interviews or in the refusal letter. However, Mr Keane
   for the hearing, produced documentary evidence to  that  effect  and  the
   appellant accepted that he and his wife had been in Paris.






IV. Out of this arise certain credibility points. The first significant  one
   is why the appellant did not mention this in  either  of  his  interviews
   with the immigration authorities in the United Kingdom.  At  the  hearing
   after the evidence had been put to him, he acknowledged that he  and  his
   wife had  been  in  France  for  some  months  in  April  2014.  He  also
   acknowledged that one of the "unknown" countries in which  he  had  spent
   time before Paris was Pakistan. This does not fit in with his claims made
   at the screening interview... Where the appellant  claimed  he  had  left
   Afghanistan only 15 days before he and his wife  arrived  in  the  United
   Kingdom and that they had spent three days in an "unknown  country"  then
   three days in another unknown country, then  nine  days  in  yet  another
   unknown country before getting on the lorry  and  being  brought  to  the
   United Kingdom. In that interview the appellant was also asked if he  had
   been fingerprinted in the United Kingdom or any other country before  and
   he confirmed he had been fingerprinted in the former  but  nowhere  else.
   Later in the same interview he was asked again to confirm that he had not
   been fingerprinted anywhere else apart from the United  Kingdom  and  his
   reply again was "not just here".






V. At the hearing when the appellant was asked  to  clarify  why  he  claims
   that he left Afghanistan in July and spent only a  few  days  in  unknown
   country before entering the United Kingdom, but now acknowledged that  he
   had been in  France  for  some  months.  The  appellant  seemed  to  have
   difficulty in answering the questions directly but eventually  said  that
   when he and his wife had been fingerprinted in  France,  the  agent  told
   them that they  had  come  in  the  wrong  way  and  took  them  back  to
   Afghanistan. He said that is why he claimed to have left Afghanistan only
   a few days before. This evidence of  the  appellant  is  implausible  and
   seriously damages  the  credibility  of  the  appellant  and  his  claims
   generally.






VI. The appellant had an opportunity at his substantive asylum interview  to
   explain his journey from Afghanistan to two countries and back again  but
   instead chose to mislead the respondent. He was asked when  did  he  left
   Afghanistan after the purported attack on him  in  Afghanistan  in  April
   2013.  The appellant replied "2 July 2014". He was  asked  between  April
   2013 and July this year did anything else happen to him and his  wife  in
   Afghanistan. The appellant replied "nothing has happened because  we  did
   not leave our home but we became aware from other people about  where  we
   had gone". The appellant went on to  say  that  they  became  aware  that
   people were asking after him and his wife from families out shopping  who
   told his father. The appellant said that even if  he  had  to  leave  the
   house in Afghanistan even just to go to his in-laws, he would go  in  the
   car and not walk. He did not add that during this period he and his  wife
   had in fact actually left the country, spent some  months  abroad  before
   returning to Afghanistan with the agent and  recommencing  their  journey
   out of Afghanistan again in July 2014.






VII. From this, if it is true, one can take it that if the appellant  choose
   to follow the advice of the agent to lie to the  immigration  authorities
   about when he left Afghanistan, he may well  also  be  lying  about  what
   happened to him and his  wife  in  Afghanistan  and  even  now,  when  he
   actually left Afghanistan.






VIII. The appellant did not  claim  asylum  in  France  although  they  were
   fingerprinted. He claimed that they were being moved around and  kept  in
   one room and given only food and not allowed out. This  does  not  accord
   with his evidence that they were fingerprinted in Paris if they were  not
   be allowed out. It is also not plausible that an  agent  would  keep  two
   people in France and move them around regularly from place to  place  for
   four months as claimed.






IX. The appellant's  claim  that  he  travelled  from  Pakistan  to  various
   unknown countries and entered the United Kingdom without knowing where he
   was is not credible and inconsistent.  At  his  screening  interview,  he
   claimed he did not see the document which the agent used for him and  his
   wife to enter the United Kingdom. He said they just followed  the  agent.
   At the hearing he claimed that he could not read or write  English  could
   not read signs when he was in Pakistan. When the agent drove  them  to  a
   city he did not know where he was. After leaving Pakistan  they  went  to
   another city by plane but he did not know which  airport  they  had  left
   from. He said he could not read the signs. It was put  to  the  appellant
   that signs would be in every language. The  appellant  replied  that  the
   signs were not written in Punjabi. It was put to him whether he generally
   means that signs in an airport in Pakistan are not written in Punjabi and
   which the appellant replied, "the truth is that there were no  signs  and
   we were both very scared we did not look left or right".






X. The appellant did not satisfactorily explain why  an  agent  would  bring
   him and his wife to the United Kingdom in the most  convoluted  and  most
   expensive way. He claims that they left Afghanistan and went to Pakistan.
   From there they went France  where  they  lived  for  some  months.  They
   returned to Afghanistan and repeated the whole exercise  again  and  this
   time only stayed for a few months in France. It was pointed out that  the
   appellant and his wife had passports and they could both have  just  left
   Afghanistan in the normal manner. The appellant attributed this  decision
   to his father who paid  for  all  the  expenses.  This  is  not  credible
   evidence.






XI. The discrepancies and implausibility is in the evidence which go to  the
   crux of the appellant's claim have not been addressed in the  appellant's
   witness statement, oral evidence and submissions. Having  considered  all
   the evidence and bearing in mind the low  standard  of  proof,  that  the
   evidence of the appellant is not plausible  and  he  is  not  a  credible
   witness. The appellant has failed to  establish  by  evidence  worthy  of
   credit that his wife was attacked in an attempt to abduct  her  in  early
   2013, that he was attacked in April 13 and that they remained  in  hiding
   (or travelled abroad and returned) until they could flee in April or July
   2014.






XII. The question therefore still remains open  as  to  when  the  appellant
   actually left Afghanistan. There is  no  going  behind  the  respondent's
   concession that the appellant is a Sikh from Afghanistan although  it  is
   noted that it is somewhat surprising that he  gave  the  names  of  seven
   Gurdwaras in Kabul when asked at question 34, although according  to  the
   background evidence in the appellant's bundle there is only one Gurdwara.
   An article by Al Jazeera dated 23 February 2014 states, "Kabul  was  home
   to 8 Gurdwaras, but only one remains today". It is also  surprising  that
   the appellant claims that his wife was  walking  between  two  Gurdwaras,
   only 5 to 7 minutes' walk apart, when she  was  attacked  in  April  2014
   which could not have been  possible  given  that  the  ground  everything
   states there is only one Gurdwara in Kabul.






XIII. Mr Keane for the Secretary of  State,  in  his  submissions  suggested
   there are three ways the appellant's narrative could be explained. First,
   to conceal the appellant's nationality which is normally  behind  strange
   travel stories that are sometimes given by asylum seekers. Secondly,  for
   the appellant to conceal his identity. He noted in this regard  that  the
   appellant had attempted this by giving different dates of birth. Thirdly,
   to conceal when he actually arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Mr  Keane
   submitted that the appellant and his wife could have been here for  years
   having arrived on visitor's visa with totally different names  and  dates
   of birth and thereafter claiming asylum. The only evidence given that  he
   came to the United Kingdom in July 2014 is the appellant's evidence.






XIV. Mr Keane accepted he was surmising but submitted  there  had  to  be  a
   reason for why the appellant had  given  such  an  incredibly  discrepant
   account of his movements and had tried to hide who  he  is  and  when  he
   arrived. It was also ludicrous to suggest that an agent could  hand  over
   the passport of other  passengers  to  officials  and  it  would  not  be
   questioned,  not  just  by  immigration  authorities  by  airline  staff,
   security, et cetera. All this suggest the appellant is trying to  conceal
   who he  is  and  when  he  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  legal
   representative on behalf of the appellant did not address this  point  in
   her submissions save  to  acknowledge  that  there  was  tension  in  the
   evidence of the appellant regarding dates but submitted that the Tribunal
   could have confidence in the appellant's evidence.






XV. It is not possible  to  have  confidence  in  the  appellant's  evidence
   because there are serious doubts about when the appellant  and  his  wife
   left of Afghanistan and arrived in the United Kingdom.  It  may  be  they
   have lived in another country for some years. That is not for  the  Judge
   to speculate. However it is found that the appellant has not  established
   that he and his wife only recently left Afghanistan and  arrived  in  the
   United Kingdom in July 2014.






XVI. In respect of whether the appellant could return  to  Afghanistan,  the
   background evidence on Afghanistan is noted. The report of Roger  Ballard
   is somewhat dated, having been printed in 2011. There  is  no  report  or
   incident regarding Afghanistan later than 2010. The other information  is
   mixed. In the article by Radio Free Europe at page 58, it is  noted  that
   the Ministry of education has opened two primary schools exclusively  for
   Sikh children in Kabul and Jalalabad although it is stated that this  was
   after complaints of harassment  were  made,  bullying  and  targeting  of
   minorities. At page 60 in the Guardian article about a Sikh man  deported
   from Afghanistan (he had claimed to be an Afghan when he was not) a  Sikh
   is quoted as saying that he had gone to India  with  his  family  over  a
   decade ago but he could not find work so returned  to  Kabul  to  support
   them. In the Radio Free Europe article dated 19 August 2014 at  page  57,
   it is stated that Afghanistan allocated last year  a  Parliamentary  seat
   for Sikhs which will be shared with the Hindu  representative.  President
   Hamid Karzai issued a decree guaranteeing a reserved seat in Wolesi Jirga
   for the next Parliamentary elections in 2015.






XVII. In the case of DSG on which Miss Rosu relied, it was  found  that  the
   appellant were credible in his claims of past persecution  which  is  not
   the case for the appellant. The appellant himself claims that his  father
   had been running a successful clothing business in Kabul for 25 years and
   whilst there may be discrimination, the  appellant  has  not  established
   that he or his  family  members  have  been  subject  to  persecution  in
   Afghanistan. I have not found he has been credible in  when  he  actually
   left Afghanistan. Whenever he left, he has failed  to  establish  in  the
   absence of other factors that he  and  his  wife  will  be  subjected  to
   persecution on return to Afghanistan because of their religion.



   The grounds of appeal

6. The grounds  of  appeal  state  the  following  which  I  summarise.  The
   Tribunal made a material legal error  in  rejecting  Mr  Roger  Ballard's
   report simply because it was written in 2011.  There  is  no  substantive
   consideration of the contents of the report and  no  findings  were  made
   regarding the contents save  for  the  date  when  it  was  written.  The
   contents of the report supported the  appellant's  claim  that  he  fears
   persecution in Afghanistan. Mr  Roger  Ballard's  report  indicates  that
   there is a history of persecutory treatment of Sikhs in  Afghanistan.  An
   International Crisis Group report on Afghanistan talk about the threat to
   community  networks  that  offer  support.  Hindus  and  Sikhs  now  find
   themselves in a position closely akin to that of the Jews in Nazi Germany
   and like them, find themselves forced to flee to the four corners of  the
   globe in search of safety and security. There  is  no  reliable  data  on
   religious demography as  an  official  nationwide  census  has  not  been
   conducted in decades, however it is common knowledge that members of  the
   community have found themselves subjected to steadily  rising  levels  of
   hostility during the course of  the  past  four  decades  and  they  have
   consequently had even more reason to  seek  refuge  overseas  than  their
   Muslim patriots. It would appear that the only reliable observation  that
   can be made  about  the  current  characteristics  of  the  community  in
   question is that it is now only a small fraction of its former  size  and
   that as numbers shrink, if remaining members are finding themselves  even
   more vulnerable to aggressive exploitation, against which  they  have  no
   meaningful defence. Hence it can only be expected to continue.

7. The authority of DSG is  distinguished  because  it  is  based  upon  the
   claimants in the DSG having been found to be credible. While it was  held
   that  positive  credibility  findings  are  of  clear  relevance,  it  is
   submitted that aspects of the evidence referred to in  the  authority  to
   support the contention that the appellant is at risk of persecution  upon
   return.

8. In DSG the Tribunal referred  to  the  following  pertinent  factors.  Dr
   Bestows in his report which was referred to, relates to the prevalence of
   attacks against Sikhs and also the  impunity  with  which  the  same  are
   carried out.  This goes to the appellant's credibility and  the  risk  of
   persecution upon return. The population of Sikhs  has  dwindled  to  some
   3700 as opposed to 20,000 which shows an exodus  of  Sikh  families.  The
   UNHCR report referred to paragraph 25 of the DSG shows  that  only  about
   1000 -2000 Sikhs and Hindus remain in Afghanistan.

9. The petition in question was written by family  and  friends  in  support
   and that weight is placed upon  whether  the  events  that  occurred  are
   recorded accurately as this document was not written by the appellant who
   had first-hand experience of the events.

10. Proper consideration was not given to the fact  the  appellant  and  his
   wife had to depend upon people smugglers in order  to  leave  Afghanistan
   and hence were in their hands throughout their journey. The  family  were
   persecuted in Afghanistan  as  claimed.  Afghan  Sikhs  are  at  risk  of
   persecution on return.

   The respondent's Rule 24 response

11. The respondent in her Rule 24 response to the grounds of  appeal  states
   as follows. The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal. The  appellant
   was comprehensively disbelieved. The only facts were that the  appellants
   were Afghans and Sikhs. There was no accepted history of past persecution
   in Afghanistan. In this event there was therefore no indication of future
   persecution. In DSG, the appellants were found to be credible. The  Judge
   distinguished DSG on that basis.

12. Paragraph 24 of  the  DSG  states  "of  clear  relevance  also  was  the
   positive credibility findings in the adoption of the earlier findings  by
   the Judge in April 2004 that the appellant had experienced persecution in
   the past in Afghanistan." Therefore  credibility  of  the  appellant  was
   central to their success in the  case  of  DSG.  DSG  is  not  a  country
   guidance case and has no binding  authority.  DSG  is  reported  only  to
   demonstrate how and when it was  possible  to  depart  from  the  country
   guidance case. In the appellant's case he was unable to establish a  real
   risk on return. The Judge was entitled to conclude that the report of  Dr
   Ballard was worthy of limited weight given that it was based on events in
   Afghanistan no later than 2010. Furthermore there  was  later  background
   evidence noted at paragraph 42. The conclusion of risk to  the  appellant
   at paragraph 42 of the determination is more than adequately reasoned. No
   material error of law is disclosed by the grounds.

   The hearing

13. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Hussain submitted the following  which  I
   summarise. The Judge did not consider Dr Ballard's report which  is  very
   clear that Sikhs are at risk in Afghanistan. In the case of the  DSG,  it
   did not say the appellant credibility is, the be all  and  the  end  all.
   Simply  being  a  Sikh  in  Afghanistan  it  is  enough  to  show  future
   persecution. Dr Ballard  says  that  there  are  extreme  hostilities  in
   Afghanistan and extreme discrimination. It may  be  that  the  very  rich
   would be in a position to live in gated communities relatively safely but
   not an ordinary Sikh.

14. Mr McDevitt for the Secretary of State  stated  the  following  which  I
   summarise. The grounds of appeal suggest DSG is a country  guidance  case
   when it is not one. The appeal is confined to the principle as to when it
   is possible to go behind the country guidance  case.  There  was  nothing
   credible about the appellant. Dr Ballard report is out  of  date  as  the
   last incident reported as 2010. The Judge took into account  more  recent
   evidence. There is no perversity in the Jude's s findings which are valid
   and cogent.

   Decision on error of law

15.    I have given anxious scrutiny to  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Judge  and  have  taken  into  account  the  grounds  of  appeal,   the
    submissions and the documents in the appeal.

16.   One of the complaints against the Judge is  that  he  did  not  place
    sufficient weight on the expert report of Mr Ballard.  The  Judge  gave
    proper reasons in his determination for why he placed limited weight on
    Mr Ballard's report which was that the reports  gave  no  incidents  in
    Afghanistan beyond 2010 and therefore was outdated. In the case of DSG,
    the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber Guidance Note 2011 No
    2, at paragraph 11, it is stated:


           '"If there is credible fresh evidence relevant to the issue that
           has not been considered in the country guidance case  or,  if  a
           subsequent case includes  further  issues  that  have  not  been
           considered in the CG case, the judge will reach the  appropriate
           conclusion on the evidence, taking into account  the  conclusion
           in the CG case so far as it remains relevant.".

17. It was argued by the respondent, which I accept, that the DSG is  not  a
   country guidance case which has to be followed. This case  was  primarily
   as to the circumstances under which a Judge can  depart  from  a  country
   guidance case. The Judge in this case relied on evidence  post-dated  the
   country guidance case of SL & Others (Afghanistan)  CG  (returning  Sikhs
   and Hindus) [2005] UKIAT 00137, where it was held that Afghan Sikhs  were
   not at risk of either persecution for a Convention  reason  or  treatment
   contrary to their protected human rights.

18. The Judge was entitled to take into account more recent  evidence  about
   risk on return  to  Afghanistan  for  Sikhs  instead  of  relying  on  Mr
   Ballard's report which was dated 2011 but referred to no incident  beyond
   2010. The Judge took into account the article by Radio Free Europe  which
   stated that the Ministry of Education and  is  open  to  primary  schools
   exclusively for Sikh children in Kabul and Jalalabad and noted that  this
   is after complaints of harassment and bullying targeting  the  minorities
   was made. He took into account a Guardian newspaper article about a  Sikh
   man purporting to be from Afghanistan who stated that he  went  to  India
   with his family over a decade ago but  he  could  not  find  work  so  he
   returned to Kabul to support them. He noted that the  Radio  Free  Europe
   article dated 19 August 2014 at page 57 stated that Afghanistan allocated
   last year a parliamentary seat for Sikhs which will be  shared  with  the
   Hindu representative.

19. The Judge took into account an article in the  appellant's  bundle  from
   Radio Free Europe where it  is  stated  that  in  the  1970s  there  were
   estimated to have been more than 150,000 Hindus and Sikhs in Afghanistan.
   Many were engaged in successful businesses, owned shops and the  children
   studied in universities. However thousands  migrated  in  the  1980s  and
   again in the 1990s. It is stated that there are only  around  4000  Sikhs
   living in the country. The majority of Sikhs who have remained there  are
   impoverished people who struggle to make ends meet. A Sikh is  quoted  as
   saying that "in our community only those who have no money have  remained
   in Kabul and Jalalabad. Anyone who can  afford  to  leave  wouldn't  stay
   here".

20. The Judge noted that it is clear that the appellant and his father  have
   sufficient funds, if his claims  are  true,  to  pay  an  agent  for  his
   brother's family as well as the appellant and his  wife  to  get  to  the
   United Kingdom using false documents and agents. The  Judge  stated  that
   the appellant's  claim  of  expending  this  amount  of  money  to  leave
   illegally  when  it  was  not  needed  for  them  to  legitimately  leave
   Afghanistan does not sit well with the background country information  or
   if it were true that the appellant and  his  other  family  members  were
   desperate to leave Afghanistan because they were in fear of abduction and
   losing their lives. They could have simply got on the plane and left  for
   Pakistan or another nearby country. The claims of  the  large  amount  of
   money expended to get the appellant, his wife and his brother and  family
   to the United Kingdom is far  more  redolent  of  obtaining  an  economic
   advantage in entering into and remaining in  the  United  Kingdom  rather
   than fleeing persecution.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
   appellant did not need an agent to leave  Afghanistan  to  go  to  nearby
   Pakistan or India, if he was indeed  fleeing  persecution.  He  was  also
   entitled to consider evidence which post-dated Dr  Ballard's  report  and
   did not fall into material error.

21. The Judge did not find the appellant  credible  and  proper  and  cogent
   reasons were given in the determination for this finding in some  detail.
   The Judge found that there is no evidence as for when the appellant first
   entered the United Kingdom. The Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
   appellants' narrative that he left Afghanistan, went to Pakistan and then
   to France. He then returned to Afghanistan, went back to Pakistan then to
   France before coming to the United Kingdom. The judge noted that  in  his
   substantive interview the appellant had an opportunity to explain that he
   had left Afghanistan but had returned to Afghanistan before leaving again
   but instead he misled the respondent. The Judge  took  into  account  the
   appellant's answer at his asylum interview when he was asked,  after  the
   claimed attack on him in April 2013 to when he left Afghanistan on 2 July
   2014 did anything as happened to him what his wife  in  Afghanistan.  The
   appellant answered "nothing's happened because we did not leave our  home
   but we became aware from other people about where we had gone". The Judge
   noted that the appellant did not say that during this period he  and  his
   wife had left the country and spent some months abroad  before  returning
   with an agent to  Afghanistan  and  recommencing  their  journey  out  of
   Afghanistan for the second time, in July 2014. The Judge was entitled  to
   find that the appellant misled the respondent and that it is not credible
   that an agent would take the appellant on such a convoluted route to come
   to the United Kingdom. These findings were  open  to  the  Judge  on  the
   evidence before him.

22. The Judge found that that the appellant's evidence that he and his  wife
   was attacked in Afghanistan walking from  one  Gurdwara  one  to  another
   Gurdwara which was a short distance apart is not credible  and  does  not
   accord with the background evidence. The Judge found that the appellant's
   evidence that there are eight good in Kabul, does  not  accord  with  the
   background evidence that they is only one Gurdwara  left  in  Kabul.  The
   Judge's findings that the wife therefore could not have been attacked  in
   Kabul walking from one Gurdwara to another, is not perverse or irrational
   on the evidence.

23. The Judge  also  highlighted  other  credibility  issues  including  the
   appellant's inconsistency as to how long he lived in France and Pakistan.
   He was entitled not find credible the appellant's evidence  that  he  did
   not  know  that  he  was  in  Pakistan.  He  considered  the  appellant's
   explanation that he and his wife were so stressed that they did not  look
   at the signs at the airport to know that they were in Pakistan. The Judge
   was also entitled to find that the appellant's evidence that he  did  not
   know that he was in Pakistan not to be credible. The Judge found that  it
   is not possible to know when the appellant left Afghanistan and  for  how
   long he was living in France and for how long he has been in  the  United
   Kingdom. It was open to the Judge to  find  that  the  appellant  is  not
   credible and has not given credible explanations too many  issues  raised
   by the respondent.

24. The Judge found with  good  reasons  based  on  the  evidence  that  the
   appellant lied about his name and date of birth was  in  France  and  the
   United Kingdom to mislead the respondent. The Judge properly  found  that
   it is clear that the appellant and his wife  have  both  given  different
   dates of birth to the authorities, in order to mislead and to avoid being
   subsequently traced. It was therefore open to the Judge to find that  the
   appellant's did not make  allowance  for  the  process  of  international
   fingerprint exchange which is why the appellant felt  confident  to  give
   different dates of birth. The Judge essentially found that the  appellant
   resorts to deception to achieve his objectives.

25. I however accept the argument put forward on  behalf  of  the  appellant
   that lack of the appellant's credibility does not necessarily go  to  his
   risk on return but it must be borne in mind that the  appellants  failure
   to prove that he was persecuted in Afghanistan before he left the country
   is relevant to his risk on return.

26. There was no credible evidence before the Judge to  suggest  that  every
   Sikh, no matter what his or her circumstances is at risk in  Afghanistan.
   The Judge took into account the background evidence and recent events  in
   Afghanistan to inform his decision.

27. The Judge noted at paragraph 43 that the  appellant's  father  has  been
   running a successful clothing business in Kabul for 25 years  and  whilst
   there  may  be  discrimination  against  Sikhs,  the  appellant  has  not
   demonstrated that he and his members of  his  family  were  subjected  to
   persecution when they were in Afghanistan. The fact that the  appellant's
   father had resources and had a  successful  clothing  business  in  Kabul
   correctly demonstrated to the Judge that the appellant  was  not  amongst
   those who were at risk in Afghanistan. The appellant's father's  business
   and resources in Kabul were circumstances that the Judge was entitled  to
   take  into  account  in  assessing  risk  on  return.   The   appellant's
   representative also pointed out in his submissions at  the  hearing  that
   people with resources are able to live in gated communities in Kabul  and
   it  is  the  ordinary  Sikh  who  would  find  it  difficult   to   avoid
   discrimination and persecution. I accept this argument  that  Sikhs  with
   resources and successful businesses are able to live in Kabul  relatively
   safely to the Howarth standard.

28. The Judge's determination has been carefully written and  he  has  taken
   into  account  all  the  evidence  in  reaching  his  decision  which  is
   sustainable. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and
   find there is more material error of law in the determination.


DECISION

Appeal dismissed



      Dated this 1st day of June 2015
Signed by


Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal









