
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10155/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th August  2013                             |On 19th  November 2013     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                     Between

                                 suamo simon
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S.Bryce, Counsel, instructed by Drummond Miller,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction.

   1. The appellant made a claim to asylum on 19 May 2006, having arrived by
      air two days earlier from the Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC).  He
      claims that he is a national of that  country,  born  on  1  September
      1980.


   2. The appellant claims that he was a supporter of  the  UDPS  and  that,
      whilst taking part in a demonstration, he was hit over the head  by  a
      policeman and taken into custody. After being detained almost a  year,
      he had managed to leave a hospital where he had been  transferred.  He
      was helped by a pastor who had befriended him. They then travelled  to
      the United Kingdom, the same  pastor  enabling  him  to  pass  through
      immigration control with a false passport.   He  claimed  that  he  is
      fearful of being returned to the DRC because of his  involvement  with
      the UDPS and because he has claimed asylum in the United Kingdom.

   3. Asylum was refused on 5 July 2006.  His appeal  was  dismissed  on  26
      October 2006.  The judge did not find him to be  a  credible  witness.
      On the 4 December 2006, the appellant made an  Article  8  ECHR  claim
      which was  refused.   Further  representations  were  submitted  on  3
      January 2008 and 23 April 2012 but were rejected as  fresh  claims  by
      the respondent.  A decision to remove the appellant  to  the  DRC  was
      made on the 31st October 2012.  The appellant appealed.

The First -tier Tribunal

   4. His appeal was heard on the  10th  December  2012  at  Glasgow  before
      Immigration Judge Debra Clapham. The appeal was dismissed.


   5. The appellant had provided a report on enforced  returns  to  the  DRC
      entitled `Unsafe to return' written  by  Catherine  Ramos  along  with
      email correspondence from the author.  Her report related to a  survey
      of 15 enforced returnees from the United Kingdom who claimed they  had
      been  abused  by   the   Congolese   authorities.    The   appellant's
      representative  had  submitted  that  this  report  was  up  to  date;
      indicated that people had been tortured when returned;  and  therefore
      it would be unsafe to return him.  It  was  argued  that  the  country
      guidance case of BK (Failed asylum  seekers:   DRC)  CG  [2007]  00098
      should not be followed in light of the report from Ms Ramos as it  was
      out of date.  Inter alia, BK held that, on return to the  DRC  ,failed
      asylum seekers per se do not  face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
      treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.


   6. At paragraph 47 of her determination Judge Clapham states :

         47. In relation to whether he can be returned to  the  DRC  I  have
         before me the report  from  Catherine  Ramos.   That  obviously  is
         considerably more up-to-date than the country guidance case  of  BK
         and I am being asked to depart from the country guidance case here.
          As I understand it I am in a position to depart from  the  country
         guidance if there is fresh and compelling evidence to do  so.   The
         country guidance case of BK states that on return to the DRC failed
         asylum seekers do not per se face a real  risk  of  persecution  or
         serious harm or treatment contrary to article 3 of the EC HR.   The
         Court of Appeal decision is dated 2008.








   7. Judge Clapham went on to say :

         49. I am not persuaded that in this  particular  case  I  am  in  a
         position to depart from the country guidance case.   In  the  first
         place, as I stated the report is based on 15  returnees  only.   On
         the other side of the coin the United Nations High Commissioner for
         refugees noted in 2011 "In January 2011 there were 107,900 returnee
         refugees ... in the country of which  UNHCR assisted 10,900...   In
         short, Ms  Ramos'  study  is  based  on  a  very  small  number  of
         returnees.  Further, although Ms Ramos claims a special interest in
         the DRC she is not  a  country  expert  conceding  that  she  is  a
         language teacher and interpreter.  She  claims  that  her  meetings
         with high-profile cabinet members shows that her  report  has  been
         taken seriously but the fact of the matter is that no comments have
         yet been made on that report.  Further, the  UKBA  claim  that  the
         report  fails  to  address  any   mythology   re   credibility   of
         interviewees and no list of questions and no survey design.  In her
         email Ms Ramos states that she has explained  her  mythology  in  2
         sections of the report which span 3 pages.  In these  sections  she
         claims to identify interviewees and how she addressed  credibility.
         In relation to the survey design she says she is  unclear  what  is
         meant by that and therein I think lies one of  the  faults  of  the
         report.  Ms Ramos is not  an  expert  in  this  type  of  research.
         Qualitative  Research  design  is  a  highly   specialised   field.
         However, most of what she writes has been  gleaned  through  third-
         party evidence and she dismisses as not relevant the fact that some
         of the asylum seekers who have been  returned  have  been  returned
         because  of  credibility  issues  stating  that  she  has  obtained
         information about these individuals from people  in  the  community
         and she is prepared to therefore put weight on the statements  from
         the failed asylum seekers on that basis.  I think there are  severe
         design and mythological problems with the report, and  until  these
         have been addressed or I am persuaded otherwise I am  not  prepared
         to depart from previous findings.

The Grounds of Application


   8. A number of grounds were advanced  relating  to  how  the  immigration
      judge dealt with the evidence. Central  to  the  application  was  the
      manner in which the judge dealt with  the  evidence  of  the  risk  on
      return.  This consisted of more than the report from Ms Ramos.  It was
      also suggested that the judge did not take into  account  a  telephone
      statement from Ms Ramos about her report.   It  is  also  argued  that
      Judge Clapham erred in law by suggesting she could only depart from  a
      country guidance case where there was fresh and  compelling  evidence.
      Her reference to large numbers of people returning to the DRC in other
      reports  did not factor in that these were  people  who  had  fled  to
      neighbouring countries rather than being returned to the airport.   It
      was suggested she failed to take into account the  risk  simply  as  a
      failed asylum seeker being returned and the operational guidance  note
      from the UK BA that it was still considering the Ramos report.

   9. The Grounds also assert  that  Judge  Clapham  failed  to  comment  on
      evidence about negative comments about asylum seekers made by the  DRC
      Ambassador on a visit to the United Kingdom.  Judge  Clapham  referred
      to the President of Vox des Sans Vox, a Congolese  human  rights  NGO,
      who had claimed  that,  whilst  returnees  to  the  airport  had  been
      monitored, no ill treatment had been  observed.   The  Grounds  states
      that there was evidence before Judge Clapham that that organisation no
      longer  operates.   The  judge's  treatment  of  Article  8  ECHR  was
      criticised as cursory.


Permission to appeal


  10. Permission was refused in the First-tier Tribunal. The view taken  was
      that the judge had conducted a careful analysis of the background  and
      objective evidence, including the expert evidence relied on, and  give
      sufficient reasons for adhering to the country  guidance  decision  of
      BK(Failed asylum seekers :DRC)CG [2007] 00098.

  11. Similar grounds were advanced in seeking  permission  from  the  Upper
      Tribunal.   In  addition,  it  was  suggested  that  Judge   Clapham's
      conclusion that the appellant lacked credibility had tainted her  view
      of the appellant's risk on return simply as a  failed  asylum  seeker.
      It was submitted that the  judge  had  not  mentioned  the  fact  that
      removals from the United Kingdom to DRC had been halted following  the
      comments made by the DRC Ambassador.


  12. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Chalkley  on
      23 February 2013 on the basis the Grounds raised arguable issues.



The adjournment application in respect of the Upper Tribunal hearing.

  13. By a letter dated 2 August 2013, received at Field House on  5  August
      2013, the appellant's representatives sought an adjournment  of  these
      proceedings.  This was because the Administrative  Court  had  granted
      permission to  bring  a  judicial  review  in  respect  of  two  cases
      involving returns to the DRC.  Return was challenged on the  basis  of
      the comments made by the DRC Ambassador and the content of the  report
      from Ms Ramos.  A substantive hearing has apparently been fixed for 19
      February 2014.  The application was refused on the basis  it  had  not
      been established in the present appeal that there had been an error of
      law.


  14. At the hearing, Mr Bryce renewed the application.  He  referred  to  a
      generic letter  dated  17  May  2013  from  the  Treasury  Solicitor's
      Department to representatives involved in judicial review applications
      challenging removal to the DRC. The letter asked applicants  to  agree
      to stay proceedings pending the outcome of the lead cases fixed for 19
      February 2014. He said that the respondent had, in the  meantime,  put
      removals on hold.

  15. We pointed out to the representative that  Field  House  had  not  put
      appeal hearings on hold.  We were mindful of the comments of the Court
      of Appeal in AB (Sudan) -v- SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 921 which dealt  with
      an appeal against an order of the  Administrative  Court  refusing  to
      stay judicial review proceedings pending  an  appeal  to  the  Supreme
      Court in a related action regarding removals to Italy under the Dublin
      Convention.  Jackson LJ had referred to the rapid  developments  which
      can occur in immigration law and in many of the countries  with  which
      immigration proceedings are  often  concerned.   At  paragraph  32  he
      stated:

         32. In my view the power to stay immigration cases pending a future
         appellate decision in other litigation is a  power  which  must  be
         exercise cautiously and only when, in the interests of justice,  it
         is necessary to do so.  It may be necessary to grant a stay if  the
         impending appellate decisions are likely to have a critical  impact
         on the current litigation.  If courts or tribunals  exercise  their
         power to stay cases too freely, the immigration  system  (which  is
         already overloaded with work) will become even more clogged up.


      This view was echoed by Davis LJ:


         54. It seems to me that, generally speaking, tribunal's and  courts
         should be very wary in this field in acceding  to  requests  for  a
         stay of proceedings on the ground that  a  relevant,  or  allegedly
         relevant, point of law or practice  is  due  -  it  is  often  said
         "shortly", although that more often proves to  be  a  statement  of
         aspiration rather than of fact - to be decided in some other  case.
         Sometimes such a course may be necessary and appropriate, depending
         on the circumstances.  But it should not be taken as some  kind  of
         norm.


  16. With these dicta in mind, we refused the  adjournment  application  on
      the basis an error of law had yet to be  established  and  we  saw  no
      prejudice by proceeding to determine the error of law question.

The point argued.


  17. In line with Directions issued by the Upper Tribunal, the  appellant's
      representative had filed a skeleton argument.  It states that the sole
      basis on which the appeal was to be argued  related  to  the  risk  on
      return to the appellant as a failed asylum  seeker,  specifically  one
      who exited illegally. It was acknowledged that Judge Clapham had  been
      right to take the previous credibility findings as a  starting  point.
      The only issue was the point arising in Senga CO-573-94,  namely,  the
      risk created by virtue of the act of claiming asylum, irrespective  of
      the truth of the underlying claim.


  18. Although the country guidance case of BK (Failed asylum seekers:  DRC)
      CG  [2007]  00098  dealt  with  risk  on   return,   the   appellant's
      representative argued that the issue should be revisited.  This was on
      the basis that the Administrative Court  would  be  doing  so  in  the
      pending judicial review applications.  An additional dimension to  the
      appellant's claim was that he left the DRC illegally.  The consequence
      of this was not covered by BK.  The Ramos report  indicates  that  the
      penalty for doing so  would  be  imprisonment  and  that  the  country
      guidance case established that prison conditions in the  DRC  violated
      Article 3 ECHR.  The principal argument  however  centred  on  whether
      immigration Judge Clapham had properly dealt with the Ramos report.


  19. At hearing, Mr Bryce referred us to paragraph 47 of immigration  Judge
      Clapham's determination.  He said that when  considering  whether  she
      should depart from the country guidance of BK (Failed asylum  seekers:
      DRC) CG [2007] 00098, the judge had wrongly applied a  test  requiring
      `fresh and compelling evidence'.  He also referred to paragraph 49  of
      the determination where Judge Clapham had noted that Ms Ramos was  not
      a country expert and was critical of her  methodology.   He  suggested
      that the judge had misunderstood the nature of the report and she  had
      approached it on the basis it was an expert report which it  was  not.
      Rather, as outlined in his skeleton  argument  it  was  more  akin  to
      diplomatic  or  consular  material  used  in  relation  to  advice  on
      situations in a country.  By using the phrase 'compelling'  he  argued
      the immigration judge was introducing  a  specific  and  inappropriate
      criterion.

  20. Mr Mullen submitted that the use of the word  `compelling'  in  itself
      did not demonstrate a material error of law.  He said the  immigration
      judge had dealt with all the evidence in detail and had preferred  one
      part of the evidence over another.  He submitted that  the  judge  had
      properly referred to the smallness of the sample used by Ms Ramos and,
      at  paragraph  49,  she  questioned  the  methodology  used  and   the
      credibility of the interviewees.  He submitted that  country  guidance
      were only promulgated following a  rigorous  examination  of  all  the
      evidence in relation to a country; by contrast, Ms Ramo's  report  was
      impressionistic and based on a small sample from people not  found  to
      be credible.

Our conclusions

  21.  The skeleton argument on the behalf of the appellant  refers  to  the
      decision of DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure from CG  Afghanistan
      [2013] UKUT 00148 (IAC).  There, the Upper Tribunal upheld  the  judge
      in the First-tier Tribunal departing from a country guidance decision.
       The country guidance decision was from 2005  and  found  that  Afghan
      Sikhs were not at risk if  returned.   Against  this,  the  First-tier
      judge had a more recent High  Court  decision  and  an  expert  report
      indicating there had been a drastic reduction in the number  of  Sikhs
      in Afghanistan.  The Upper Tribunal referred to the Practice Direction
      in relation to country guidance  cases  (reproduced  in  the  skeleton
      argument) and concluded the  First-tier  judge  had  directed  himself
      properly, albeit by way of paraphrase.  The Upper Tribunal found  that
      a First-tier Tribunal  judge  was  entitled  to  depart  from  country
      guidance  where  evidence indicated that it should  not  be  followed.
      At paragraph 26, the Upper Tribunal stated:


         26... A country guidance  case  retains  its  status  until  either
         overturned by a higher court  or  replaced  by  subsequent  country
         guidance.  However, as this case shows, country guidance cases  are
         not set in stone ... and a judge may depart from  existing  country
         guidance in the circumstances described in the  Practice  Direction
         and the Chamber Guidance Note.   This  does  not  amount  to  carte
         blanche for judges  to  depart  from  country  guidance  as  it  is
         necessary, in the wording of the practice direction to show why  it
         does not apply to the case in question.  In SG (Iraq)  [  2012]EWCA
         Civ 940, the Court of Appeal made it clear, at  paragraph  47,  the
         decision-makers and tribunal judges are required  to  take  country
         guidance determinations into account, and  to  follow  them  unless
         very strong grounds supported  by  cogent  evidence,  are  adduced,
         justifying their not doing so.  To do so otherwise would amount  to
         an error of law.


  22. Before deciding  to  depart  from  country  guidance,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal must have before it "credible fresh evidence".  The  test  is
      not that the evidence is `compelling'.  A judge is required  to  carry
      out a proper evaluation of any fresh evidence presented to cast  doubt
      upon an existing country guidance decision.  It is our conclusion that
      immigration  Judge  Clapham  did  properly   evaluate   the   evidence
      presented.  Paragraph 49 clearly demonstrates her  evaluation  of  the
      report from Ms Ramos and the weight she attached to it in the light of
      the existing country guidance.  The judge gave her reasons for finding
      shortcomings in the methodology used by Ms Ramos and her evaluation of
      the risk on return is a balanced one;  for  example,  she  noted  that
      returnees are likely to be interviewed by the DRC authorities.  We  do
      not find that the judge erred in law in refusing to  depart  from  the
      existing country guidance. We do not find that her  use  of  the  word
      "compelling" introduced a new and improper test into her analysis;  we
      find that the use of the word did no more than indicate that the judge
      was aware that she should not  depart  from  country  guidance  simply
      because new evidence, whatever  its  probative  value,  had  been  put
      before her. We find her analysis  of  the  new  evidence  and  of  the
      evidence as a whole to have been fair. Consequently, we find no  error
      of law in her decision to follow the existing country guidance in  the
      particular circumstances of this appeal.


  23. Mr Bryce did not pursue any of the other grounds upon which leave  was
      granted.

Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Signed                              Date

Immigration Judge F J Farrelly                  Sitting as  a  Deputy  Judge
of the Upper Tribunal.











