

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10402/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6 December 2016                |On 7 December 2016             |
|                                  |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     MB
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patel (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant in this determination identified as MB.

   1. I have made  an  anonymity  order  as  this  decision  refers  to  the
      appellant's protection claim.


   2. This is an appeal by the appellant, a  citizen  of  Libya,  against  a
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated  10  June  2016,  in
      which it dismissed his appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to
      refuse asylum and humanitarian protection.

FTT decision

   3. The FTT disbelieved much of  the  appellant's  account  including  his
      claim that he was deliberately targeted in Libya.   The  FTT  rejected
      the appellant's claim that he would be at risk in  Libya  for  reasons
      relating to his sur place  activities.   Having  made  these  specific
      findings, the  FTT  considered  the  more  general  position  for  the
      appellant and his family members in their home area of Benghazi.   The
      FTT applied AT and others (Article  15c;  risk  categories)  Libya  CG
      [2014] UKUT 00318 (IAC) and concluded in line with that  case  that  a
      person with the appellant's characteristics would not be  at  risk  of
      indiscriminate harm in Benghazi.  The  appeal  was  dismissed  on  all
      grounds.



Error of law

   4. At the beginning of the hearing both  representatives  indicated  that
      they agreed that the FTT's decision contains two  material  errors  of
      law.  Before turning to these it is important to note that  there  has
      been no appeal against the FTT's findings  regarding  the  appellant's
      past activities in Libya or his sur place activities.   Ms  Patel  has
      firmly   predicated   this   appeal   on   the   appellant's    "bare"
      characteristics: a healthy Libyan man with a wife and young  children,
      whose home area  in  Benghazi.  It  follows  that  the  FTT's  factual
      findings are uncontaminated by the errors of law identified below  and
      are preserved.


   5. Turning to the two errors of law.  First, Mr McVeety accepted that  as
      at the date of hearing there was adequate evidence that conditions  in
      Benghazi had deteriorated to the  extent  that  AT  should  have  been
      reconsidered.  That this is  so  is  apparent  from  the  plethora  of
      materials available, as summarised in the respondent's report "Country
      Information and Guidance - Libya: Security and humanitarian  situation
      (June 2016).

   6. Second,  Mr  McVeety  accepted  that  the  FTT  did  not  address  the
      submissions on the safety of  the  route  of  return  for  the  family
      members.  Mr McVeety however submitted that the  respondent's  current
      position is that this appellant  is  at  risk  in  his  home  area  of
      Benghazi but that he can internally  relocate  to  Tripoli,  and  that
      flights have resumed to an airport nearby.  The  question  as  to  the
      safety of the route of return has  therefore  changed.   There  is  no
      longer any issue  regarding  the  safety  of  returning  to  Benghazi.
      Rather, safety of route of return is restricted to a consideration  of
      the safety of getting to Tripoli

   7. The appellant was granted permission in relation to the  latter  point
      in para 6 but not the former in para 5.  Mr McVeety did not object  to
      permission being extended to the former point, as contained in  ground
      2 of the grounds  of  appeal,  and  I  formally  grant  permission  in
      relation to ground 1.

   8. As both representatives agreed that the decision  contains  these  two
      material errors of law, there is no need for me to  give  any  further
      detailed reasons.


Re-making the decision

   9. I indicated to Ms Patel that the decision could potentially be  remade
      by me.  She  was  clear  in  her  submission  that  extensive  factual
      findings were required regarding the issue of internal relocation  and
      these should be made by the FTT.


  10. By paragraph 7.2 of the relevant practice statement for appeals on  or
      after 25 September 2012, I must be satisfied that:

                 "the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
                 necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
                 made  is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the   overriding
                 objective in rule 2 it is appropriate to remit the case  to
                 the First-tier Tribunal."

  11. Both representatives agreed that the situation in Libya  was  changing
      rapidly and it  is  important  for  the  Tribunal  to  assessment  the
      position for this family in Tripoli by reference to comprehensive  and
      up to date evidence that was not available  at  the  date  of  hearing
      before me. Both agreed that this should be considered by the FTT.   It
      is clear from FA (Libya: art 15c) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 413 (IAC)  that
      AT is no longer country guidance given the numerous changes  in  Libya
      since November 2013 and the issue of internal relocation (the risk and
      reasonableness analysis) for this appellant shall need to be carefully
      considered in light of updated evidence.  In all the  circumstances  I
      am satisfied that it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  FTT  to
      determine the issue of internal relocation and if relevant the  safety
      of the route of return to Tripoli (the respondent having accepted that
      the appellant cannot safely return to Benghazi).

Decision

  12. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error of law
      and I set aside those parts of the decision addressing risk on  return
      and humanitarian protection.




  13. The decision shall be remade by the FTT.

Directions

   1) The matter shall be listed on the first available date before the FTT
      with a time estimate of 2.5 hrs.
   2) The appellant's solicitors shall file and serve a skeleton argument
      outlining his position on the outstanding disputed issues ((i) risk
      and reasonableness of internal relocation to Tripoli and (ii) the
      safety of the route of return to Tripoli) and the evidence relied upon
      with page references to the appellant's bundle (which should contain
      updated witness statements), 28 days before the hearing.
   3) The respondent shall file and serve a skeleton argument in response 14
      days before the hearing.
   4) Arabic, North African interpreter.






Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
6 December 2016
