
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10062/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th September 2017                  |On 8th September 2017                |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     PN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. O'Ryan, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who in a determination  promulgated  on  the  22nd
    April 2016 dismissed her claim for protection.  Originally  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal there were two Appellants; the  Appellant  and  her
    daughter, however this appeal is brought solely by the first  Appellant
    therefore it is not necessary to set out any details  relating  to  the
    second Appellant's claim.

 4.   The  Appellant's  immigration  history  is   set   out   within   the
    determination at paragraphs [2]-[3] and in the decision  letter  issued
    by the Secretary of State.  It can be summarised  briefly  as  follows.
    The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on the 20th June 2004 on  a
    visit visa valid for six months. On the 3rd December 2014 the Appellant
    made her  application  for  asylum  which  resulted  in  a  substantive
    interview and a decision letter issued by the Secretary of State  dated
    3rd July 2015 in which her application for asylum was refused.

 5. The primary basis of the Appellant's protection claim  is  recorded  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs [4] to [20] which
    is also referred to in the detailed reasons for refusal  at  paragraphs
    [21]-[25].  Her claim for protection  related  to  fear  on  return  to
    Uganda as a result of her membership  of  a  particular  social  group,
    namely that of sexual orientation.

 6. The Appellant exercised her right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 24th  November  2015.
    However the decision was not promulgated  until  the  22nd  April  2016
    which was almost 5 months after the hearing of the claim.

 7. In that decision at paragraphs 113-125, the judge set out her  findings
    and conclusions and rejected the core of her asylum claim and  was  not
    satisfied that her account relating to circumstances in Uganda were  as
    she had claimed and was not satisfied also that she was gay as had been
    claimed. The judge also found  that  her  daughters  appeal  should  be
    dismissed. It is not necessary to set out the judge's consideration  of
    that claim as there is no appeal  against  that  decision  before  this
    Tribunal.

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and the grounds
    are set out in the papers dated the 5th May  2016.   In  essence  those
    grounds make reference to the issue of the delay  in  promulgating  the
    determination in the light of having dismissed the claim exclusively on
    grounds of plausibility or the credibility of the  claim.  The  grounds
    extensively set out the relevant case law  relating  to  the  issue  of
    delay, the likely effect upon the findings of fact and  also  that  the
    decision failed to engage with the evidence of four witnesses who  gave
    evidence before the Tribunal. The last ground makes  reference  to  the
    dangers of making credibility findings on  the  basis  of  plausibility
    (paragraphs 13 - 15).

 9. Permission to appeal was refused  on  24  May  2016  however  an  Upper
    Tribunal Judge granted permission on 22  June  2017  in  the  following
    terms;

         "... the grounds set out  in  arguable  challenge  the  credibility
         findings, bearing in mind the delay  between  the  hearing  of  the
         appeal and the promulgation of the determination  nearly  5  months
         later, and the points made in relation to the acceptance on the one
         hand by the judge of the  credibility  of  the  witnesses  and  the
         adverse conclusions with regard to the Appellant."

10. At the hearing before this Tribunal Mr O'Ryan, who  did  not  represent
    the Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, relied upon the grounds  that
    were before the Tribunal.  He relied upon the grounds as pleaded taking
    the Tribunal to the authorities and by making reference to the decision
    in  SSHD v RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868. He referred  the  Tribunal
    to the determination and that on the face of the  decision  the  appeal
    was heard on 24 November 2015 and was signed on 21 April 2016 which was
    just short of five months and there was no other indication that it was
    prepared earlier than the date upon which it was signed. Thus there was
    significant delay. He further referred the Tribunal to the contents  of
    the determination at paragraph 113 in which the judge recorded that she
    had "the opportunity of hearing and observing  the  Appellant  and  the
    witnesses who gave evidence". Later at paragraph 115, the judge  refers
    to her account of the Appellant's experiences "which does not have  the
    ring of truth about it." Thus he submitted what the judge had heard and
    observed was five months prior to making the actual assessment.

11. He referred the Tribunal to the grounds which extensively set  out  the
    legal authorities relied upon and which related to the  safety  of  the
    judge's decision where credibility  findings  are  made  after  such  a
    lengthy and significant delay. Whilst  the  rule  of  thumb  was  three
    months, the authorities set out the principles that should be  applied.
    By reference to the decision in RK (as cited) which was  a  case  where
    there had been 39 months delay, and the Secretary of State's appeal was
    dismissed,  he  submitted  that  that  case  involved  no   issues   of
    credibility and no oral evidence was given. Thus the present appeal can
    be distinguished from the decision in RK.

12. Dealing with the second ground, at paragraphs 10 to 12 of the  grounds,
    whilst the judge made reference to the witnesses who gave  evidence  on
    the Appellant's behalf and found that there was no reason to disbelieve
    their evidence at [113], an assessment of their evidence had been  left
    out of account. He submitted that the judge at [122] made reference  to
    the evidence of "the gay community and organisations" which  must  make
    reference to those witnesses, but the judge went on to  state  "however
    against the background of my findings in respect  for  life  in  Uganda
    before coming to the  United  Kingdom,  I  find  that  the  Appellant's
    involvement with these organisations in United Kingdom.... lead  me  to
    the conclusion the Appellant's claim to be a homosexual is a fabricated
    one." In reaching that conclusion judge had not taken into  account  or
    made an assessment of the detail of the witnesses  evidence  which  was
    relevant to be taken  into  account  "in  the  round"  when  making  an
    assessment of credibility.

13. At paragraphs 13 to 15 of the grounds, he submitted  that  the  judge's
    adverse findings on credibility were based on the plausibility  of  the
    account. In the light of the case law cited in the grounds, that was an
    incorrect approach to adopt. Furthermore in the  light  of  an  account
    that was then dismissed after a significant delay gave  further  reason
    for reaching the conclusion that the decision was unsafe and could  not
    stand.

14. Mr Bates confirmed that the Secretary of State  had  not  provided  any
    rule 24 response following the grant of permission. He  made  reference
    to the issue of delay. He said that the Secretary of State  was  unable
    to provide any insight into the  delay  but  accepted  that  there  was
    significant delay as outlined in the grounds. However he submitted that
    this was a detailed determination of 30 pages and the judge  at  length
    recorded the cross-examination. However whilst  he  accepted  that  the
    findings were brief he submitted that there were findings made  by  the
    judge were sufficient to support her adverse conclusion on credibility.

15. As to the witnesses evidence, he submitted that it was not unusual  for
    witnesses to attend and for them to genuinely believe the Appellant but
    for the judge to find  that  they  have  in  effect  been  deceived  by
    Appellant. In this context he referred to witnesses called in Christian
    conversion cases (Dorodian).If there was an error of law, he  submitted
    that this was a case that should go back before the First-tier Tribunal
    and that none of the findings of fact could be preserved which mirrored
    the submission made by Mr O'Ryan as to disposal.

Discussion:

16. I am satisfied that the central  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant are correct and that this  is  case  in  which  it  has  been
    demonstrated that the delay between the hearing of the appeal  and  the
    decision almost 5 months later has  affected  the  adverse  credibility
    findings made  and  thus  renders  the  determination  unsafe.  I  have
    therefore reached the conclusion that the  decision  cannot  stand  and
    will be set aside.

17. I have reached that  conclusion  for  the  following  reasons.  I  have
    carefully considered the jurisprudence set  out  in  the  grounds  that
    relate to the issue of delay and have done  so  in  the  light  of  the
    decision in RK (as cited).

18. The decision of Sambasivam v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2000] Imm AR 85 is referred to in the decision of RK (as cited).  That
    was the case where an asylum  seeker  unsuccessfully  appealed  to  the
    Court of Appeal after a delay in promulgation of four months after  the
    hearing. In that case the Appellant referred to a statement made by the
    IAT in Mario [1988] Imm AR 281 at 287 stating;

         "In an  area  such  as  asylum,  where  evidence  requires  anxious
         scrutiny, the Tribunal will  usually  remit  the  case  to  another
         adjudicator where the period between the hearing and the  dictation
         of the determination is more than three months."

19. This is being referred to as the "rule of thumb" approach  where  there
    is a delay in promulgation.

20. At paragraph [16] of Sambavisam, Potter LJ referred to this as "no more
    and no less than a useful statement of guidance to  practitioners  upon
    the usual attitude and likely decision of the IAT in a  case  where  an
    issue essential to the disposition of the claim for asylum depends upon
    a careful weighing of the credibility  of  the  applicant  and  yet  it
    appears that the delay between hearing date and the preparation of  the
    determination exceeds three months." He went on to state:

    "in the absence of special or particular circumstances, that is plainly
    a useful and proper rule of thumb  which,  in  the  experience  of  the
    Tribunal,  it  is  broadly  just  to  apply,  the  twin  reasons   that
    substantial  delay  between  the  hearing  and   preparation   of   the
    determination then does the assessment of credibility issues unsafe and
    that such a delay tends to  undermine  the  losers  confidence  in  the
    correctness of the decision once delivered."

21. He went on to state "in cases of delay of this kind, the matter is best
    approached from the starting point  that,  where  important  issues  of
    credibility arise, a delay of over three  months  between  hearing  and
    determination will merit remittance for rehearing unless, by reason  of
    particular circumstances, it is clear that the eventual outcome of  the
    application, whether by the same or a  different  route,  must  be  the
    same."

22. There is no dispute that the judgement of Potter LJ needs to be read in
    the light of the judgement of the Court of Appeal in RK  (Algeria)  (as
    cited) as set out in the Upper Tribunal decision in Arusha and  Demushi
    (deprivation of citizenship-delay) [2012] UKUT 00080.

23. It is important to note that  the  factual  circumstances  in  RK  were
    different to the present appeal- credibility was not an issue  and  did
    not require consideration of oral evidence given by witnesses.

24. The court made it plain at paragraph  22  that  there  was  not  appeal
    against the delay but that (the  Secretary  of  State)  must  "in  some
    rational way, present the  delay  as  a  source  of  infection  of  the
    decision."

25. In my judgement, the decision in RK requires a nexus to be  established
    between any undue delay and any defect in the  evaluative  process  and
    this requires a careful consideration of the grounds advanced on behalf
    of this Appellant.

26. Having considered the determination in the light of the submissions,  I
    am satisfied that there is such a nexus established. This was the  case
    that centred upon the Appellant's  credibility  and  in  particular  in
    relation to  her  claimed  sexual  orientation.  In  this  respect  the
    Appellant's evidence and that of the four witnesses was key  in  making
    an assessment on the credibility of her claim. The judge placed  weight
    on "having heard and observed" the Appellant  and  the  witnesses  (see
    paragraph 113) and at paragraph 15 made reference  to  the  Appellant's
    account of her experiences which "does not have the ring of truth about
    it." However the determination is silent as to when the judge made  her
    assessment of the Appellant and the  witnesses  and  the  determination
    gives the appearance of having considered and "observed"  the  evidence
    five months before making the eventual assessment. It  cannot  be  said
    that the determination states when  the  judge  made  that  assessment-
    whether it was undertaken straight after  the  hearing  or  short  time
    thereafter whether it was in fact five months after  having  heard  the
    evidence. There is no reference to that within the determination.

27. I take into account, as Mr Bates submitted, that  the  judge  recounted
    the evidence in the determination, however reciting the  evidence  five
    months later is  not  the  same  as  having  had  in  mind  the  recent
    observation of the witnesses at the time and reaching a fair assessment
    of this evidence.

28. I further take into account that the  judge  heard  and  observed  four
    witnesses who gave relevant evidence relating to the Appellant's sexual
    orientation from having had considerable contact with her whilst in the
    United Kingdom. The judge summarised that evidence at paragraph  83-93.
    It is plain from the evidence given by those witnesses  that  some  had
    experience of working with the LGBT community and  in  particular  with
    those who have sought asylum (see paragraph 85). Other evidence related
    to their experiences of having met her, and known her for a significant
    period of time and their experiences of the Appellant.

29. The judge at [113] stated that she had "no reason to disbelieve  "those
    witnesses and that there" genuine conclusion is that she is  a  lesbian
    lady". However the findings of fact made by the judge  were  relatively
    brief when seen in the light of the recitation of the evidence. However
    importantly the findings did  not  make  any  real  assessment  of  the
    evidence of the witnesses. At paragraph  122,  the  judge  appeared  to
    return to that evidence when referring to  the  evidence  of  the  "gay
    community "and this must be  a  reference  to  the  evidence  of  those
    witnesses. However, the judge stated "however against the background of
    my findings in respect of her  life  in  Uganda....  I  find  that  the
    Appellant's involvement with these organisations in the United  Kingdom
    and her attendance at gay pride marches, given how late in the day that
    she accessed these organisations, lead me to the conclusion  that,  the
    Appellant's claim to be a homosexual is a fabricated one..."

30. In reaching that conclusion, the judge failed to make an assessment  of
    those witnesses and the evidence "in the round" and had  considered  it
    solely in relation to the events in Uganda and against  the  background
    of having made a late claim of asylum. As Mr  O'  Ryan  submitted,  the
    judge did not engage with the depth of knowledge given by the witnesses
    in the light of the time that they had  known  the  Appellant  and  the
    general factual circumstances outlined in their  evidence.  It  is  not
    sufficient in my judgement to  simply  dismiss  that  evidence  as  the
    witnesses genuinely holding views, without more.

31. I make it clear that I do not set aside the decision on account of  the
    delay per se. The Appellant is not, nor could she be appealing  against
    the delay but advances this appeal on the basis of presenting delay  as
    infecting the decision thereby rendering  it  unsafe.  Thus  for  those
    reasons, I am satisfied that the Appellant has made out the grounds and
    I have reached the conclusion that the decision involves the making  of
    an error on a point of law. The decision is thereby set aside.

32. As to the remaking of the decision, both advocates submitted  that  the
    correct course to adopt in a case of  this  nature  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  it  would
    enable the judge to consider the Appellant's evidence and that  of  the
    witness; this is a case in which the adverse credibility  findings  are
    therefore unsafe and cannot be preserved

33. In the light of those submissions, I am  satisfied  that  this  is  the
    correct course to take and therefore I set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to hear afresh.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family.  The direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.
 Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.




Signed[pic]                             Date: 7/9/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

