

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10806/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on: |
|On 25 July 2016                               |On 26 July 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                         Saber Abdulla Ebrahim Fathi

                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                             NOTICE AND DECISION

   Pursuant to rule 21(4) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
                                    2008
                                (as amended)

1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal against the  decision
   of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's
   decision to remove him to his country of origin, Bahrain,  following  her
   refusal  to  grant  him  international  protection  under   the   Refugee
   Convention or humanitarian protection grounds,  or  leave  to  remain  on
   human rights grounds.

2. However, the application for permission to appeal is defective.   Whereas
   before the First-tier Tribunal, the  applicant  was  represented  by  AJO
   solicitors, in the application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal, he represents himself and no address for service is given.   In
   the appropriate box, he gives his address as 'no fixed abode'.

3. Paragraph 21(4) of the Upper Tribunal Rules  requires  the  appellant  to
   state his name and address in issuing a notice of appeal.  That  has  not
   been done and in consequence this  was  never  a  valid  application  for
   permission to appeal.

4. It will not be possible to serve this decision on  the  appellant  as  we
   have no address for service.   The decision will  therefore  lie  on  the
   appeal file: if the appellant contacts the Upper Tribunal  he  may  apply
   for the appeal to be reinstated, if he can provide a satisfactory  reason
   for the failure to provide an address for service as the Rules require.

DECISION

5. I set aside the grant of permission in this appeal.

6. There is no valid appeal before the Upper Tribunal.


Date: 26 July 2016                      Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


