
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10020/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|On 27 May 2015                       |On 4 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             KOUROSH SHABASTANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D McGlashan, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By determination promulgated on 12  January  2015  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hands dismissed the appellant's appeal against refusal of asylum.

 2. Paragraph 16 of the determination says:

         "At the commencement of the hearing, Mr McGlashan indicated that he
         had been able to obtain a video of the appellant performing his rap
         song and had been able to bring a laptop to the hearing which would
         be able to play it.  Mr Govan [the Presenting Officer] objected  to
         the playing of the video as there had been no previous reference to
         it and a copy had not been provided to the respondent's office.  He
         had not had the opportunity to investigate the source of the video.
          Mr McGlashan explained the appellant had only been able  to  email
         it to him recently as there was some difficulty  with  the  playing
         format and he would have no objection to  allowing  Mr  Govan  some
         time  to  view  the  video  and  consider  his   position.    After
         considering the submissions, I decided not to allow the video to be
         played."

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  on  one  ground
    only: alleged unfairness in declining to admit into evidence the video,
    said to show the appellant performing a rap song and talking about  his
    experiences in detention.

 4. No further evidence about the video accompanied the grounds.

 5. In a Rule 24 response to the grant of permission the respondent  argues
    that although the judge is said to have given no reasons on this point,
    she must have upheld the respondent's  reasons;  that  the  appellant's
    credibility was cogently rejected; and that the video  could  not  have
    added materially to his case.

 6. The UT issued directions on 28 April 2015, which amongst other  matters
    reminded parties of the need to apply if they sought to  introduce  any
    further evidence.

 7. On 27 May 2015 the appellant tendered his "inventory of productions 4":
    (1) cd video of appellant's... highly political rap  song  against  the
    Islamic regime" and (2) certified English  translation  of  appellant's
    rap song.

 8. Mr McGlashan submitted that it had been unfair not to allow the  cd  to
    be played.  He accepted that the performance was in Farsi and  that  no
    transcript had been available.  He said he  had  been  suggesting  that
    there  should  be  an  adjournment  for  a  translation  to  be   made.
    Otherwise, there would have been no point in admitting the evidence.

 9. Mrs Saddiq said that her colleague's file minute recorded  that  having
    enquired half an hour before the hearing, there was  no  indication  of
    further evidence, yet when it began there was a request to play a video
    recording.  That came far too late and  with  no  explanation,  so  her
    colleague was right to object.  The reasons he gave  were  recorded  at
    paragraph 16 and were rightly upheld  by  the  judge.   It  could  have
    served no purpose to play a recording in Farsi.  At  paragraph  34  the
    judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  provided  a  video  to  his
    representative but found it  would  have  added  little.   Now  that  a
    transcript and translation were belatedly provided, there  was  nothing
    in them to make any difference.  The judge had given good  reasons  for
    finding the appellant's  evidence  incoherent  and  unpersuasive.   The
    appellant  had  not  shown  any  unfairness.   He  had  not  given  any
    meaningful explanation of why it took so long to produce the recording.
     There had been a case management review  hearing  in  advance  of  the
    substantive hearing, when no potential problem was intimated.

10. Mr McGlashan in reply said  the  matter  did  not  arise  only  at  the
    hearing, because it was in the appellant's statement that  a  recording
    existed.  It was not in cd format at the time of  the  hearing,  having
    only recently been emailed to the appellant's phone from Iran and  then
    to his representatives.  It went to the core of  the  appellant's  case
    that he had written and performed rap songs with his friends  in  Iran.
    The transcribed content was plainly critical of the regime.

11. I reserved my determination.

12. The transcribed  and  translated  song  does  appear  critical  of  the
    cruelties of the Iranian regime.

13. There was no intimation in advance of a possible  problem  relating  to
    video evidence.  A mention buried in a statement is  not  enough.   Any
    difficulty should have been made clear at the case management review on
    8 December 2014.  To raise the  issue  only  when  the  hearing  began,
    having told the other side half an  hour  earlier  that  there  was  no
    further evidence, called for strong justification.  It  has  still  not
    been explained with any clarity why this item became available only  at
    the last possible moment.

14. The application was not advanced or at least not  clearly  advanced  at
    the hearing as one calling for an adjournment.  It was  suggested  that
    the video be played to the tribunal for any value it might have,  which
    would be more a fishing expedition than proper leading of evidence.

15. The grounds of appeal to the UT were not accompanied by any  transcript
    and translation, without which it is doubtful whether the case  merited
    a grant of permission.

16. The production of the transcript in the UT is another matter delayed to
    the last moment.  The transcript includes no mention of  the  appellant
    talking about his experiences in detention, which was  previously  said
    also to feature.

17. Cases should not too  readily  go  against  appellants  for  procedural
    shortcomings.  Not all these shortcomings may be  attributable  to  the
    appellant himself.  However, there is an unsatisfactory history on  his
    side.

18. The question is whether the judge gave the appellant  a  fair  hearing.
    As matters emerged before  her,  there  was  no  good  reason  for  the
    evidence to arrive so late.  No legal error arises from her  sustaining
    the respondent's objections.  In any event, her determination makes  it
    plain that the appellant was not prejudiced  by  non-admission  of  the
    video.

19. The reasons of the judge for  rejecting  the  appellant's  account  are
    cogent.  They include the following at paragraph 30:

         "I accept the appellant performed rap songs  with  his  friends  in
         private ... he claims to have written two songs, one of  which  has
         political connotations however the one he claims  was  released  by
         his friends on the internet was not the political one.   I  do  not
         find it is reasonably likely this would have  brought  him  to  the
         adverse attention of the Iranian authorities."

20. That is as favourable a view of the issue as the appellant  could  have
    expected, if the video had been played  and  the  transcript  provided.
    The judge would have come to the same conclusions.

21. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.






           [pic]


           1 June 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
