
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10081/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th November 2016                         |On 20th December 2016         |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Abdallah [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Hussain, instructed by Lei Dat & Baig
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Ransley made following a hearing at Manchester on 19th April 2016.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Kuwait born on 28th August 1995.  He  says
    that he is an undocumented Bidoun, a claim rejected by the appellant.

 3. The judge accepted that the claimant was an  undocumented  Bidoun  from
    Kuwait.  She noted that the  Secretary  of  State  had  raised  several
    credibility issues in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  and  wrote  as
    follows:

         "Applying the lower standard of proof, I find that the appellant by
         way of his rebuttal witness  statement  has  provided  an  adequate
         response to the challenge raised by the respondent in  the  refusal
         letter.  I note that at the hearing Mrs Fell relied on the  refusal
         letter but she did not  seek  to  challenge  the  rebuttal  witness
         statement."

 4. The judge noted that the claimant was supported by his maternal  cousin
    who has been granted refugee status on the basis of his ethnicity.  She
    found his asylum account to be consistent with the  background  country
    materials and on that basis allowed the appeal.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had not adequately given reasons for her decision.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Parkes on 27 May 2016.

 7. Although Mr Hussain sought vigorously to defend this  determination,  I
    am satisfied that the judge did err in law.  The Secretary of State set
    out a number of difficulties, as she  saw  them,  with  the  claimant's
    evidence in the refusal letter. It was  incumbent  upon  the  judge  to
    explain why she considered that the claimant's rebuttal  statement  had
    properly addressed the Secretary of State's concerns.  It is not enough
    simply to say that the statement provided an adequate response.

 8. Furthermore, since the Presenting Officer at the hearing relied on  the
    refusal letter, it is not a proper reflection of her position to  state
    that she did not seek to challenge the rebuttal witness statement.

 9. The judge erred in law because she did not give adequate reasons to the
    Secretary of State explaining why she had lost the appeal.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision will have to be  re-made  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Ransley at Manchester.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed[pic]                         Date 19 December 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
