
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10141/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 June 2015                      |On 25 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                            MR SRIMATHAN SRIPALAN
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Ruddy, Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal with permission against a decision by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal D'ambrosio dismissing an appeal on asylum and human
    rights grounds.

 2) The appellant was born on 15 April 1988 and is a national of Sri Lanka.
     He is of Tamil ethnicity.  In March 2014 when he was visiting Vavuniya
    he was detained by the Sri Lankan Army in a house to house search.  The
    army were looking for a prominent LTTE member who had been involved  in
    a shooting incident with the police but had  escaped  from  the  scene.
    The appellant was detained for a month.  Early  on  in  the  period  of
    detention the army discovered that the appellant was related to an LTTE
    leader called Siva Sankar, known in  the  LTTE  as  Pottu  Amman.   The
    appellant was accused of having links with both Pottu  Amman  and  with
    the individual suspected of involvement in the shooting incident, known
    as Gopi, both of whom were attempting to rebuild the  LTTE.   The  army
    tried to make the appellant confess that he was  linked  to  these  two
    individuals and to make him disclose their location.  According to  the
    appellant he had no such links and he did not know their location.  His
    relationship with Pottu Amman is that Pottu Amman is  the  son  of  the
    appellant's grandmother's sister.  The appellant was tortured  to  make
    him reveal information.  This included beating  and  burning  his  back
    with a hot iron rod.   The  judge  had  before  him  a  medical  report
    describing the appellant's injuries.

 3) The appellant escaped from  detention  after  his  sister  bribed  army
    officers to release him.  An agent arranged for the appellant to  leave
    Sri Lanka straight away after his release.  He was  taken  by  boat  to
    India where he stayed for 3 months.  In August 2015 he  travelled  from
    Dubai to the UK using a false Indian passport.

 4) Shortly after his arrival in the UK the appellant spoke to  his  sister
    by telephone.  She told  him  that  two  days  previously  three  plain
    clothes intelligence officers had visited her home.  They told her that
    the appellant had escaped from detention and was in London.  They  said
    he would be killed if he returned to Sri Lanka.  The appellant spoke to
    his sister by phone again in November.  She told  him  that  two  plain
    clothes intelligence officers had visited her home.  She  was  required
    to notify them if she heard anything about the appellant.  He  was  not
    recorded by the army as having been released.  His record  showed  that
    he had escaped and was on a wanted list.  The appellant fears detention
    and torture if he returns to Sri Lanka.

 5) The judge noted that the medical report stated that the burn  scars  on
    the appellant's back would have caused severe pain.   The  location  of
    the scars were such that they  were  not  likely  to  have  been  self-
    inflicted.  The scars were consistent with the appellant's  account  of
    torture.  The judge was satisfied that the judge had not inflicted  the
    scars himself or arranged for them to be treated by proxy.   The  judge
    was satisfied that they were inflicted by the Sri Lankan Army when  the
    appellant was detained in March/April 2014.  The  judge  also  accepted
    the appellant's evidence as to his relationship with  Pottu  Amman  and
    his account of how he had escaped from detention.

 6) Nevertheless, the judge did not accept that the appellant would be on a
    wanted list in Sri Lanka.  The judge considered it implausible that  if
    the appellant's escape had been  arranged  through  a  bribe  he  would
    subsequently have been placed on a wanted list.  The  judge  considered
    it more plausible that in order to  avoid  possible  repercussions  for
    themselves the army officers involved in the appellant's  escape  would
    have recorded that he was released from  detention  as  of  no  further
    interest.  On this basis, having regard to the country  guideline  case
    of GJ & others (post-civil war) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  the
    appellant would be unlikely to be of interest  to  the  authorities  on
    return and would not be at  risk.   For  this  reason  his  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 7) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  given  the  judge's
    favourable credibility findings the judge arguably erred in  concluding
    that the appellant would not be at risk in terms of  the  guidance  set
    out in GJ and others.

 8) A rule 24 notice was lodged on behalf of the respondent contending that
    the judge directed himself appropriately and  that  his  findings  were
    consistent with GJ and others.  The judge was entitled  to  find  there
    was no reason to believe the appellant was on a watch  list  or  had  a
    profile that would suggest ongoing interest.

Submissions

 9) At the hearing before me Mr Ruddy for the  appellant  relied  upon  the
    grounds of the application for permission to appeal  and  stressed  the
    positive credibility  findings  which  had  been  made  by  the  judge,
    including the appellant's link to Pottu Amman.  The judge accepted that
    the appellant had been  tortured  and  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
    medical report regarding the scars on the appellant's body.  The  judge
    accepted the appellant escaped from detention through  bribery.   There
    was nothing negative in the  judge's  findings  about  the  appellant's
    history.  On the basis of this the judge should have allowed the appeal
    on asylum grounds.  The appellant fell within  paragraph  7(a)  of  the
    risk factors in GJ and others.  He was perceived as a threat.   He  was
    detained and tortured a short time ago.  He was linked to high  profile
    individuals.  These were clear findings.

10) Mr Ruddy further submitted that reference had been made at the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal to paragraph  339K  of  the  Immigration
    Rules but this had not been referred to in the determination.  The risk
    to the appellant had not been assessed properly and this was a material
    error.  The appeal should be allowed  in  the  basis  of  the  positive
    findings made by the judge.

11) For the respondent Mrs O'Brien referred to the  rule  24  notice.   She
    acknowledged the favourable findings for the appellant, for example  at
    paragraph 59, where the judge recorded that the appellant was initially
    detained without torture but described  increasingly  severe  forms  of
    torture after the army received information  that  he  was  related  to
    Pottu Amman.  He was then released to an agent after the army  realised
    that he could or would  not  provide  useful  information.   The  judge
    accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been  detained  because   of   his
    relationship with Pottu Amman.  The respondent's  reasons  for  refusal
    letter of 6 November 2014 was based on  rejection  of  the  appellant's
    history as not credible.  If he were to be regarded as  credible  there
    was nothing in the refusal letter to indicate that with his history  he
    would not be regarded as being at risk.

Discussion

12) Having considered the determination and heard the parties' submissions,
    I am satisfied that the judge erred in law.  First, the judge ought  to
    have had regard to paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules having found
    that  the  appellant  had  suffered  past  persecution.   In  terms  of
    paragraph 339K the fact that a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
    persecution or serious harm is to be regarded as a  serious  indication
    of the person's well founded  fear  of  persecution  or  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons to consider  that
    such a persecution or serious harm will not  be  repeated.   The  judge
    erred by not approaching the question of risk in these terms.

13) In itself this might not lead to the  decision  being  set  aside.   At
    paragraph 82,  however,  the  judge  treats  the  consequences  of  the
    appellant's escape from detention and finds that it  is  not  plausible
    the appellant would have been described by the army in their records as
    someone who had escaped from  detention  because  this  might  lead  to
    possible  repercussions  for  the  soldiers  concerned.   It  was  more
    plausible that the appellant would have been recorded  as  having  been
    released and therefore he would not be on a "stop" or "wanted" list.  I
    consider that the judge's reasoning in this regard is  inadequate.   He
    is  speculating  about  the  motives  and  attitudes  of  the  soldiers
    concerned and about the keeping of records of escapes  or  releases  in
    the Sri Lanka Army, a matter on which he does not appear  to  have  had
    any specific country information.  Accordingly, I do not think that the
    finding made by the judge at paragraph 82 that the  appellant's  escape
    would have been recorded as a release is a finding that is sustainable.
     In making this finding without  sufficient  evidence  or  reasons  the
    judge further erred in law.

14) The proper course for me is to set aside the decision, while preserving
    the positive findings in respect of the appellant's  treatment  in  Sri
    Lanka, and to re-make the decision.

15) In terms of paragraph 7(a) of the summary of GJ and  others,  those  at
    risk of persecution or serious harm on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  include
    individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to the  integrity
    of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are, or  are  perceived  to
    have, a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil  separatism
    within the diaspora and/or renewal of  hostilities  within  Sri  Lanka.
    Also at risk in terms of  7(d)  are  those  whose  names  appear  on  a
    computerised "stop" list accessible at the airport, comprising  a  list
    of those against whom there is an extant court order or arrest warrant.
     It is further stated in GJ and others, in the summary at paragraph  8,
    that the Sri Lankan authorities' approach  is  based  on  sophisticated
    intelligence, both as  to  activities  within  Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
    diaspora.  At paragraph 9 it is stated that the authorities maintain  a
    computerised  intelligence-led  "watch"  list.   A  person  whose  name
    appears on a "watch" list is not reasonably likely to  be  detained  at
    the airport but will be monitored by the security services after his or
    her return.  If that monitoring does not indicate that such a person is
    a Tamil activist working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or
    revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in question is  not,
    in general, reasonably likely to be detained.  This would be a question
    of fact in each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried  out
    by such an individual.

16) In this appeal the appellant claimed to be on a  "wanted"  list.   This
    appears to be a "watch" list rather than a "stop" list as there  is  no
    evidence of an arrest warrant  or  court  summons  for  the  appellant.
    Nevertheless, the evidence is  that  he  remains  of  interest  to  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka because of his relationship  to  the  activist
    Pottu Amman and his suspected link to another activist called Gopi.  In
    this regard it  is  significant  that  the  appellant's  detention  and
    torture was a recent event, taking place in March/April 2014, nearly  5
    years after the cessation of the civil war.  This  indicates  that  the
    appellant is perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as associated with
    individuals who continue to be regarded as a threat to the integrity of
    Sri Lanka.

17) Although the appellant was able to secure his release from detention in
    April 2014, this was only after he had been tortured.  As long  as  the
    appellant remains  of  interest  to  the  authorities  because  of  his
    relationship with, in particular, Pottu Amman, there  is  a  real  risk
    that he would be detained in the future were he to return to Sri  Lanka
    and suffer further torture in an attempt to  extract  information  from
    him as a perceived supporter of the LTTE or someone perceived  to  have
    close links to the LTTE leadership.  On this basis  his  asylum  appeal
    will succeed.  I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal on  asylum
    grounds.

Conclusions

18) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

19) I set aside the decision.

20) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

21) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   As  the
    appeal has been allowed and no application has been made  for  such  an
    order, I do not consider that it is necessary and I make no such order.



Fee Award   Note: This is not part of the determination

As no fee has been paid or is payable, no fee award is made.


Signed      Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
