
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10453/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2018                            |On 23 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     J H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, instructed by Broudie Jackson & Canter,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, J H, is a female citizen of  Zimbabwe.   By  a  decision
    which is dated 15 July 2017, I  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination of  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal of her protection claim.  My reasons for reaching  that
    decision was as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, J H, was born in 1980 and is a  female  citizen
         of Zimbabwe.  By a decision dated  14  July  2015,  the  respondent
         refused the appellant's protection claim.  The  appellant  appealed
         to the First-tier Tribunal (Designated Judge McClure) which,  in  a
         decision promulgated on 8 March 2017, dismissed  the  appeal.   The
         appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The appellant has a child (H) who was born in March 2012.  The
         appellant is HIV  positive  and  is  receiving  treatment  for  her
         condition.   Despite  claiming  that  she  was  at  risk  from  the
         Zimbabwean authorities, the judge found [71] that  the  authorities
         had no interest in the appellant at the time that she left Zimbabwe
         or that they would have any interest in her now were  she  returned
         to that  country.   In  consequence  of  that  finding,  the  judge
         dismissed the asylum/humanitarian protection/Articles 2 and 3  ECHR
         appeals.  Granting permission to appeal, Judge McWilliam found that
         the  judge  had  not  arguably  erred  in  his  treatment  of   the
         asylum/humanitarian  protection  appeals,  the  judge  not   having
         accepted the appellant's evidence "having made  findings  that  are
         grounded in the evidence and  adequately  reasoned."   The  hearing
         before the Upper Tribunal on 13 July 2017, therefore, proceeded  on
         the basis of Article 3/8 ECHR and in relation  to  the  appellant's
         medical condition as provided for in Judge McWilliam's order.

         3.   I find that the First-tier Tribunal should be  set  aside.   I
         have reached that finding for the following reasons.  First, I note
         that although the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal took place
         on 4 November 2016, the decision was not promulgated until 8  March
         2017.  The delay in promulgation was one of the grounds  of  appeal
         to the Upper Tribunal rejected by Judge McWilliam who  found  that,
         notwithstanding  the  delay,  that  Designated  Judge  McClure  had
         understood the evidence and issues and had  delivered  a  carefully
         drafted decision.  I agree.  However, I do find that the delay  has
         led the judge to fall into error.  At [20], the judge refers to the
         case of Paposhvili v Belgium [2016] ECHR 1113.  He quotes from this
         case at [183] and summarises what he considers to be the principles
         of law enunciated [21].  He notes that a judicial decision maker is
         required "among other things [2] to carry out a careful  assessment
         of the facilities of care that would be available in the  receiving
         state."  He also considers [22]  that  "current  case  law  in  the
         United Kingdom" now has to be read in the light of  guidance  given
         in  Paposhvili.   There  is  nothing   particularly   controversial
         regarding what the  judge  says  about  Paposhvili.   However,  the
         decision in Paposhvili was promulgated on 13  December  2016.   The
         case is also referred to at length by Ms Patel in  her  grounds  of
         appeal. The problem is that there exists a disconnect  between  the
         references made to the authority by  the  judge  and  counsel;  the
         judge has applied what he considers to be  the  principles  of  the
         case without giving Ms Patel an opportunity to make submissions  in
         respect of it.  Ms Patel submits that the  appellant's  case  under
         Article 3 ECHR has not been properly considered  in  the  light  of
         Paposhvili.  I make no finding in respect of that submission but  I
         do  find  that  this  is  an  instance,   given   the   change   in
         jurisprudence, when the  Tribunal  could  and  should  have  either
         reconvened the hearing  or  sought  written  submissions  from  the
         representatives.

         4.    Secondly,  I  agree  with  Judge   McWilliam,   who   granted
         permission, that the Tribunal's findings  at  [72  -  73]  are  not
         entirely clear.  The judge notes that the appellant is receiving "a
         cocktail of drugs" and that a Dr Chaponda, a consultant in HIV  and
         infectious  diseases  at  the  Royal   Liverpool   and   Broadgreen
         University Hospital in a report dated 27  October  2016  considered
         that the appellant would "die within a year"  if  she  returned  to
         Zimbabwe and was unable to access  her  "very  complex  regimen  of
         antiretroviral treatment."  Judge McClure wrote that,  "however  at
         the time that the appellant came to the United  Kingdom  her  viral
         load was undetectable with a CD4 count of 782.  Whilst it has  been
         accepted that this has increased  it  is  to  be  noted  that  drug
         treatment is available in Zimbabwe."  I take this slightly  cryptic
         remark  to  be  a  suggestion  that  the  appellant  had   accessed
         antiretroviral treatment in Zimbabwe (possibly from a Dr Brown  who
         the judge notes had  been  "willing  to  obtain  supplies  of  such
         medication") before she travelled to the United Kingdom. The  judge
         did not, however, make an unequivocal and  firm  finding  that  the
         appellant had actually accessed an  appropriate  regimen  of  drugs
         whilst in Zimbabwe.  The judge went on at [73] to "take account  of
         the fact that the report  from  the  hospital  indicates  that  the
         current course of treatment would not be  available  in  Zimbabwe."
         However, the judge considered that it was "unclear  on  what  basis
         the hospital is making that assertion.  It was also unclear whether
         or not it was considered that there may be private means to  obtain
         the medication through  individuals  like  Dr  Brown."   The  judge
         concluded [74] that, "given all the evidence I find that there  may
         be drugs available, albeit at a price, within Zimbabwe."

         5.   The problem with the judge's analysis is that  the  basis  for
         finding that the appellant would  "die  within  a  year"  had  been
         clearly set out by Dr Chaponda in his letter.   The  doctor  wrote,
         supporting his prognosis, that, "I know this from my experience  in
         working in Sub-Saharan Africa and the links that I have there."  He
         went on to indicate that he had carried out doctoral work  in  Sub-
         Saharan Africa, had worked establishing an HIV clinic from  2006  -
         2009 and that he had extensive experience with  HIV  treatments  in
         Sub-Saharan Africa as well  as  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was
         unclear why Judge McClure seems to have been unaware of this  basis
         of Dr Chaponda's prognosis given that it had been clearly stated in
         the letter.  Moreover, the judge has not made any firm finding that
         the appellant would be able to  obtain  from  Dr  Brown  (or  other
         individuals) the complex regimen of treatment which  she  requires.
         It is also not  clear  whether  Dr  Chaponda  was  aware  that  the
         appellant had possibly accessed treatment whilst  in  Zimbabwe  and
         whether or not he had taken  that  possibility  into  account  when
         giving his depressing prognosis.

         6.   Finally, as regards the application of paragraph 276ADE of  HC
         395 (as amended), t  the  judge  found  that  there  were  no  very
         significant obstacles preventing the appellant's reintegration into
         Zimbabwe.  In reaching that conclusion, the judge does  not  appear
         to have taken into account the best interests  of  the  appellant's
         child H or  to  have  considered  whether  problems  accessing  the
         necessary drug regime would constitute a  significant  obstacle  to
         the  appellant's  reintegration.   I  do  not  say  that   such   a
         consideration should have led the judge to a different decision but
         I do consider these were important factors which should  have  been
         addressed in the analysis.

         7.   In the light of what I  have  said  above,  I  set  aside  the
         decision.  Judge McClure's findings regarding asylum are preserved.
          The only remaining issue before the Upper  Tribunal  to  determine
         concerns Articles 3/8  ECHR  in  respect  of  the  appellant's  HIV
         condition.  I consider it would be helpful if further evidence  was
         obtained  from  Dr  Chaponda.   I  therefore  make  the   following
         directions.

         Notice of Decision

         8.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 8 March 2017 is set aside.   The  judge's  findings  as  regards
         asylum are preserved.  The only issue in respect of which the Upper
         Tribunal shall remake the decision concerns Articles 2/3/8 ECHR and
         arise from the appellant's medical condition (HIV positive).

         DIRECTIONS

         (i)  The parties shall file at the Upper Tribunal and serve on each
         other any evidence upon which they seek  to  rely  at  the  resumed
         hearing at least 10 days prior to the date of that hearing.

         (ii) Permission to the respondent to send questions in  writing  to
         Dr Mas Chaponda within 21 days  of  today.   A  copy  of  any  such
         written questions should be filed at the Tribunal and sent  to  the
         appellant's solicitors.  Dr Chaponda shall  reply  within  21  days
         after receipt of such questions.  His reply should be sent  to  the
         representatives of both parties.

         (iii)    Within  7  days  after  receiving  Dr  Chaponda's  written
         replies,  the  respondent  shall  notify  the  Tribunal   and   the
         appellant's solicitor if the  attendance  of  Dr  Chaponda  at  the
         resumed hearing is required.

         (iv) The resumed hearing should be  listed  before  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Clive Lane on a date at Manchester not before 2 October  2017
         (2 hours allowed)

         Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their
         family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
         respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Manchester on 25 January  2018,  Dr  Chaponda
    (see above), a consultant at the Royal Liverpool Hospital, attended and
    gave oral evidence.  Dr Chaponda explained that the appellant's current
    CD4 count had recently fallen and that the  viral  load  in  her  blood
    system had become detectable.  Without appropriate treatment,  her  CD4
    count will be likely to fall below 200 and  that  would  be  likely  to
    occur within twelve  months  of  any  adverse  change  to  her  current
    treatment regime.  At present, the appellant is on what is known as 3rd
    line treatment.  As the virus mutates it becomes necessary to find  new
    methods of treatment and new combinations of drug therapy.  Dr Chaponda
    said the treatment which the appellant would be able to access (even if
    she were able to afford to do so) in Zimbabwe  was  at  best  2nd  line
    treatment but more likely 1st line treatment to  which  her  virus  has
    been resistant now for several years.  He commented that to  treat  the
    appellant with 1st line treatment, was "as good as  treating  her  with
    nothing".  Dr Chaponda said that the appellant would be likely  to  die
    within twelve months of return to Zimbabwe whilst should she remain  in
    the United Kingdom, she would be likely to live into  her  70s  or  her
    80s.

 3. Both representatives made submissions and I reserved my decision.

 4. At the time of the error of law decision of this appeal, the law was in
    a state of some flux.  As I  noted  [3]  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    fallen into error for failing to  deal  adequately  with  the  case  of
    Paposhvili  v  Belgium  [2016]  ECHR  1113.   Since  the  date  of  the
    promulgation of the error of law decision, the Upper Tribunal has given
    its view on the relevance of Paposhvili in  EA & Ors (Article 3 medical
    cases - Paposhvili not  applicable)  [2017]  UKUT  445  (IAC).   More
    recently, we have the benefit of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64.  I have had regard to  the  judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in AM in particular in reaching my determination of
    this appeal.

 5. Whilst the prospect facing this  present  appellant  is  uncertain  but
    likely to be distressing, the legal issue in  her  case  is  relatively
    straightforward.   I  accept  Dr  Chiponda's  evidence  that  the  only
    treatment which this appellant can access in Zimbabwe  is  1st  or  2nd
    level HIV treatment which,  as  he  stated  bluntly,  is  "as  good  as
    nothing".  In short, the virus from which the  appellant  suffers  will
    not be adequately or indeed treated at all by such  drug  therapies  as
    are available in Zimbabwe.  There is no evidence to show that the level
    of drug therapy which this appellant requires is available there,  even
    at a cost.  However, given that the appellant receives a  drug  therapy
    does not require surgery or more intensive or invasive treatments,  the
    possibility must be considered that she will be able to take  with  her
    to Zimbabwe some of the drugs which she will use were she to remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  Those drugs, self-administered in Zimbabwe,  would
    have the effect of delaying the onset of the physical decline which the
    cessation of her treatment would  produce.   The  suggestion  that  the
    appellant can take a few months of treatment with her  was  not  raised
    before the Upper Tribunal and there was certainly  no  suggestion  that
    she could be treated at a distance by the NHS.  I merely refer  to  the
    possibility here with a view to underlining the  fact  that  the  exact
    prognosis for this appellant and the  speed  of  her  physical  decline
    must, inevitably, remain matters of speculation.

 6. What is more clear from  the  evidence  of  Dr  Chiponda  is  that  the
    appellant will enter a physical decline and is likely to face an  early
    death.  In his submissions, Mr  Bates,  for  the  Secretary  of  State,
    concentrated upon palliative care.   He  accepted  that  there  was  no
    treatment available for the appellant in Zimbabwe  to  actively  combat
    her illness but that it  was  likely  that  palliative  care  including
    painkillers would  be  able  to  manage  her  pain  appropriately.   Dr
    Chiponda was cross-examined about the availability of  palliative  care
    in Zimbabwe.  Though he had no direct experience of Zimbabwe itself, he
    had worked in Malawi and was of the opinion that palliative care in sub-
    Saharan Africa was similar in most countries.  Dr  Chiponda  said  that
    pain relief would be available.  It is tempting on  the  facts  of  the
    present case to conclude that to compare the level of  treatment  which
    the appellant currently receives in the United Kingdom with the limited
    palliative care she might receive prior to her death in Zimbabwe is not
    to compare like with like.  Ms Patel, for the appellant, submitted that
    the mere fact that Mr Bates concentrated upon palliative  care  was  an
    indication that the Secretary of State accepted that  there  would,  in
    effect, be no treatment at all available for the appellant in Zimbabwe.
     However, that argument may be misleading.   N v United Kingdom  [2008]
    EHRR 39 remains the authority binding upon this Tribunal.  The House of
    Lords accepted in N that the appellant would return home and would die.
     In N at [69], Lady Hale formulated the appropriate test as follows:

         "In my view, therefore, the test, in this sort of case, is  whether
         the applicant's illness has reached such a critical stage (ie he is
         dying) that it would be inhuman treatment to  deprive  him  of  the
         care which he is currently receiving and send him home to an  early
         death unless there is care available there to enable  him  to  meet
         that fate with dignity. This is to the  same  effect  as  the  text
         prepared by my noble and learned friend, Lord Hope of Craighead. It
         sums up the facts in D. It is not met on the facts of this case."

    Two observations arise from  Lady  Hale's  test.   First,  the  present
    appellant is not at present dying thanks  to  the  excellent  treatment
    which she is receiving.  Secondly,  there  will  have  appeared  to  be
    sufficient  palliative  care  available  in  Zimbabwe  to  enable   the
    appellant to "meet her fate with dignity".  That palliative care in the
    receiving  country  for  a  person  who  is  dying  is   an   important
    consideration in a case such as the  present  is  made  plain  in  Lady
    Hale's judgment.  It was not, therefore, inappropriate for Mr Bates  to
    make submissions regarding the availability of palliative care.

 7. The Court of Appeal has been careful in AM to note that the judgment of
    the European Court in Paposhvili seeks  to  make  only  a  very  modest
    alteration to the previous jurisprudence.  The Court of Appeal at  [39]
    stated:

         "There are a number of powerful indicators, including in the  Grand
         Chamber's judgment itself, which  support  this  interpretation  of
         para. [183] and the inference that the Grand Chamber only  intended
         to make a very modest extension of the protection under  Article  3
         in medical cases:

         i)   Article 3 is an unqualified right with a  high  threshold  for
         its application (see N v  United  Kingdom,  para.  [43],  and  also
         Paposhvili, para. [174]);

         ii)  the Grand Chamber cited with approval  at  paras.  [175]-[181]
         the  ECtHR's  previous  case-law  set  out  there,   including   in
         particular D v United Kingdom and N v United Kingdom, and in  doing
         so it specifically noted at para. [178] that N v United Kingdom was
         a case in which there had been no  violation  of  Article  3  where
         removal of the applicant would result in a significant reduction in
         her life expectancy;

         iii) as appears from the Grand Chamber  judgments  in  N  v  United
         Kingdom, at para. [43], and in Paposhvili, at paras.  [178],  [181]
         and [183], the paradigm case for finding a violation of  Article  3
         in a medical case is D v United Kingdom, and the Grand  Chamber  in
         Paposhvili was only concerned to  provide  guidance  regarding  the
         "other very exceptional cases" referred to in N v United Kingdom at
         para. [43], i.e. those "where the humanitarian  considerations  are
         equally compelling" to those in D  v  United  Kingdom  (ibid.;  and
         Paposhvili, para. [178]): see Paposhvili, paras.  [181]-[183].  The
         Grand Chamber in Paposhvili  itself  recited  at  para.  [177]  the
         circumstances in D v United Kingdom which made it a compelling case
         and characterised it as a case of "very exceptional  circumstances"
         - it should be noted that this characterisation was not used in the
         judgment in D v United Kingdom itself, but was  stated  to  be  the
         relevant characterisation of that case by the Grand Chamber in  its
         judgment in N v United Kingdom and is deliberately repeated by  the
         Grand Chamber here in its judgment in Paposhvili;

         iv)  the Grand Chamber in Paposhvili seeks only  to  "clarify"  the
         approach set out in N v United Kingdom (see para.  [182]),  not  to
         effect any major change to what had been authoritatively laid  down
         in that case; and

         v)   the Grand Chamber at para. [183] in  Paposhvili,  as  well  as
         using the rubric  "other  very  exceptional  cases",  which  itself
         indicates how rarely the test in Article 3  will  be  found  to  be
         satisfied in medical cases, emphasised in the final  sentence  that
         it was still intending to indicate that there was "a high threshold
         for the application of Article 3" in medical cases. This echoes the
         point made by the Grand  Chamber  in  para.  [43]  of  N  v  United
         Kingdom, set out above, about the high threshold for application of
         Article 3."

 8. At [41], the Court of Appeal stated:

         "In that regard, it is also significant that even  on  the  extreme
         and exceptional facts of the Paposhvili case, where  the  applicant
         faced a likelihood of death within 6 months if removed to  Georgia,
         the Grand Chamber did not feel able to say that it was clear that a
         violation of Article 3 would have occurred for that reason  had  he
         been removed. Instead, all that the Grand Chamber held was that the
         applicant had raised a sufficiently credible Article 3 case that it
         gave rise to a  procedural  obligation  for  the  relevant  Belgian
         authorities to examine that case with care and  with  reference  to
         all the available evidence. The violation of Article  3  which  the
         Grand Chamber held would have occurred if the  applicant  had  been
         removed to Georgia was a violation of that procedural obligation."

 9. The appellant in the present appeal has a minor child  with  her.   The
    child will return to Zimbabwe with the appellant.  Ms  Patel  submitted
    that the child's best interests would not be addressed by her returning
    with her mother to Zimbabwe and  there  to  watch  her  mother  die  in
    possibly some discomfort and pain.  Put like that, few  would  disagree
    with that argument.  However, I am drawn back  to  the  fact  that  the
    prognosis of the appellant's  physical  decline  remains  a  matter  of
    speculation.  The appellant's death as consequence of her HIV condition
    is very likely to occur but when and in what circumstances  exactly  is
    not at all clear.  I accept Mr Bates's submission that the  appellant's
    decline on return to Zimbabwe is unlikely to be so immediate  that  she
    would be unable to care for her child  or  make  arrangements  for  her
    future care.  I understand that the child  has  family  living  in  the
    United Kingdom and, as Mr Bates submitted, it may be necessary  in  the
    future for her to return here to be cared for by that family.   I  also
    agree with Mr Bates that, as he submitted, that is not  a  circumstance
    of today but one of the future.   Mother  and  child  will  be  removed
    together and, on the most basic analysis, it is  in  the  child's  best
    interest to be with her mother.

10. Sadly, the circumstances of this appellant, although very  distressing,
    are by no means unusual.  Applying the ratio of N and  having  in  mind
    also the Court of Appeal's cautious approach to Paposhvili,  I  am  not
    satisfied that the appellant satisfies  the  test  established  by  the
    House of Lords in N such that she would be entitled  to  protection  in
    the United Kingdom on Article 3 ECHR grounds. She does  not  share  the
    extreme circumstances of D v United Kingdom  and  Paposhvili  does  not
    assist her.  In the circumstances, her appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 10 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 10 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
