
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10610/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 January 2016                   |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     EM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, solicitor, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ A Hussain, promulgated  on
    14 January 2015. Permission to appeal was granted on 27 January 2015 by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher.

Background


 2. The appellant claimed asylum owing to a fear of  returning  to  Eritrea
    and indefinite military service. He claimed to  have  left  Eritrea  in
    1996, aged 2, and thereafter resided in Ethiopia, Sudan and Libya.  The
    appellant's case was referred to the National Referral Mechanism for  a
    decision as to whether he had been trafficked. The  respondent  refused
    the application solely on the basis that  the  appellant  had  acquired
    Ethiopian nationality and could "no longer" be considered a national of
    Eritrea. All other aspects of his claim were accepted.

 3. The FTTJ dismissed the appeal on the basis that the appellant would  be
    admitted to Ethiopia and was not likely to be persecuted or deported to
    Eritrea. The FTTJ particularly noted the appellant's failure  to  apply
    for Ethiopian travel documents.

Error of law


 4. Permission to appeal was sought, firstly, because it was said that  the
    FTTJ applied the wrong standard of proof in relation to Articles 2  and
    3 of the ECHR. Secondly, it was argued that the FTTJ failed to  provide
    reasons for his finding that the appellant's mother  was  an  Ethiopian
    national and this  finding  affected  the  overall  findings  that  the
    appellant could obtain Ethiopian travel documents.  Thirdly,  the  FTTJ
    had failed to give reasons as to how  the  appellant,  as  an  Eritrean
    national, could acquire Ethiopian nationality when dual citizenship was
    not permitted under Ethiopian law. Fourthly, it was said that the  FTTJ
    failed  to  apply  country  guidance,  notably  ST  (Ethnic  Eritrea  -
    nationality - return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT  (IAC).  Lastly,  it  was
    said that inadequate reasoning was provided in  relation  to  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules and Article 8 outside the Rules.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on all  grounds,  albeit  FTTJ  Fisher
    particularly emphasised the first two grounds.

 6. The Secretary of State's response of 6 February 2015  stated  that  the
    respondent opposed the appeal  as  it  was  considered  that  the  FTTJ
    appropriately directed himself. The FTTJ was said to have made  a  slip
    of the pen with regard to the standard of proof and it was said  to  be
    "clear" that the appellant would be treated de  jure  as  an  Ethiopian
    national.

The hearing


 7. Mr Howard relied on the grounds of appeal and took me to relevant pages
    of a567-page bundle, which had  been  put  assembled  for  the  hearing
    before me. All the material contained therein had been before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 8. For his part Mr McVeety conceded that the FTTJ had made a  clear  error
    as to the standard of  proof  at  [23]  of  the  decision.  He  further
    conceded that there was nothing elsewhere in the decision, which  would
    indicate that this was just a slip of  the  pen.  Accordingly,  if  the
    incorrect standard had been applied,  he  accepted  that  none  of  the
    FTTJ's findings could be preserved and that  the  entire  decision  was
    infected by that error.



Decision on Error of Law

 9. I decided that the FTTJ had made material errors of law and  set  aside
    his decision in its entirety. My reasons are as follows.

10. With regard to the appellant's claim under Articles 2 and 3  ECHR,  the
    FTTJ had the following to say;  "The  appellant  bears  the  burden  of
    proving matters relating to Articles 2, 3 and  8.  The  standard  is  a
    balance of probabilities.  In  addition,  the  burden  of  proving  his
    nationality  also  rests  with  the   appellant   on   a   balance   of
    probabilities.  It is trite  law  that  the  lower  standard  of  proof
    applies; Kacaj applied."  There  is  no  indication  elsewhere  in  the
    decision and  reasons  that  the  FTTJ  in  fact  applied  the  correct
    standard. In view  of  this  fundamental  error,  none  of  the  FTTJ's
    findings could be considered safe as Mr McVeety acknowledged.

11. For completeness, I briefly consider the other grounds  raised  in  the
    application. The FTTJ decided at [27] that the appellant's  mother  was
    an "Ethiopian national by birth." That finding  was  not  supported  by
    reasoning or reference to any evidence before the judge. Mr Howard drew
    my attention to paragraph 3 of the appellant's witness statement  dated
    30 December 2014, where  he  clearly  states,  "My  mother  is  not  an
    Ethiopian Nationality (sic). My mother had an Eritrean Passport  only."
    Evidently, the FTTJ erred in failing to provide any or adequate reasons
    and failing to take into account relevant  evidence  before  him.  That
    this was a material error can be seen from [36] of the decision,  where
    the FTTJ remarks that one of the reasons that the Ethiopian authorities
    would give the  appellant  travel  documents  is  that  his  mother  is
    Ethiopian.

12. The FTTJ found, at [31] of his  decision,  that  the  appellant  is  an
    Eritrean national with a right to Ethiopian  nationality.   Submissions
    were made to  the  effect  that  Ethiopian  law  did  not  permit  dual
    citizenship and an article, which appears before  me  at  p565  of  the
    current appellant's bundle was drawn to the FTTJ's attention. The  FTTJ
    failed to engage with that argument or provide reasons as  to  how  the
    appellant would be able to obtain Ethiopian nationality in addition  to
    his Eritrean nationality.

13. The respondent accepted that the appellant is an Eritrean national  and
    at [35] the FTTJ found that if he were to be  returned  to  Eritrea  he
    would be  entitled  to  international  protection.  The  FTTJ  did  not
    consider that the appellant is an ethnic Eritrean. There was a complete
    failure to consider the country guidance decision of ST  regarding  the
    risk of removal to Eritrea of ethnic Eritrean removed to Ethiopia. I am
    satisfied that the said authority was before the  FTTJ.  He  materially
    erred in this regard also.

14. Finally, the FTTJ's findings, set out in a single  paragraph  [44],  in
    relation to Article 8 both within and outside the Rules was  manifestly
    inadequate.

15. An anonymity  direction  was  made  by  the  FTTJ  and  I  consider  it
    appropriate that this be continued and  therefore  make  the  following
    anonymity direction:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. "

Conclusions


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision to be re-made.

Directions


       . This appeal is remitted to be  heard  de  novo  by  any  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge except I Hussain.

       . The appeal should be listed for a hearing at Birmingham IAC.

       . An interpreter in the Amharic language is required.

       . Time estimate is half a day.




    Signed Date: 24 January 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
