
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10113/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 October 2018                             |On 18 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     ZM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Uddin, Evolent Law
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. he appellant, ZM, born on 17 March 1989 is a female citizen of Albania.
     The appellant claims to fear a blood feud in  Albania  and  also  ill-
    treatment at the hands of her husband's family and  a  gang  which  had
    subjected her to human trafficking.  By a decision dated 2  July  2015,
    the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim for  international
    protection.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Moxon) which, in a decision promulgated on 11 July 2018, dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There are five grounds of  appeal.   First,  the  judge's  analysis  of
    medical evidence is challenged.   At  [42],  the  judge  noted  that  a
    diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)  had  been  provided
    although it had been made "by a counsellor rather than a more  suitably
    qualified expert such as a psychiatrist."  Whilst the judge was correct
    to say that the initial diagnosis was made by a counsellor, it  appears
    to have been reaffirmed by a psychologist  and  by  an  officer  of  an
    organisation called Solace which  had  been  "providing  psychotherapy,
    complimentary therapies and advocacy support ... in  Yorkshire  in  the
    Humber  region  since  2006"  (grounds,  paragraph  5).   In   granting
    permission, Judge Gibb noted there was a certain tension  between  [42]
    and [45] of the  analysis.   At  [42],  the  judge  recorded  that  the
    appellant had  given  a  consistent  account  to  support  workers  and
    counsellors "during which she has presented  with  symptoms  of  mental
    health  conditions  and  genuine  upset"  and   the   judge   "assigned
    considerable weight when I assessed the evidence."  At [45], the  judge
    noted that the  authors  of  the  medical  reports  had  "accepted  the
    appellant's evidence at  face  value".   The  experts  had  failed  "to
    adequately consider whether the presentation of  the  appellant  during
    the examinations was due to an alternative cause."  He  noted  that  it
    was  "not  unlikely"  that  the  appellant  would  suffer  symptoms  of
    depression in considering the prospect of returning to Albania which he
    might  find  "less  pleasant"  than  living  in  the  United   Kingdom.
    Likewise,  the  appellant  might  have  presented  with   symptoms   of
    "nervousness and anxiety" simply by reason of being assessed by  mental
    health workers.

 3. I find no error in the judge's analysis.  Paragraph [42] represents  no
    more than a statement by the judge that at the outset of  his  analysis
    he was considering all the evidence with an open mind.  He was  correct
    to do so.  He records that the diagnosis of PTSD was not provided by  a
    psychologist or psychiatrist in the first instance but goes no  further
    than that.  Indeed,  the  remainder  of  [42]  consists  of  the  judge
    reminding himself that he should give  appropriate  weight  to  medical
    evidence.  It simply cannot be said that  the  fact  that  the  initial
    diagnosis had not been provided by a psychiatrist is a main reason  for
    the judge rejecting the evidence; that rejection is  provided  at  [45]
    which makes no reference at all to the qualifications of the individual
    providing the initial diagnosis.  I agree with Mr McVeety, who appeared
    for the Secretary of State, that  [45]  simply  qualifies  the  judge's
    initial observations at [42].

 4. Secondly, the judge's decision is challenged on a  basis  that  he  has
    applied the wrong burden of proof.  It seems likely  that  the  grounds
    are intending to refer to  the  standard  of  proof,  rather  than  the
    burden.  The grounds challenge the use by the judge of the words "it is
    not unlikely" representing an application of the standard of  proof  of
    the balance of probabilities.  I reject that submission.  The judge has
    very clearly set out the correct standards  and  identified  upon  whom
    fell the burden of proof earlier in his decision at [5]-[7].  I do  not
    accept that the judge has departed from an application of  the  correct
    standard of proof.  He  was  entitled  to  observe  that  it  was  "not
    unlikely" that the appellant would feel distressed at the  prospect  of
    leaving the United Kingdom.

 5. Grounds  3,  4  and  5  are,  as  Judge  Gibb  observed  when  granting
    permission, no more than challenges to findings of fact which were open
    to the judge on the evidence.  Mr Uddin, who appeared for the appellant
    before the Upper Tribunal, made no reference to these  grounds  in  his
    oral submissions.  He was right to refrain from doing so  because  they
    lack merit.  The grounds are no more than  a  series  of  disagreements
    with the judge's findings.

 6. I am satisfied that the judge's analysis of the evidence including  the
    medical evidence in this appeal is adequate and in accordance with  the
    law.  He has not erred for the  reasons  asserted  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal or at all and I leave his decision undisturbed.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 10 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 10 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
