
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10307/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24th August, 2017                  |On 05th September, 2017               |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                           Miss Kadra Mohamed Abdi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs A Chaudhry of Counsel, instructed by Maya
Solicitors;
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Somalia  born  on  1st  June  1980,  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 31st March 2015 and claimed asylum  on
    2nd April, 2015.

2.   On 8th July 2015, the respondent refused to grant the appellant  asylum
    and also refused to grant her humanitarian protection.   As  a  result,
    the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  her  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge M Davies at Manchester on 25th April
    2017.

3.   The appellant claimed to be a member of the Ashraf clan from  Beledweyn
    in South Central Somalia.  She claimed to have been taken by the leader
    of Al Shabaab in April 2011, kept against her will and released in  May
    2011.  She gave an alternative account  that  she  escaped.   She  also
    claimed that she had gone to  her  mother's  house  after  leaving  her
    captors and was taken to Ethiopia the following day.  She stayed with a
    friend of her mother's in Ethiopia and her mother initially  went  with
    her but after one or two months returned to Somalia to look  after  her
    grandmother in Beledweyn.   The  appellant  then  gave  an  alternative
    account that her mother lived in Ethiopia.  The appellant claimed  that
    she last had contact with her mother when she left Ethiopia in 2011.

4.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and from witnesses  on
    her behalf but did not find any of them  to  be  credible.   The  judge
    quite properly advised the appellant before giving evidence  to  listen
    carefully to the questions that were put to  her  and  then  to  answer
    those questions.  The judge told her that if she did not  understand  a
    question she should tell the interpreter.  He advised her that he would
    take into account the evidence she had  already  given,  including  her
    witness statement and the evidence given to the respondent  during  her
    asylum interview.  The  appellant  indicated  to  the  judge  that  she
    understood and the judge then explained the role of the interpreter and
    emphasised that he  was  independent  of  the  respondent  and  the  UK
    authorities.  She told him that she did not wish to ask any  questions.
    A statement was submitted from Mr  Abubaker  Amin.   It  was  submitted
    shortly before the hearing and accompanied by a letter from  Manchester
    City Council's Chief  Executive's  Department  describing  Mr  Amin  as
    registered as a self-employed freelance  interpreter  for  the  Somali,
    Brava, Swahili, Bajuni and Kibajuni languages.   The  letter  described
    him as being an experienced interpreter having worked for  the  council
    for over ten years and having a degree from Egypt and, "is an ex-Somali
    Army personnel".  It is said that he was born and brought up in Somalia
    and has lived and worked both  in  Northern  Somalia  and  in  Southern
    Somalia.

5.   The judge found the witnesses not credible and  at  paragraph  99  said
    this:-

         "To summarise the appellant is not a member  of  the  Ashraf  clan.
         She is not from Beledweyn but is from  the  north  of  Somalia.   I
         attach no weight whatsoever to the evidence  of  Mr  Abubaker  Amin
         which entirely conflicts with the findings I  have  made  regarding
         the appellant.  I do take into account  the  Sprakab  Report  which
         taking into account the appellant's lack of credibility I do attach
         weight to."


6.   In granting permission to appeal, it was said  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grant that it was arguable that the  judge  may  have  erred  in,
    "providing inadequate reasons  for  his  findings  and  in  failing  to
    address the expert evidence  placed  before  him  as  set  out  in  the
    grounds".  The first challenge simply said that the  judge  incorrectly
    dismissed the evidence of the interpreter.

7.   The second challenge said that the judge,

         "makes no  mention  of  the  evidential  weight  attached  to  this
         professional evidence and indeed dismisses it totally, whereas  the
         Sprakab Report  is  used  by  the  respondent  to  argue  that  the
         appellant is from North Somalia.  The judge makes  no  findings  on
         this report other than verbally stating during the proceedings that
         since the interpreter was not present he would not be accommodating
         his witness statement, whereas he did not suggest that the  Sprakab
         linguist needed to be present."

8.   The third challenge criticises the judge for  dismissing  the  evidence
    of other witnesses, because two of  them  contradicted  each  other  on
    whether the appellant's brother was older or younger than her.

9.   Mrs Chaudhry told me that it was a material error of law  on  the  part
    of Judge Davies to dismiss the interpreter's evidence, that being of Mr
    Abubaker Amin, in its entirety in the way he did.  He was  not  present
    at the hearing, but it was clear that he had met the appellant  and  he
    had assessed her as being from Beletwyne in the South of  Somalia.   He
    said that the language she used is clearly and predominantly from South
    Somalia.  Mrs Chaudhry also suggested that the judge had erred  in  his
    assessment of the witnesses'  credibility  finding  them  not  credible
    simply on the basis of discrepancy as to the  age  of  the  appellant's
    brother.  He failed  to  recognise  that  they  met  the  appellant  at
    different times.

10.  For the respondent Mr Harrison suggested that the judge's  findings  on
    credibility were based on the appellant's inconsistency.  He found that
    he could not place reliance on anything she had said.  The statement of
    Mr Abubaker Amin was  not  the  statement  of  a  linguist  but  of  an
    interpreter.  He did not claim to be an expert and the weight that  the
    judge attached to his statement was a matter  for  him.   He  submitted
    that there was no error of law.

11.  I have concluded that the  judge's  determination  cannot  stand.   The
    judge finds at paragraph 90  that  the  appellant  has  fabricated  the
    entirety of her claim and the three witnesses she had called  had  been
    untruthful.  He noted the inconsistencies recorded by the respondent in
    the respondent's refusal letter between what the appellant said in  her
    screening interview and her subsequent interview.   The  appellant  had
    not given any explanation for those  inconsistencies.   The  judge  was
    clearly concerned that the appellant failed to answer questions put  to
    her, despite the fact that he had given her clear instructions that she
    should listen carefully to the interpreter and the question put to  her
    and say if she had any difficulty in understanding the  question.   She
    did not indicate that she failed to understand the questions.

12.  The judge also noted that she, "continued to fail to  answer  questions
    and prevaricate when  she  was  re-examined."   He  recorded  that  the
    appellant's Counsel repeated the advice that he had given to her  about
    answering questions in a straightforward manner.  He concluded that the
    appellant's account a complete fabrication and at paragraph 92 that she
    had fabricated her account of being kidnapped and raped by  Al  Shabaab
    and that she was from  Northern  Somalia  and  not  from  Beledweyn  in
    Southern Somalia.

13.  At paragraph 93 he noted contradictory evidence as to  the  whereabouts
    of the appellant's mother at the date of her screening interview and at
    paragraph 94 he said he did not accept that the appellant  was  of  the
    Ashraf clan and that she was a member of the same clan as the witnesses
    who gave evidence before him.

14.  Unfortunately, nowhere does the judge explain why  he  found  that  the
    appellant was not from  the  Ashraf  clan.   He  also  found  that  the
    appellant was from Northern Somalia and not from Beledweyn in  Southern
    Somalia before actually considering the evidence of Mr Abubaker Amin or
    the Sprakab Report.

15.  The judge then, at paragraph 95, says  that  taking  into  account  his
    findings in  respect  of  the  appellant  he  then  has  no  hesitation
    whatsoever in concluding that  the  three  witnesses  who  gave  [oral]
    evidence on behalf of the appellant had not  given  truthful  evidence.
    He criticises Mr Mohamed as giving  totally  implausible  evidence  and
    noted that he had failed  to  answer  questions  in  a  straightforward
    manner.  The judge recorded that  he  appeared  to  be  making  up  his
    evidence as he went along and said that  the  appellant's  brother  was
    older than the appellant.  He found that that contradicted the evidence
    given by Mr Affi.  He claimed that the appellant's  brother  was  older
    than the appellant.  Mr Mohamed had said that the appellant  was  older
    than her brother.  The judge attached no weight to Mr  Affi's  evidence
    either.  The third witness, Mr Khanyare, gave conflicting  evidence  of
    how he knew the appellant and it appears that he had  never  even  seen
    the appellant in Beledweyn.

16.  It was on that basis that the judge found that the appellant was not  a
    member of the Ashraf clan, but he has not given any reason at  all  for
    that finding.

17.  He also went on to find that  the  appellant  was  from  the  North  of
    Somalia and not from Beledweyn and only then does he  say  he  did  not
    attach any weight to the evidence of Mr Abubaker Amin,  which  entirely
    conflicts with the judge's findings, and that he did take into  account
    the Sprakab Report, which he attached weight to.

18.  With very great respect to the judge, he  should  have  considered  all
    the evidence before concluding that the appellant was not a  member  of
    the Ashraf clan and should have  given  his  reasons  for  making  that
    finding.  He should  also  have  considered  all  the  evidence  before
    finding that the appellant was from the North of  Somalia  rather  than
    from Beledweyn, but it is clear from the determination that he did not.

19.  I have concluded that the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  M
    Davies cannot stand.  Whilst I accept that  it  is  perfectly  possible
    that another judge may make precisely the same credibility findings,  I
    believe that they are unsafe  since  they  have  not  been  made  after
    consideration of all the evidence in the round.

20.  While Mr Abubaker Amin is an interpreter and does not claim  to  be  an
    expert linguist, there are  obvious  difficulties  with  his  evidence.
    Nonetheless, while the judge was entitled not to attach as much  weight
    to a witness statement as  he  would  to  the  oral  testimony  of  the
    witness, his reasons for attaching no weight whatsoever  to  it  simply
    because it conflicts with the findings he has made with regard  to  the
    appellant, is a mistake of law.  He should have compared the  statement
    of the witness with the  Sprakab  Report  and  then  explained  why  he
    preferred one over the other.

21.  For all the above reasons I  am  satisfied  that  the  making  of  this
    determination involved the making of an error of law.  I set aside  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge M Davies in its entirety.  I
    had given consideration to retaining the appeal in the  Upper  Tribunal
    and hearing the appeal afresh myself, but given the  inevitable  delays
    which are likely to occur if I take this course, I have concluded  that
    the interests of justice require that I remit the  appeal  for  hearing
    afresh by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge M Davies.

22.  Three hours should be allowed for the  hearing  of  the  appeal  and  a
    Somali interpreter should be booked.  Care should be  taken  to  ensure
    that the Somali interpreter is not Mr Abubaker Amin.

No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                 DIRECTIONS

I MAKE THE FOLLOWING DIRECTIONS:

         a.  The appellant shall serve on the respondent and on the First
            Tier Tribunal a copy of all witness statements relied upon NO
            LATER than 21 days before the hearing of the appeal.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

4th September 2017.
