
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10038/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2015                     |On 17 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARKUS QC


                                   Between

                                     am
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Harris, instructed by Biruntha Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka and was born in 1989.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from the contents
    of her protection claim.

 3. This appeal is against the decision promulgated  on  9  March  2015  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith which refused the appellant's asylum
    and human rights appeal.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum  in  a
    decision dated 12 June 2015. Although it focuses on particular  aspects
    of the  grounds  in  [3],  the  decision  does  not  explicitly  refuse
    permission on any ground; Ferrer (Limited Appeal Grounds; Alvi)  [2012]
    UKUT 00304 (IAC0 applied.

 5. The background to this matter  is  that  whilst  the  appellant  was  a
    student she became acquainted with Dinesh Rajapakse, a relative of  the
    former President of Sri Lanka.  He  made  unsolicited  sexual  advances
    towards her. Also whilst a student, the appellant assisted a friend  by
    receiving  parcels  which  were  then  collected  from  her  home.  The
    appellant thought that the parcels were in connection with distributing
    books to rural areas. On 2 February 2011 the appellant was arrested and
    told that the parcels contained weapons and explosives.  The  appellant
    was released and her file closed on payment of a bribe by her father.

 6. The appellant then came to the UK on 23 February  2011  to  study.  She
    returned to Sri Lanka for a holiday on 30 July 2013. During the holiday
    she campaigned for the JVP and as part of those activities  again  came
    to the attention of Dinesh Rajapakse. This resulted  in  the  appellant
    being raped by Mr Rajapakse on two occasions. On the first  occasion  a
    police officer was present and she was also raped by  him.  The  police
    officer warned her that he knew of her arrest in 2011. He  also  showed
    her evidence that a false case had been prepared  against  her  showing
    her to be involved with the intelligence wing  of  the  LTTE.  She  was
    warned not to say anything about the rapes or  the  material  would  be
    used against her and also told that her father would also be placed  at
    risk.

 7. The appellant returned to the UK  on  10  September  2013  having  said
    nothing about the rapes other than to her father. After  she  left  her
    father was threatened by  a  local  police  officer.  He  went  to  the
    Institute of Human Rights (IHR) who assisted  him  to  prevent  further
    police harassment. The IHR confirmed their  intervention  in  a  letter
    dated 3 October 2010.  The  letter  went  on  to  refer  to  a  pending
    investigation against the appellant under the Prevention  of  Terrorism
    Act (PTA). It further referred to  a  "reliable  highly  placed  source
    within the police department" confirming the existence of a PTA  arrest
    order against the appellant.

 8. The appellant's father also contacted a lawyer, Mr Rathnadiwakara, who,
    in a letter dated 20 September 2014, stated that he met with:

         "... a senior superintendent of police (SSP), who is a close friend
         of mine. On condition of anonymity he  showed  me  a  copy  of  the
         Arrest Order no: PTA/AO/2013/LT/CP 14 in his file,  issued  against
         [the appellant]. "

    The letter from Mr Rathnadiwakara went on to state  that  he  had  been
    able to note down details from the arrest order.

 9. Judge Griffith did not find the appellant's account of being  raped  by
    Dinesh Rajapakse and a police officer or existence of a false case  and
    arrest order to be credible.

10. Ms Harris' first challenge at the hearing  before  us  related  to  the
    findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith concerning  the  letters
    from IHR. The reasons given for finding the  letters  did  not  attract
    weight are at [54]:

         "I have considered the evidence from the Institute of Human Rights.
         The names of the officers of that organisation are  in  the  public
         domain. There does not appear to  be  a  manager  as  such  of  the
         organisation yet this is the title assumed by  the  author  of  the
         letter dated 3 October 2013. Furthermore, the information  set  out
         in the first paragraph of the letter dated 3 October 2013 does  not
         accord with the aims and objectives as stated in the organisation's
         key areas of work, which are available in the public domain. I have
         noted Dr Smith's view that there is a  reasonable  likelihood  that
         they are genuine. However, he states that the organisation does not
         have the resources to investigate individual cases and "all it  can
         do is hand cases over to the police". In the present case  the  IHC
         seems to have done far more than that; not only  claiming  to  have
         discussed the matter with a high ranking police officer but also to
         have received in confidence information from  the  police.  I  have
         decided I cannot place weight of any significance on the letters."

11. There are a number of difficulties with this  paragraph.  Firstly,  the
    organisational chart of IHR is set out at N1 of the appellant's bundle.
    It shows there to be a number of posts with the title "manager" in  the
    organisation. The staff profile is contained at N2 and shows a  "Sujith
    Silva" as "Manager." The letter from IHR before the First-tier Tribunal
    is signed by "Sujith Silva" who is stated  to  be  "The  Manager.  That
    information  was  at  odds  with  Judge  Griffith's   view   that   the
    organisation had no manager. We were not taken to  any  other  document
    that could bear the comments made to  that  effect  at  [54]  that  the
    organisation not having a manager.

12. Secondly, the reference in [54] misrepresents the comments of Dr  Chris
    Smith about IHR in his country report. Dr Smith states at [84]  of  his
    report that IHR are involved in legal access  and  representation.  The
    work that the appellant maintains was conducted by IHR for  her  father
    and as set out in the IHR  letter  of  3  October  2013  was  therefore
    consistent with Dr Smith's view.

13. What the First-tier Tribunal  appears  to  have  done  is  confuse  the
    comments of Dr Smith in [84] about another organisation,  Human  Rights
    Commission (HRC) which does  not  have  the  resources  to  investigate
    individual cases and "all it can do is hand cases over to the police".

14. We also noted that the appellant's claim as to the part played  by  IHR
    is also  entirely consistent with the description of the organisation's
    key areas of work set out at M1-M2 of the appellant's bundle.

15. Our conclusion was  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  reached  an
    impermissible adverse  finding  about  the  appellant's  claim  of  the
    involvement of IHR and the letter of 3 October 2013 as a result.  Where
    this evidence is a core part of the claim, it was  our  view  that  the
    error was material and such that the decision had to be set aside.

16. Ms Harris also  submitted  that  the  findings  about  the  IHR  letter
    undermined the next conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal at [55], that
    Mr Rathnadiwakara's letter of 20 September 2013 concerning  the  arrest
    order carried no weight. We found merit in that argument as credibility
    factors tend to feed off each other and the IHR letter and letter  from
    Mr Rathnadiwakara are linked to the extent that they address  the  same
    core part of the appellant's account.

17. We also heard argument on the remaining grounds, noting  in  particular
    that at  [56]  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appears  to  have  reached  a
    conclusion on credibility, then addressed the  medical  evidence,  long
    since found to be an incorrect approach. The medical report  here  also
    shows at 9.4.8 that the Consultant Psychiatrist specifically considered
    the possibility of  the  appellant  fabricating  her  symptoms  or  her
    symptoms arising from other causes. The  judge's  reasons  for  placing
    little weight on the medical report were undermined where  they  failed
    to note this approach, stating "Dr Gupta's  report  was  based  on  the
    appellant's own account" and that "it is possible that there are  other
    reasons, not disclosed by the appellant that led to  the  diagnosis  of
    PTSD."

18. For all of these reasons, we found that the credibility finding on core
    parts of the appellant's account disclosed an error on a point  of  law
    and had to be set aside.

19. We were in agreement with the parties, following paragraph 7.2  (b)  of
    Part 3 of the Senior President's Practice Statement dated 25  September
    2012, that the nature of the fact finding that will have to take  place
    is such that it is appropriate to remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be re-made de novo, none  of  the  findings  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Griffith remaining.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside to be remade.

21. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  re-made  de
    novo.



Signed   [pic]         Date 10 August 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

