
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10272/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th April 2017                     |On 08 May 2017                       |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     l S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs K Obayelu of Goshen Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against the decision of Judge Green of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 12th February 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a male Indian citizen born in 1992.  He arrived in the
    United Kingdom on 13th January 2011 having been granted  a  visa  as  a
    Tier 4 Student.  His leave was subsequently extended  until  27th  June
    2015.  However because the college at which he was a  student  had  its
    Sponsor licence revoked, the Appellant's leave to remain was  curtailed
    so that his leave expired on 6th February 2015.

 3. On 15th January 2015 the Appellant claimed asylum on the basis  of  his
    membership  of  a  particular  social  group,  that  being  his  sexual
    orientation.  The Appellant is gay.

 4. The Respondent refused his asylum and human rights application on  14th
    July 2015.  The Appellant's appeal was heard by the FTT on 8th February
    2016.

 5. The FTT found that the Appellant is gay, and that he could  not  return
    to his home in India, because of his fear of his  father  and  brother.
    However, the FTT found that it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant to relocate internally to a major city within India.  The FTT
    found that the Appellant was not at  risk  because  of  the  reasonable
    option of internal relocation, and he was not entitled to  a  grant  of
    asylum or humanitarian protection, and  his  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom would  not  breach  Articles  2  or  3  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 6. The FTT considered the Appellant's family and private life pursuant  to
    Article 8 and it was accepted that the Appellant had established family
    life in the United Kingdom with his partner who is a  Pakistani  Muslim
    and who has been granted refugee status in the United Kingdom.  However
    the FTT considered that there were no insurmountable obstacles to  that
    relationship continuing in  India.   The  FTT  found  the  Respondent's
    decision to be proportionate and the appeal  was  also  dismissed  with
    reference to Article 8.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Judge Brunnen granted permission on one ground  only,  that  being  the
    consideration by the FTT of Article  8  and  insurmountable  obstacles.
    Judge Brunnen found it  arguable  that  in  finding  no  insurmountable
    obstacles the FTT had failed to take into account that the  Appellant's
    partner is not  only  gay,  but  also  a  Pakistani  Muslim,  and  that
    consideration of these  additional  characteristics  might  lead  to  a
    different conclusion.   It was also arguable that the FTT had failed to
    give adequate reasons for finding that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing in India.

Error of Law

 8. On 27th January 2017 I heard submissions from both parties in  relation
    to error of law and concluded that the FTT decision with  reference  to
    Article 8 must be set aside.   Full  details  of  the  application  for
    permission, the grant of  permission,  the  submissions  made  by  both
    parties, and my conclusions are contained  in  my  decision  dated  3rd
    February 2017, promulgated on 14th February  2017.   I  set  out  below
    paragraphs 17 - 25 of that decision, which contain my  conclusions  and
    reasons for setting aside the Article 8 aspect of the FTT decision;

         "17. I indicated at the hearing that the FTT had  materially  erred
             in  law  in  relation  to  consideration   of   insurmountable
             obstacles,  and  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
             Therefore the FTT decision on  those  issues  was  set  aside.
             Permission to appeal had not been granted on any other  issue,
             and therefore the FTT findings in relation to risk  on  return
             were preserved.

         18.  My reasons for finding an error of law are as follows.

         19.  The FTT considered the Appellant's family and private life  at
             paragraph  31  finding  that  there  were  not  insurmountable
             obstacles to family life continuing in India 'for the  reasons
             given above.'

         20.  At paragraphs 26 - 30  the  FTT  had  considered  whether  the
             Appellant would be at risk on return to India because  of  his
             sexuality.  The FTT found that the Appellant could not  return
             to his home area  because  of  his  fear  of  his  father  and
             brother, but it would not be unduly harsh for him to  relocate
             to a major city within  India.   Adequate  reasons  for  these
             conclusions were given.

         21.  However, when considering internal relocation and whether this
             would be unjustly harsh, the FTT did not specifically consider
             the  position  of  the  Appellant's  partner.    Consideration
             related to the Appellant only.

         22.  The Respondent's  guidance  on  insurmountable  obstacles  was
             before the FTT, and as conceded  by  Mr  Mills  contained  two
             factors which needed to be specifically considered by the FTT.
               I  do  not  accept  that  these  factors   were   adequately
             considered.  I refer in particular to page 26 (page 91 of  the
             Appellant's bundle) of the guidance and the  consideration  of
             whether the Appellant's partner had the  ability  to  lawfully
             enter and stay in India.  The guidance indicates that decision
             makers should consider country policy and information, and  in
             relation to India that shows that same sex marriages  are  not
             recognised.

         23.  At page 27 of the guidance decision  makers  were  advised  to
             consider the position of a same sex couple where  the  partner
             would face substantial social discrimination or where  his  or
             her rights and freedoms would be severely restricted.  If this
             amounted to a barrier which either could not  be  overcome  or
             would present a very serious hardship  to  the  partner,  then
             this could amount to an insurmountable obstacle.

         24.  Although the  FTT  considered  internal  relocation  perfectly
             properly, the FTT did not consider  all  relevant  factors  in
             relation to  insurmountable  obstacles,  and  failed  to  give
             adequate reasons for finding that insurmountable obstacles  to
             family life continuing in India did not exist.

         25.  Having set aside the decision of the FTT, it was not  possible
             to proceed further and re-make the decision as I accepted that
             further evidence would be needed from the  Appellant  and  his
             partner, and no interpreter was available.   The  hearing  was
             therefore adjourned.  There will be a further  hearing,  which
             will consider  the  issue  of  insurmountable  obstacles,  and
             Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  The findings of  the
             FTT on all other issues are preserved."

Re-Making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 27th April 2017

Preliminary Issues

 9. I ascertained that the Tribunal had  received  all  documentation  upon
    which the parties intended to rely, and that each party had served  the
    other with any documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.  The
    Tribunal had received the Respondent's bundle with Annexes A -  E,  the
    Appellant's bundle containing pages 1 - 23, and the Appellant's  bundle
    which had been before the FTT.  In addition  Mrs  Obayelu  submitted  a
    skeleton argument dated 26th April 2017.

10. Mrs Obayelu  indicated  that  oral  evidence  would  be  given  by  the
    Appellant and his partner.  Both representatives  indicated  that  they
    were ready to proceed and there was no application for an  adjournment.



Oral Evidence

11. The Appellant indicated that he wished to give his evidence in English,
    although an interpreter  in  Punjabi  was  present,  and  assisted  the
    Appellant with his evidence when required.  The Appellant  adopted  his
    witness statement dated 28th January 2016.

12. The Appellant's partner J A gave evidence with the  assistance  of  the
    interpreter in Punjabi.  He adopted his witness  statement  dated  28th
    January 2016.

13.  Both  the  Appellant  and  his  partner  were   questioned   by   both
    representatives.  I have recorded  all  questions  and  answers  in  my
    Record of Proceedings.  It is not necessary to reiterate them here.  If
    relevant I  will  refer  to  the  oral  evidence  when  I  set  out  my
    conclusions and reasons.

14. In summary  the  Appellant  and  his  partner  stated  that  they  have
    established family life together in this country.   They  met  in  this
    country.  The Appellant's partner is gay and a cross dresser,  and  has
    been granted refugee status  in  this  country  on  the  basis  of  his
    sexuality.  They wish to live together in the United Kingdom.  They  do
    not believe that they would be able to live together openly in India.

15. The Appellant pointed out that his father is a police officer in India,
    and he believed that he would be located  by  his  father  wherever  he
    lived in India.

16. The Appellant stated that with reference to a  visa  for  his  partner,
    they had checked online, and  he  would  not  be  given  a  visa.   The
    Appellant's partner stated that he  had  not  investigated  whether  he
    would be given a visa to enter India, as he stated that he did not wish
    to live in India and did not believe that he  would  be  able  to  live
    openly with the Appellant as a gay couple in India.

The Respondent's Submissions

17. Mr Mills pointed out that the FTT findings on risk and return had  been
    preserved, and this included at paragraph 30 the finding  that  it  was
    not credible or plausible that the Appellant's father and brother would
    look for him in India or even know if he returned to India.  It was not
    accepted that the Appellant's father posed any risk  to  the  Appellant
    because of his connections with the police.

18. Mr Mills submitted that the main issue to be considered related to  the
    nationality of the Appellant's partner, and his  ability  to  obtain  a
    visa to enter India.   Mr  Mills  submitted  that  background  evidence
    indicated that gay men could live openly in the larger cities in India.



19. Mr Mills submitted that no evidence had been provided to show that  the
    Appellant's partner would not be granted a visa to  enter  India.   The
    insurmountable obstacles test was a high threshold, and  the  Appellant
    had not provided evidence to discharge the  burden  of  proof  on  this
    issue.  Mr Mills submitted that evidence had not been submitted to show
    that there were any exceptional circumstances outside the  rules  which
    would warrant allowing the appeal with reference to Article 8.

20. Mr Mills referred to section 117B of the 2002 Act, and I was  asked  to
    note that the Appellant is  not  financially  independent,  and  little
    weight should be given to the Appellant's private life because  it  had
    been established at a time when his immigration status was  precarious.
    I was asked to find the  Respondent's  decision  on  Article  8  to  be
    proportionate, and to dismiss the appeal.

The Appellant's Submissions

21. Mrs Obayelu relied upon her skeleton argument which  is  comprehensive,
    comprising 25 paragraphs and 8 pages, and it is not  necessary  to  set
    out that argument here.  I was asked  to  note  that  the  Respondent's
    guidance, updated on 16th May 2014,  at  page  57  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle, confirms  there  is  no  provision  in  Indian  law  for  civil
    partnerships or the recognition of same sex marriages.

22. Therefore the Appellant's partner would not be granted a visa to  enter
    India as his same sex partner.   Reliance  was  also  placed  upon  the
    Respondent's guidance which confirms  that  same  sex  sexual  activity
    between males is regarded as a criminal offence.  I was therefore asked
    to find that because the Appellant and his partner are gay and wish  to
    live together,  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  them  living
    together in  India.   Therefore  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  with
    reference to EX.1 of Appendix FM, or alternatively  with  reference  to
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

23. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

24. I have taken into account all the evidence, both oral and  documentary,
    which has been placed before me, and taken into account the submissions
    made by both representatives.

25. Dealing firstly with risk on return, the FTT findings are preserved and
    therefore the Appellant is  not  entitled  to  a  grant  of  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection and his return would not breach Articles 2  and
    3 of the 1950 Convention.  The FTT also considered Article  12  of  the
    1950 Convention, which is the right to marry.  Permission to appeal  on
    this point was not granted, and the FTT finding at  paragraph  32  that
    Article 12 does not confer the right to chose a particular  country  in
    which to marry, and there would be no  breach  of  Article  12  if  the
    Appellant and his partner returned to India is  preserved.   In  making
    findings on risk on return, the FTT found that the Appellant could  not
    return to his home area because of his fear of his father and  brother,
    but he had a reasonable option of internal relocation to other parts of
    India, including the major cities.

26. It is accepted that the Appellant and his partner  are  gay,  and  that
    they are in a genuine relationship and have family life  together.   It
    is also accepted that the Appellant's partner has been granted  refugee
    status in the United Kingdom,  based  upon  his  sexuality.   It  would
    therefore not be safe for him to return to Pakistan.

27. The issue to be decided is whether there are  insurmountable  obstacles
    to the Appellant and his  partner  continuing  family  life  in  India.
    EX.1.(a) is not applicable as this relates to a  parental  relationship
    with a child.  I therefore set out below EX.1.(b) and EX.2;

         "EX.1.(b)      the  applicant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                  relationship with a partner who is in  the  UK  and  is  a
                  British Citizen, settled in the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with
                  refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and  there  are
                  insurmountable obstacles to family life with that  partner
                  continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2.    For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  'insurmountable
                  obstacles' means the very significant  difficulties  which
                  would be faced  by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
                  continuing their family life together outside the  UK  and
                  which could not be overcome or would entail  very  serious
                  hardship for the applicant or their partner."

28. The Supreme Court considered insurmountable obstacles and Article 8  in
    Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11.   It  was  found  that  the  requirement  of
    insurmountable obstacles is a stringent test to be met and this was not
    incompatible with Article 8.  The requirement must be interpreted in  a
    sensible and practical way and the definition in EX.2 was approved.

29. If the requirement within the Immigration Rules  is  not  met,  it  was
    confirmed that leave pursuant to Article 8  outside  the  rules  should
    only be granted in  genuinely  exceptional  circumstances  which  would
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.

30. I have taken into account the guidance in MD India CG [2014] UKUT 00065
    (IAC).  The Indian penal code of  1860  criminalises  same  sex  sexual
    activity, although prosecutions  for  consensual  sexual  acts  between
    males are, and always have been, extremely  rare.   Although  same  sex
    males   may   suffer   ill-treatment,   extortion,    harassment    and
    discrimination from the police and general public,  the  prevalence  of
    such incidents is not such, even when taken  cumulatively,  that  there
    can be said in general to be a real risk of an  openly  same  sex  male
    suffering treatment which is persecutory or which would breach  Article
    3.

31. In summary, the Upper Tribunal  found  in  MD  that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh for an openly same sex orientated male who
    is at risk in his home area because of his particular circumstances, to
    relocate internally to a major city within  India.   It  was  confirmed
    that India has a  large,  robust  and  accessible  LGBTI  activist  and
    support network, mainly to be found in the large cities.  The above  is
    consistent with the Respondent's guidance relied upon by  Mrs  Obayelu.
    That guidance also confirms at 1.3.17 that in  addition  to  the  LGBTI
    support network mainly to be found in  the  large  cities,  gay  people
    could often rely on NGOs or support groups  to  provide  emotional  and
    material support, which may include assistance in establishing contacts
    and obtaining employment and accommodation.

32.  I  therefore  conclude  that  the  country  guidance,  and  background
    evidence, indicates that same sex males can live openly together in the
    large cities in India.

33. I must consider the two factors  in  the  Respondent's  guidance  dated
    August 2015 at pages 91 and 92 of the Appellant's bundle.  This relates
    to the ability to lawfully enter and  stay  in  another  country.   The
    Appellant would have no difficulty as he is  an  Indian  citizen.   His
    partner is a citizen of Pakistan.   While  there  is  no  provision  in
    Indian law for same sex marriages, that does not  mean,  without  more,
    that the partner would not be granted a visa to enter India.   On  this
    point, the burden of proof is on the Appellant.  The hearing before the
    Upper Tribunal was adjourned to enable further evidence to be produced.
     The Appellant has not provided satisfactory evidence to indicate  that
    his partner would not be granted a visa to  enter  India.   Conflicting
    oral evidence was given on this point, the Appellant claiming that this
    had been checked online and that a visa would not be  granted,  whereas
    the partner stated that he had not investigated this as he did not wish
    to live in India.  I find that no satisfactory independent evidence has
    been produced to show that the Appellant's partner would not be granted
    a visa to enter into and reside in India.  The burden of proof has  not
    been discharged on this point.

34. The other  factor  not  considered  by  the  FTT  related  to  cultural
    barriers.  It must be  considered  whether  the  partner  would  be  so
    disadvantaged that they could not be expected to go and live  in  India
    either because as a same sex couple the Appellant and his partner would
    face substantial social discrimination, or the rights and  freedoms  of
    the partner would be severely restricted.

35. Again, the burden of proof is on the Appellant and it is has  not  been
    discharged.  The evidence that has been submitted  indicates  that  the
    couple could live together in a same sex relationship  in  one  of  the
    larger Indian cities.  As was found in MD  India,  there  is  a  large,
    robust and accessible LGBTI activist and support network in  the  large
    cities.

36. I fully accept that the Appellant and his partner wish to remain in the
    United Kingdom.  That however is not the test that I must consider.  It
    has not been proved the Appellant  and  his  partner  would  face  very
    significant difficulties living together in India, which could  not  be
    overcome, or which would entail very serious hardship.

37. I therefore conclude that there  are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing in India.

38. I have considered Article 8 outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   I  have
    taken into account the factors in section 117B of the  2002  Act.   The
    Appellant is not financially independent.  I accept that he  can  speak
    English, although  this  is  a  neutral  factor.   The  enforcement  of
    effective immigration control is in the public  interest.   The  couple
    met and formed a relationship when the  Appellant  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom lawfully, but only had limited leave to remain,  and  therefore
    his immigration status was precarious.  I must place little weight upon
    the Appellant's private life formed when  his  immigration  status  was
    precarious.

39. I do  not  find  the  Appellant  has  demonstrated  any  compelling  or
    exceptional  circumstances  that  would  justify  allowing  the  appeal
    pursuant to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  Having taken into
    account the wishes of the couple to remain in  the  United  Kingdom,  I
    find that the weight that must be attached  to  the  need  to  maintain
    effective immigration control is greater, and the Respondent's decision
    is proportionate and does not breach Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.  The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction.   I  continue  that
direction pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the Appellant or any member of his family.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             2nd May 2017



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             2nd May 2017
