
[pic]
S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/10740/2014
                                                               AA/10741/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 November 2015                  |On 19 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                    GRKS
                                    GNPW
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Kumudusena, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka. They have appealed  with  the
    permission of the First-tier Tribunal against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Malins,  promulgated  on  18  August   2015,
    dismissing their appeals against decisions of the respondent to  refuse
    to vary their leave to remain on asylum grounds and to remove them.

 2. The appellants are husband and wife. The basis of their claims was that
    first appellant had been detained in 2008 on suspicion of helping  LTTE
    members find accommodation in Colombo. The second  appellant  had  been
    detained and questioned about her husband  when  she  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka for a visit in 2012. The authorities believed the first appellant
    was helping Tamils in the UK. The appellants claimed asylum separately.
    In support of their applications they provided a  number  of  documents
    said to show the first  appellant  was  subject  to  investigation  for
    offences under the Prevention of Terrorism Act.  Medical  evidence  was
    submitted  concerning  the  first  appellant's  scars  and  the  second
    appellant's psychiatric health.

 3. The appeals were heard by Judge Malins on 20 July 2015 at Hatton Cross.
    The appellants were represented by Mr  D  Kumudusena.  Both  appellants
    elected to give evidence in Sinhalese. The judge first  considered  the
    documentary evidence. She set out the police reports said to relate  to
    both appellants but concluded  that  she  could  not  accept  that  the
    documents were genuine. She set out her reasons in paragraph 10.4.  She
    did not find  it  credible  that,  if  the  first  appellant  had  been
    suspected of involvement with his cousin in bombing  the  Hilton  Hotel
    and other serious terrorist activities, that he would have been able to
    leave Sri Lanka on his own passport eight  months  later.  Nor  was  it
    credible that the police would write a report  five  years  later.  The
    appellant had not been able to produce the arrest warrant despite being
    asked to do so at his interview. The judge did not find it  "plausible"
    that either appellant  was  an  LTTE  supporter,  inferring  that  they
    belonged to the Sinhalese community. It was fanciful  that  the  police
    reports would recite all of the appellant's respective domestic, family
    and educational circumstances. There was no  evidence  that  the  first
    appellant was a leading member of the LTTE diaspora. He claimed to have
    been kicked and beaten with a  metal  bar  during  his  detention.  The
    medical report of  Mr  Andrew  Mason,  a  specialist  in  accident  and
    emergency medicine, found that the scars on the first appellant's  head
    were  consistent  with  his  account  of  being  struck  and   rendered
    unconscious, as was the scrape on his chin. It  was  not  uncommon  for
    persons to strike their heads accidentally. However, the scars  on  his
    leg were highly consistent with his account of how they were caused  by
    blows from a hard object, such as a piece of  metal.  The  judge  found
    this report of limited assistance, particularly given that no age could
    be ascribed to the head and leg injuries.

 4. The judge then turned to consider the credibility of the appellants. In
    relation to the second appellant, the judge gave  reasons  for  finding
    her not credible in paragraph 11.2. It  was  not  credible  the  second
    appellant would have remained in Sri Lanka  for  10  months  after  her
    detention. It was not credible  the  police  sent  a  passport  to  the
    authorities to facilitate the issuance of a new  one.  As  a  Sinhalese
    Buddhist her sympathies would naturally lie against the LTTE. There was
    no arrest warrant issued despite her failure to  sign  on  weekly.  The
    judge then noted the following:

         "(e) The second appellant's credibility is  further  diminished  by
         the  claim  advanced  by  her  Representative  (clearly,   on   her
         instructions) that "the second appellant works in Sri  Lanka  as  a
         human rights lawyer" (advanced as an additional reason for  her  to
         be in danger) which is manifestly untrue..."

    The judge went on to give reasons why this claim could not be true.

 5. The judge then turned to the credibility of the  first  appellant.  She
    started by noting she had rejected the second appellant's claim to have
    been  arrested  in  Sri  Lanka  by  reason  of  the  first  appellant's
    activities. Giving her reasons for  disbelieving  the  first  appellant
    also, the judge relied on the late timing  of  his  asylum  claim.  The
    judge  found  the  finding  of  Mr  Mason  in  relation  to  the  first
    appellant's leg injury was insufficient to show he had been  mistreated
    sufficiently to induce a well-founded fear of persecution. The fact his
    cousin had been granted asylum in Switzerland in 2007, having  gone  in
    2006, did not indicate the first appellant  would  be  tainted  by  his
    relationship  but  was  indicative  that  it  was  not   credible   the
    authorities would have had an interest in the first  appellant  through
    this relationship two years after the cousin had left the country.

 6. The grounds seeking permission to appeal challenge virtually every  one
    of the reasons given  by  the  judge  for  making  adverse  credibility
    findings. Many of the grounds  simply  express  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings and attempt to re-argue the case.  However,  paragraph
    20 of the grounds refer to the judge's finding  at  paragraph  11.2(e),
    set out above. The grounds submit that the representative did not raise
    any claim that the second appellant worked in  Sri  Lanka  as  a  human
    rights lawyer as an additional reason for her life to be in danger.  It
    was simply  not  mentioned.  Appended  to  the  grounds  is  a  witness
    statement made by Mr Kumudusena confirming that he did  not  state  the
    second appellant worked in Sri Lanka as a human rights  lawyer  in  his
    oral submissions. There would be no reason  for  him  to  make  such  a
    submission as the second appellant had nothing to  do  with  the  legal
    system in Sri Lanka. Paragraph 4 of the statement suggested  this  must
    have been a genuine error by the judge.

 7. The respondent has filed the rule 24 response opposing the  appeal.  In
    essence, this argues that the judge directed herself appropriately  and
    made detailed and thorough credibility findings. Even  if  it  had  not
    formed part of the appellants' case that the  second  appellant  was  a
    human rights lawyer, this did not undermine the  various  and  numerous
    other credibility findings made by the judge and it  was  difficult  to
    see how this would materially change the outcome of the decision.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal because  it
    was   arguable   the   judge   had   misunderstood   the    appellants'
    representative's submissions in relation to the second appellant  being
    a  human  rights  lawyer.  Further,  it  would  not  appear  the  judge
    considered all the evidence in the round.

 9. I heard submissions on whether the judge made a material error of  law.
    Mr Tufan did not rely on his colleague's rule 24 response and confirmed
    that, in his view, the judge's decision should  be  set  aside  on  the
    grounds it contains material errors of law. In addition  to  the  point
    about the apparent error in hearing  the  appellants'  representative's
    submissions, he was concerned about the correctness of the finding that
    the appellants would  not  have  been  allowed  to  leave  through  the
    airport, the finding on the appellants' ethnicity and the finding there
    was no arrest warrant in respect of the first appellant.

10. I did not need to call on Mr Kumudusena to reply in view of Mr  Tufan's
    acceptance that the decision contains material errors of law.

Error of law

11. I accept the judge misheard Mr  Kumudusena's  submissions  and  it  was
    never the appellants' case that the second appellant  was  at  risk  on
    account of being a human rights lawyer. She had never claimed to  be  a
    lawyer. The judge therefore erred in relying on this as undermining the
    second appellant's credibility. In my judgment,  this  error  alone  is
    sufficient to set aside the decision. Whilst, as the response says, the
    judge gave numerous findings for making an adverse credibility  finding
    against both appellants, the parties  cannot  be  confident  the  judge
    would have done so had she not considered that the second appellant had
    made a false claim about being a human rights lawyer. It  follows  that
    the decision of the first-tier Tribunal must be set aside.

12. The representatives were also in agreement that the appropriate  course
    was for the appeals to be re-heard by a different judge in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. In this  particular  case,  I  consider  the  appellants
    should be given a fresh hearing. I direct as follows:

                                 DIRECTIONS

    1.   The appeals will be heard together at Hatton Cross by  any  judge,
    except Judge Malins, on a date and time to be notified. None  of  Judge
    Malins's findings are to be preserved.

    2.   Any additional evidence which either party wishes to rely on  must
    be filed and served no later than 7 days before the hearing.

    3.   A Sinhalese interpreter will be  provided  unless  the  appellants
    indicate they would prefer a Tamil interpreter no  later  than  5  days
    before the hearing.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and  her
decision dismissing the  appeals  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
human rights grounds is set aside.

The appeals are to be re-heard by the First-tier Tribunal.




                               Signed   Date 17 November 2015


                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
