
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10497/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |               Decision & Reasons    |
|                                     |Promulgated                          |
|On 27 September 2017                 |On 6 December 2017                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                     DHM
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                              Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Miss N Braganza, Counsel
For the Respondent: Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on [ ]  1967.  He  appealed
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 13  July  2015  to
    remove him from the  UK  following  a  refusal  to  grant  him  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and protection under the European Convention on
    Human Rights (ECHR).

 2. The appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup (hereafter
    "FtTJ") on 18 March 2016 and he dismissed the appeal on 5 April 2016 on
    all grounds. The Appellant now appeals that  decision  with  permission
    granted on 7 August 2017 by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer  on  all
    grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant has been in the UK since his entry in 2001. His leave  to
    remain as a Highly  Skilled  Migrant  ended  on  19  January  2006  and
    subsequent applications for an extension  in  the  same  capacity  were
    refused. On 29 April 2008 he was arrested for criminal damage  and  was
    cautioned. He was served with a Notice informing him of  his  liability
    to be removed. He absconded and claimed asylum on 20 January 2015.

 4. The Appellant's claim is that he is at risk of persecution on return to
    Zimbabwe because of his involvement in opposition politics and his work
    as a teacher in Zimbabwe. The Appellant's claim is set out by the  FtTJ
    in his decision at [12] and can be summarised as follows.

 5. The Appellant is highly educated. His obtained a degree in  Physics  in
    Cuba and a Masters degree in Material Sciences in Australia. He claimed
    that his academic career had been thwarted because he was not an active
    member of Zanu PF. He came to the UK as a teacher in 2001 and became  a
    vocal critic of the regime. He had written to the African  Union  about
    the regime and circulated this letter to the Prime Minister in the  UK.
    He set up the Zimbabwe External Communications Secretariat (ZECS) to co-
    ordinate the struggle against corruption and  human  rights  abuses  in
    Zimbabwe. Since 2007 he had attended monthly vigils at Zimbabwe  House.
    In 2010 he was assaulted by Zanu PF thugs at  Zimbabwe  House  and  was
    active in leaving anti Zanu PF messages on Facebook and  social  media.
    He was a member of Zimbabwe United for Democracy  (ZUNDE)  and  claimed
    that teachers in Zimbabwe were persecuted.

6.    The FtTJ heard evidence from the  Appellant  and  a  witness  and  had
    before him documentation personal to the Appellant filed in support the
    claim. Having considered all  the  evidence,  the  FtTJ  noted  various
    inconsistencies and omissions in  the  Appellant's  account.  The  FtTJ
    rejected the Appellant's account of being assaulted in  Zimbabwe  House
    but, nevertheless, reached the following positive findings of fact:

    (i)    It is possible that the Appellant  may  have  attracted  adverse
         attention in Zimbabwe by his online activities [40].

    (ii)   The Appellant was a teacher in Zimbabwe [42].

    (iii)  The Appellant has used social media  to  publish  anti  Zanu  PF
         material online [53] & [71].

    (iv)   The Appellant had written a letter to the Prime Minister in 2007
         [66] (this is the Appellant's letter written to the  African  Union
         that was circulated to the Prime Minister [49]).

     (v)   The Appellant set up ZECS [71].

7.    In light of these findings, the FtTJ concluded  that  the  Appellant's
    membership of ZUNDE and ZECS did  not  place  him  at  risk.  The  FtTJ
    observed that the latter organisation had not been registered  and  his
    activities were minimal. The FtTJ further observed that the Appellant's
    social media  postings  were  infrequent  and  the  Appellant  had  not
    received threats online.

8.    The FtTJ proceeded to apply these facts to  extant  country  guidance,
    namely, CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    0059 (IAC). The FtTJ noted the Appellant did not have  any  connections
    to the MDC and who was on his account an inactive political  member  of
    the Zanu  PF  in  Zimbabwe.  The  FtTJ  noted  the  Appellant  did  not
    experience any ill-treatment because of his  occupation  as  a  teacher
    [77] and found that his allegations of unfair treatment did not  relate
    to his work as a teacher, but to his work as a research scientist.

9.    In his omnibus conclusion the FtTJ stated thus at [80]:

         "In these circumstances I find that his activities as a teacher and
         his somewhat limited role online as a critic of the regime are  not
         of such significance as to give rise to any perception on the  part
         of the CIO that he has any profile of the sort which would  attract
         their attention. "

10.   Accordingly, the FtTJ rejected the Appellant's claim that  he  was  in
    need of international protection.

Discussion

11.   At the hearing, on behalf of the Appellant, Miss  Braganza  relied  on
    the grounds of appeal and elaborated upon them. She submitted  that  in
    view of the findings made by  the  FtTJ  and,  the  acceptance  of  the
    Appellant's sur place political activity  and  social  media  activity,
    taken  with  the  country  guidance  and   the   Respondent's   Country
    Information Guidance (CIG),  the  FtTJ  plainly  erred.  Miss  Braganza
    submitted that the FtTJ had failed to consider what would happen to the
    Appellant at  the  airport,  which  was  specifically  referred  to  in
    counsel's skeleton argument and the submissions at  the  hearing  [35].
    Miss Braganza referred to several passages of the FtTJ's decision which
    I have summarised above. She submitted that the FtTJ recognised that it
    was  possible  that  the  Appellant  may  have  attracted  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities in Zimbabwe by his online  activities  and
    thus the level of activity was irrelevant. She submitted that the  FtTJ
    accepted the Appellant was a critic of the regime and, as  such,  would
    be subject to airport checks during which he would be asked  about  his
    absence and identity.  She  submitted  that  his  online  presence  and
    criticism of the regime would immediately be seen thereby  placing  the
    Appellant at risk. Miss Braganza submitted that at [80]  the  FtTJ  did
    not address what he was required to do.

12.   Miss Braganza referred to the CIG report  that  was  before  the  FtTJ
    and, in particular,  to  the  following  paragraphs  which  provide  as
    follows:


         "1.3.7 As was the case before the July 2013 elections, the security
         apparatus  is  controlled  by  Zanu-PF,  the  enactment  of  a  new
         constitution has not improved the  human  rights  environment,  and
         there continue to be reports, albeit  declining  numbers,  of  ill-
         treatment of MDC supporters, their families,  political  activists,
         student leaders and perceived government critics,  particularly  in
         Mashonaland   West,   Mashonaland   Central,   Mashonaland    East,
         Manicaland, Masvingo and Midlands provinces and high density  areas
         of Harare.


         1.3.8 In those places opponents, or perceived opponents, of Zanu-PF
         may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
         serious ill-treatment, from Zanu-PF  authority  figures  and  those
         they control. They would also face a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment
         because of a continuing  risk  of  being  required  to  demonstrate
         loyalty to Zanu-PF. There are few incidents of similar difficulties
         being  faced  by  perceived  MDC   supporters   or   activists   in
         Matabeleland North, Matabeleland South, low density areas of Harare
         or in Bulawayo.


         1.3.9 Assessing who may be at real risk from politically  motivated
         violence is not simply a matter of the level of political  activity
         in which the individual has engaged. Violence tends to be  targeted
         at those with a perceived political profile, not necessarily  of  a
         high level, and those perceived to be active in MDC politics.


         1.3.10 Following an assessment of the  risk  on  return  to  Harare
         airport (see country guidance caselaw of HS read with AA and SM and
         others), the assessment of risk on return to a home area will  also
         very much depend on the place in Zimbabwe to which  the  particular
         individual would return. There are differences  between  urban  and
         rural areas (and the situation is  not  uniform  across  the  rural
         areas).


         ..................


         1.3.16 Those who have been  or  who  are  human  rights  defenders,
         members  of  civil  society  organisations  and   journalists   are
         similarly at a heightened risk of ill-treatment on account of their
         actual or imputed political opinion. The heightened risks should be
         considered alongside the individual  circumstances  of  each  case,
         including their previous employment, any activity  which  might  be
         perceived as being critical of ZANU-PF, any adverse interest by the
         authorities and an assessment of the risk  to  them  on  return  to
         Zimbabwe  whether  or  not  they  seek  to  resume  their  previous
         profession.


         1.3.17 Where the person's fear of ill-treatment  is  by  the  state
         authorities, they would be unable to apply to these authorities for
         protection.


         1.3.18 As regards  fear  of  ill  treatment  by  non-state  actors,
         victims of political violence are rarely able to rely on the police
         to pursue justice on their behalf. Police are  often  unwilling  or
         unable to protect those targeted. It is reported  that  the  police
         remain partisan on behalf  of  Zanu-PF,  committed  serious  abuses
         against perceived supporters of the MDC and government critics with
         impunity, and in numerous cases fail to  intervene  or  investigate
         reports  that  Zanu-PF-aligned  individuals  engaged  in  political
         violence. It is also reported that  policed  sometimes  arrest  the
         victims of violence rather than the perpetrators.  Court  cases  in
         Zimbabwe take a long time to proceed and are  regularly  postponed.
         Selective  application  and  interpretation  by   law   enforcement
         officials and the Attorney General's Office limit access to justice
         and the freedoms of political actors opposed  to  Zanu-PF.  Zanu-PF
         sympathisers use threats and intimidation to force magistrates, who
         hear the vast majority of cases, particularly rural magistrates, to
         rule in the government's favour."


13.   On behalf of the Respondent, Mr  Staunton,  submitted  that  paragraph
    1.3.9 of the CIG placed the Respondent  in  difficulties  and  he  thus
    conceded that the FtTJ materially erred in law.

14.   I consider that that concession was rightly made and  I  announced  my
    decision at the hearing setting aside the decision of the FtTJ.

15.   It is plain on the facts found by the FtTJ that he accepted  that  the
    Appellant is a low-key opponent of Zanu-PF through his online criticism
    of the regime and  the  letter  that  he  sent  to  the  African  Union
    subsequently  circulated  to  the  British  Prime  Minister.  The  FtTJ
    concluded that the Appellant's limited role was not sufficient to place
    him  at  risk  on  return.  That  conclusion  as  Mr  Staunton  rightly
    recognised does not sit comfortably with the Respondent's own  guidance
    which does not limit the question of risk to the  level  or  degree  of
    activity of the individual concerned. It is further plain that the FtTJ
    failed to address risk at the point of return and  failed  to  consider
    that the Appellant could not be expected to hide his political  opinion
    in order to keep safe when interviewed by the CIO at Harare  airport  -
    (see HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT  00094  and
    RT (Zimbabwe) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]
    EWCA Civ 1285).

16.   Having found that the FtTJ materially erred in law  the  parties  were
    invited to address the Tribunal as  to  their  respective  position  on
    disposal. Miss Braganza invited me to remake  decision  on  the  FtTJ's
    primary findings of fact and she relied on her earlier submissions.  Mr
    Staunton did not wish to make further submissions and  he  was  content
    for the Tribunal to remake the decision on the evidence. I thus proceed
    to remake the Decision.

Re-making the Decision

17.   I have borne in mind that the burden is on the Appellant to show  that
    there is a real risk of persecution and/or serious harm in the event of
    a return. I also bear in mind the preserved findings in relation to the
    Appellant's asylum claim (see para. 6 (i)-(v) above) and  case  law  of
    HS, CM and RT (as previously cited).

18.   The FtTJ's findings identify the Appellant as a teacher and  a  critic
    of the Zanu PF on line, that corresponded with the  African  Union  and
    the British  Government,  and  who  was  involved  with  civil  society
    organisations. While the Appellant's activities have taken place in the
    UK, it is of significance that the FtTJ found that it is possible  that
    the Appellant may have attracted adverse attention in Zimbabwe  by  his
    online activities.

19.   In HS the Tribunal stated as follows:

         "264. The CIO has taken over responsibility for  the  operation  of
         immigration control at Harare airport and immigration officers  are
         being replaced by CIO officers. We accept  also  that  one  of  the
         purposes of the CIO in monitoring arrivals at  the  airport  is  to
         identify those who are thought to be, for whatever reason,  enemies
         of the regime. The aim is to detect those of interest because of an
         adverse military  or  criminal  profile.  The  main  focus  of  the
         operation to identify those who may be of adverse interest  remains
         those who are perceived to be politically active in support of  the
         opposition. But anyone perceived to be a threat to or a  critic  of
         the regime will attract interest also.

         265. The fact that  the  CIO  has  taken  over  responsibility  for
         monitoring all  returning  passengers  at  Harare  airport  is  not
         something that effects the level of risk. The evidence before AA(2)
         was that all deportees were handed over to the CIO for  questioning
         in any  event.  Then,  as  now,  those  deportees  will  have  been
         identified in advance from the passenger manifest and the CIO  will
         have formed a preliminary view as to which, if any, are of  further
         interest.

            ...................

         282. For all these reasons we adopt and reaffirm the guidance given
         in AA(2), set out above at paragraph 34 of this  determination.  We
         identify one further risk category.  The  evidence  indicates  that
         those associated with the civil  society  organisations  that  have
         attracted adverse interest from  the  Zimbabwean  authorities  will
         face the same level of risk as  those  perceived  to  be  political
         opponents of the Zimbabwean regime."



20.   Further, the headnote to the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  CM
    summarises the position. For present purposes, it is sufficient to  set
    out paragraphs 3(1) and 3(2) which refreshes and updates  the  relevant
    Country Guidance.

         (3) The only change to the EM Country Guidance that it is necessary
         to make as regards the position as  at  the  end  of  January  2011
         arises from the judgments in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.  The  EM
         Country Guidance is, accordingly, re-stated as  follows  (with  the
         change underlined in paragraph (5) below):

             (1)  As  a  general  matter,  there  is   significantly   less
             politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared with  the
             situation considered by the AIT  in  RN.  In  particular,  the
             evidence does not show that, as a general matter,  the  return
             of a failed asylum seeker from the United Kingdom,  having  no
             significant MDC profile, would result in that person facing  a
             real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.
             (2) The position is, however, likely to be  otherwise  in  the
             case of a person without ZANU-PF connections,  returning  from
             the United Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural area
             of Zimbabwe, other than  Matabeleland  North  or  Matabeleland
             South. Such a person may  well  find  it  difficult  to  avoid
             adverse attention, amounting to  serious  ill-treatment,  from
             ZANU-PF authority figures and those they control. The  adverse
             attention  may  well  involve  a  requirement  to  demonstrate
             loyalty to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of serious harm  in  the
             event of failure. Persons who have shown themselves not to  be
             favourably disposed to ZANU-PF are entitled  to  international
             protection, whether or not they could and  would  do  whatever
             might  be  necessary   to   demonstrate   such   loyalty   (RT
             (Zimbabwe))."

21.   In view of the Appellant's accepted profile and, in particular,  as  a
    publicised critic of the regime through social  media  along  with  the
    unchallenged finding that the Appellant's activities, however  minimal,
    may have received adverse attention in Zimbabwe, I find that  in  light
    of the background evidence which suggests that the level and degree  of
    the adverse activity engaged in does not determine who is targeted, and
    the country guidance, that the Appellant is likely to be identified  at
    the point of return as an opponent to the regime and is thus at risk of
    being subjected to ill-treatment at Harare airport.

22.   No questions were put to the Appellant concerning his  willingness  or
    otherwise to declare his loyalty to Zanu-PF, nor was enquiry made as to
    where in Zimbabwe the Appellant might choose to  live  were  he  to  be
    returned. In my assessment, the Appellant's case comes squarely  within
    paragraph 3(2) above. The Appellant is within  a  category  of  persons
    recognised in CM as likely to suffer ill-treatment. I find  that  there
    is a real risk of persecution or serious harm to the Appellant both  on
    arrival at the airport in Harare and, in the event that he was to  pass
    through the airport unchallenged, when residing in  his  home  area  in
    Zimbabwe.

23.   Accordingly, the Appellant has established a  well-founded  fear  that
    he would be persecuted for a reason that is recognised by  the  Refugee
    Convention and that there is a real risk that he would  be  subject  to
    various forms of ill-treatment such as to infringe  Article  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made.
I substitute a decision allowing the Appellant's appeal on asylum and  human
rights grounds.




Signed      Date 15 November 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

