
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10871/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 November 2015                  |On 3 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                     M L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Manjit Dogra, Counsel, instructed by Marsh and
                    Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the re-hearing of the appellant's asylum appeal, following  his
    successful error of law challenge to the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the refusal by the Secretary  of
    State to recognise him as a refugee.  The First-tier Tribunal  made  an
    anonymity  direction,  and  I  consider  it  is  appropriate  that  the
    appellant continues to be accorded anonymity for these  proceedings  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Legal Principles

The Geneva Convention

 2. Article 1 of the 1951 Geneva Convention defines a  refugee  as  someone
    who owing to a well-founded fear of being  persecuted  for  reasons  of
    race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or
    political opinion is outside the country  of  his  nationality  and  is
    unable or owing to such fear is  unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of that country or who not having a  nationality  and  being
    outside the country of his former habitual residence  as  a  result  of
    such events is unable or owing to such fear is unwilling to  return  to
    it.

Asylum under the Immigration Rules

 3. Under paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules an asylum  applicant  will
    be granted asylum in the United Kingdom if the Secretary  of  State  is
    satisfied, inter alia, that he is a refugee as defined  by  the  Geneva
    Convention.

Grant of Humanitarian Protection under the Immigration Rules

 4. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration  Rules  provides  that  a  person  be
    granted humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom if the  Secretary
    of State is satisfied, inter alia,  that  he  does  not  quality  as  a
    refugee, but that substantial grounds have  been  shown  for  believing
    that the person concerned, if he is returned to the country of  return,
    would face a real risk of suffering serious  harm  and  is  unable,  or
    owing to such risk, unwilling to avail himself  of  the  protection  of
    that country.

The Burden and Standard of Proof

 5. In international protection claims, the standard of proof  is  that  of
    real risk or reasonable  degree  of  likelihood.  Evidence  of  matters
    occurring after the date of decision can be taken into account.

Past Persecution or Serious Harm

 6. Under Paragraph 339K, the fact that a person has already  been  subject
    to  persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
    persecution or serious harm, will be regarded as a serious indicator of
    the person's well-founded fear of persecution or serious  harm,  unless
    there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution  or  serious
    harm will not be repeated.

Duty to Substantiate Claim for International Protection

 7. Paragraph 339L of the immigration rules provides that it is the duty of
    the person to substantiate his claim. Where aspects of  his  claim  are
    not supported by documentary or other evidence, those aspects will  not
    need confirmation when all of the following conditions are met:

      1. The person has made a genuine effort to substantiate his claim;

      2. All material factors at the person's disposal have been  submitted,
         and a satisfactory explanation regarding any lack of other relevant
         material has been given;

      3. The person's statements are found to be coherent and plausible  and
         do not run counter to available specific  and  general  information
         relevant to the person's case;

      4. The person has made his claim at the earliest possible time, unless
         the person can demonstrate good reasons for not doing so;

      5. The general credibility of the person is established.

The Evidence

 8. The evidence before me comprises the  evidence  which  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the additional oral evidence  that  I  received
    from the appellant, to which I refer in greater detail  as  appropriate
    below.

The Appellant's Material History

 9. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose  date  of  birth  is  4
    September 1987.  On 21 January 2009 he applied for entry  clearance  to
    the UK as a student, and the application  was  granted  on  5  February
    2009.  He arrived in the UK on 23 February 2009 on a valid student visa
    which expired on 30 June 2012.  On 28 March 2012  he  made  an  in-time
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 Highly Skilled Migrant.  He
    was granted leave in this capacity on 13 August 2012, and his leave was
    valid until 13 August 2014.

10. In August 2012 the appellant returned to  Sri  Lanka  for  a  visit  of
    nearly three months.  On 31 December 2013 the appellant returned to Sri
    Lanka for another visit.  On 21 January 2014  the  appellant  left  Sri
    Lanka and returned to  the  UK,  travelling  (as  before)  on  his  own
    passport.  In July 2014  he  attended  the  Asylum  Screening  Unit  in
    Croydon and made a claim for asylum.

The screening interview

11. The appellant was given a screening interview on 14 July 2014.  He  had
    been fingerprinted for his visa application to come here, and also when
    he was arrested in Sri Lanka on 14 January 2014 as the army thought  he
    was an LTTE member.  His national ID card had been taken  from  him  by
    the Sri Lankan army on the same occasion.  He suffered from  depression
    and insomnia.  He took citalopram, one tablet daily.   His  GP  was  Dr
    Newman, who operated from a practice in Edgware.  At  question  4.1  he
    was asked what his reason was for coming to the UK.   He  said  he  had
    come here to study initially.  He had gone back to Sri Lanka  to  visit
    his family.  He was arrested by the Sri Lankan army as they thought  he
    was an LTTE member.  He was beaten, tied up and he had hot water poured
    on him.  He was also kicked about with boots.  He  was  now  scared  he
    would be arrested and killed if he  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.   He  was
    detained for two days, following his arrest on 14  January  2014.   His
    father paid  a  bribe  for  his  release.   He  was  never  charged  or
    convicted.

12. He was asked whether he was subject to an arrest warrant or  wanted  by
    any law enforcement authority  for  an  offence  in  any  country.   He
    answered yes, "it" was issued in Sri Lanka on 17 February 2014.  He was
    asked to explain why he thought his claim could not be decided quickly.
     He answered he was expecting a letter from his lawyer to confirm  what
    had happened to him in Sri Lanka.  He was asked to give details of  his
    family.  His family in Sri Lanka consisted  of  his  father,  (born  in
    1960), his mother, five brothers (ranging in age from around  30  years
    old down to around 11 years old) and a sister aged around 20 years old.

The psychiatric report

13. Shortly before the screening interview, the appellant had seen Dr Robin
    Lawrence, general adult psychiatrist,  at  the  Harley  Street  Medical
    Express Clinic on 7 July 2014.  Mr Lawrence had prepared a report dated
    9 July 2014.

14. His initial impression was that  the  appellant  appeared  anxious  and
    depressed.  He showed him a photocopy of a prescription from his GP and
    a box of citalopram tablets.  He told him that  he  had  started  these
    pills on 2 July 2014.  All  of  his  symptoms  were  characteristic  of
    depression, and they were also very typical of  post  traumatic  stress
    disorder.

15. He had been living in the UK for six years.  When he first came at  the
    age of 21 he came to study, and he achieved  an  MBA  from  the  London
    College  Business  Institute  of  E-Commerce  in  Whitechapel.    After
    achieving this MBA in 2012, he went home for three months  leave  which
    he enjoyed with his family in Addalitheni in the  eastern  province  of
    Sri Lanka.

16. Following his second visit to Sri Lanka he was kidnapped and  tortured.
    He had returned to Sri Lanka on 31  December  2013  and  was  with  his
    family as usual.  On 14 January 2014 at 8pm he was in a tea  shop  with
    his friends.  A vehicle came in front of the shop, four people came out
    and they told him they had to investigate.  They were casually  dressed
    and had no ID.  He refused to go with them, and said that he needed  to
    speak to his father.  They confiscated his phone and  forced  him  into
    the vehicle blindfolded.  They took  him  on  a  journey  which  lasted
    approximately an hour, and he was taken to an unknown location.  He was
    taken into a dark room, where he was interrogated.  They  knew  he  had
    connections with the LTTE, which he denied.   They  asked  him  why  he
    visited from London.  He said he had only come to  visit  his  parents.
    They slapped him and pushed him to the floor, and they kicked him  with
    booted feet and threatened to kill him if he did  not  admit  his  LTTE
    connection.  They asked him about Tamil boys.  He explained that he had
    studied with Tamil boys and he knew them when he was in Sri Lanka. They
    continued to interrogate him, and another person brought  in  a  wooden
    stick and hit him on the head and his back.   They  would  not  believe
    him.  As he was explaining this to Dr Lawrence, he started to sweat and
    developed an increased heart rate and an  increased  respiration  rate.
    These were the  physical  signs  of  PTSD,  which  were  very  hard  to
    simulate.  He was left for an hour,  before  they  returned  again  and
    asked him again about his LTTE connections while beating him some more.



17. He was left without food or water and held overnight.  In  the  morning
    there was more interrogation.  Four of them used wooden sticks to  beat
    him.  Then the leader came in and said he would take him with him.  His
    hands were tied behind his back, and he was blindfolded  again  and  he
    was made to lie down in the vehicle.  They drove for some  time.   When
    he was removed from the vehicle, he saw his father's car.  He explained
    that his father was a Muslim member of  the  provincial  council.   The
    leader spoke to his father for ten minutes.   Afterwards  they  allowed
    him to go to his father's vehicle.  He was told  that  his  father  had
    paid 15 lakhs, the equivalent of between �7,000  and  �8,000,  for  his
    release.  His father then sent him in a different vehicle  to  Colombo.
    He had suffered bruising which was all gone now, but his left  shoulder
    was still stiff and uncomfortable and he felt that it sometimes  locked
    in position.  He had returned  to  the  UK  at  the  earliest  possible
    opportunity.

18. On 15 June 2014 lots of Muslim businesses were attacked and  burnt  out
    in Sri Lanka by the Sinhalese population.  He went to a  protest  about
    this on 18 June 2014 here in  London.   He  told  Dr  Lawrence  that  a
    photograph was taken of him as he led the protest and this was sent  to
    his father in Sri Lanka together with a death threat,  threatening  him
    with death if he should ever try to return to  Sri  Lanka.   Since  his
    father had told him about this death  threat,  he  said  he  could  not
    concentrate, and he felt angry, and he had  no  interest  in  life  and
    because he could not concentrate he had resigned from his employer.

19. His father was a  DEPO  inspector  before  becoming  a  member  of  the
    provincial Parliament.  The patient was the second of  seven  children.
    His older brother aged 29 was married with one child in Sri Lanka.   He
    had four younger brothers, including one aged 23 and one aged 17.   One
    of his younger siblings was  studying  and  living  at  home  with  his
    parents.  The patient came from a wealthy family.

20. His total score on the Beck depression  inventory  was  53.   This  was
    typical of severe depression.  His total score on the impact of  events
    scale was 89.  This was very high and entirely  consistent  with  PTSD.
    He had been asked if it was possible the  patient  was  simulating  his
    symptoms and he thought it was unlikely.  It is possible to pretend  to
    have a particular symptom but very difficult  to  simulate  a  complete
    syndrome in that a syndrome contains a pattern of  symptoms  which  all
    have to match and many of which are not intuitively obvious.  Moreover,
    the patient's symptoms were consistent over time and place, as  his  GP
    had independently diagnosed depression.

The documents from Sri Lanka submitted in support of the claim

21. The appellant attended a substantive asylum  interview  on  31  October
    2014, where he spoke through a Tamil interpreter.  He submitted a large
    number of documents in support of his asylum claim.  They included:

      1. An extract from the information book of Akkraipattu Police  Station
         dated 23 June 2014.

      2. An undated letter on the letterhead of Bodu Bala Sena ("BBS") which
         the appellant said had been sent to his father in his  capacity  as
         Minister of Road Developments, Eastern Province

      3. A letter from the Grama Niladhari's office, Addlaichani  Divisional
         Secretary's Division, dated 7 July 2014.

      4. A letter dated 8 July  2014  from  the  appellant's  father,  on  a
         letterhead describing him as an MPC and also  as  the  Minister  of
         Road  Development,  Irrigation,  Housing  and  Construction,  Rural
         Electrification and Water Supply, Eastern Province.

      5. A photograph which the  appellant  said  was  of  him  attending  a
         demonstration in London against the BBS (E6).

22. Following the asylum interview, the appellant  also  supplied  a  court
    summons. The summons dated 17 February 2014 had purportedly been issued
    by a magistrate at the district/magistrates'  court  in  Acraipattu  on
    information received from the officer in  charge  (OIC)  at  Acraipattu
    police station.  The appellant was named as the accused person, and the
    particulars of the alleged offence were aiding and  abetting  terrorist
    activities.  The appellant was asked to attend court on 30  April  2014
    at 9am to answer the complaint made against him, "a copy  of  which  is
    annexed hereto, together with a list of the names  and  addresses  that
    are witnesses for the prosecution" and to be dealt  with  according  to
    the law. He was informed that if he wished to call  any  witnesses  who
    were unwilling to attend, he should apply at once to the  court  for  a
    summons to compel him to return.

23. In the letter dated 8 July 2014, the appellant's father  said  that  he
    was now facing a  threat  to  his  life  from  the  BBS,  an  extremist
    organisation sponsored by the army intelligence unit and top government
    officials of Sri Lanka.  His son had been abducted on 14 and 15 January
    2014 and tortured by  the  Sri  Lankan  army  on  suspicion  of  having
    connection with Tamil youths.  He had got him released after paying  15
    lakhs through a TMVP member.  After getting treatment in secret at  the
    residence of a doctor, who was his friend, his son left for the UK.  He
    had tried his best to get his son released from the false  allegations,
    but to no avail.  Hence he was often searched by the  police,  and  the
    court had also issued an order  (warrant)  in  this  regard.   The  BBS
    threatened him and son's life, alleging that his son  had  participated
    in a demonstration staged on 18 June 2014 against a series of  acts  of
    violence committed against Sri Lankan Muslims in  Sri  Lanka.   He  had
    made a complaint at Acraipattu Police Station on 23 June 2014 regarding
    the threat posed to him and  his  son.   But  he  had  been  forced  to
    withdraw this complaint as a result of  pressure  from  top  government
    officers.  This clearly showed  the  connection  between  BBS  and  top
    government officers.

24. In the letter dated 7 July 2014 the Grama Niladhari certified that  the
    appellant was having political and religious threats of killing in  Sri
    Lanka.  These threats were done by the Buddhist extremist  group  known
    as the BBS, due to his father's political stand  and  by  the  security
    forces as well.

25. The undated letter purporting to emanate  from  the  BBS  informed  the
    appellant's father that they were in receipt of information  confirming
    that he was organising an anti-Sinhala  Buddhist  armed  Muslim  group.
    This had been further established by a communiqu� issued by him against
    Buddhist organisations and  by  the  fact  that  a  protest  rally  was
    organised by his traitorous second son (the appellant) in front of  the
    Prime Minister's office in the United Kingdom on 18 June 2014.  It  was
    no secret that, through the leadership of  his  traitorous  son,  Jihad
    organisations in western countries were trying to  establish  an  anti-
    Buddhist Muslim armed group.  They promised the death of his traitorous
    son as soon as he stepped onto  the  island.   They  did  not  need  to
    mention they were capable of carrying out these promises as a  Buddhist
    organisation, as they enjoyed the  government's  protection.  They  had
    collected all the information they needed.  To prove  their  allegation
    they  were  attaching  photographs  of  his  son  attending  the  rally
    organised by him in London.  They were giving  him  this  notice  as  a
    lesson to everyone who took part in anti-Buddhist activities.  By doing
    so, his son had invited the death of his whole family.

26. In a letter dated 10 July 2014 Mr Imam, who  described  himself  as  an
    attorney at law in Colombo, and an ex member of Parliament,  said  that
    the appellant's father was his client, and that  a  photograph  of  the
    appellant taking a prominent part in the demonstration of 18 June  2014
    had appeared in the local papers, as well as  on  social  media,  "with
    proper  identification."   Furthermore,  his  client  was  vociferously
    critical of the dastardly violence of BBS, and  alleged  that  security
    forces and top government officials were behind the incidents.  So  not
    only his client, but also his son, had become prime  targets  of  anti-
    Muslim sentiment in Sri Lanka.

Questions and Answers in the Substantive Asylum Interview

27. In interview, the appellant said he was a Tamil speaking Muslim.   When
    he went back to Sri Lanka on 31 December 2013, he was planning to  stay
    there for three weeks.  He was asked whether he knew why  he  had  been
    kidnapped.  He said they wanted him to admit that he had links  to  the
    LTTE.  They accused him of returning to Sri Lanka with money to provide
    the LTTE.  He denied this.  Then  they  mentioned  some  of  his  Tamil
    friends, and asked him what connection he had with them.  He told  them
    that he had studied with him when  he  was  young.   He  did  not  know
    whether the Tamil friends with whom he had been having  tea  had  links
    with the LTTE.  He was the only person who was  kidnapped.   They  took
    his fingerprints, also photographs of him, and they also  told  him  to
    sign a piece of blank white paper.  He was not charged with anything on
    his release.  After he came here,  an  arrest  warrant  (i.e.  a  court
    summons) was sent by the court.  One of the three friends he was having
    tea with he had last seen in 2012.  The other two he had not met for  a
    long time.

28. He had injuries as a result of the ill-treatment  he  had  received  in
    detention, but they were healed.  He had not reported the kidnapping to
    the police, because he feared being arrested again.  He found out about
    the arrest warrant when his father told him about it on 23  June  2014.
    He was asked what the charge on the warrant was.  He said he only saw a
    copy of it.  He said he had connection  with  terrorist  organisations.
    He was asked if he had the warrant now.  He said it was on its way,  it
    had been sent by DHL.  His father had been  given  the  warrant/summons
    and told that he should appear in court.   He  was  asked  whether  the
    police had followed up the warrant.  He answered yes,  his  father  had
    told him they had come to look for him continuously.

29. His father had told him that the army had come to look for  him  before
    he left Sri Lanka.  When the army came to the family home,  his  father
    was not there so they talked to his brother.  They  asked  his  brother
    about his whereabouts.  His father had told him  he  had  received  the
    letter from the BBS on 23 June  2014.   Nothing  had  happened  to  his
    family since the BBS letter had been received, except that his  brother
    had been harassed by the army.   They  asked  his  brother  if  he  had
    returned to Sri Lanka.  The appellant was asked if the  army  had  made
    any threats towards him or his family.  He said they told  his  brother
    that if they did not hand him over, they would  be  arrested.   He  was
    asked whether the family had heard from the  BBS  since  receiving  the
    threatening letter.  His father had told him that he had received  some
    threatening phone calls saying that they were going  to  kill  both  of
    them (his father and him).  They did not say who  they  were  over  the
    phone, and they did not make any demands.

30. He was asked why  he  had  not  mentioned  the  BBS  in  his  screening
    interview.  He said he had mentioned it to them but the interpreter had
    told him not to tell everything in detail but to make it short.

31. He was asked where he had got the photographs of him  at  the  protest.
    He said he had got them from Sri Lanka with the letters.  The  BBS  had
    sent the photographs with the letters.  He did not know how the BBS had
    got the photographs.

32. He was asked about the protests on 18 June 2014.  He said all  the  Sri
    Lankan Muslims in the UK united and took a decision  they  should  tell
    the  Prime  Minister  about  the  Aluthgama  riots.   They  wanted  the
    international community to be aware of the situation in Sri Lanka.   He
    had heard about the protests from one of his friends, and he just  took
    part in it.

33. He was asked whether he had considered claiming asylum when he returned
    to the UK after he was kidnapped.  He answered no  because  his  father
    advised him not to tell anyone what had happened because it would cause
    problems to his life.  He had  not  been  involved  in  organising  the
    protests against the BBS.  It was put to  him  that,  given  he  was  a
    Muslim and that the LTTE was a Hindu  Tamil  group,  he  would  not  be
    suspected of being involved in the LTTE.  He said that lots  of  Muslim
    people would join the LTTE.  Also, he had some Tamil friends.

The Reasons for Refusal

34. On 24 November 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing to recognise the appellant  as  a  refugee,  or  as  otherwise
    requiring international human rights protection.  The documents he  had
    submitted in support  of  his  asylum  claim  had  been  considered  in
    accordance  with  the  guidance  given  in  Tanveer  Ahmed.    Due   to
    discrepancies in his account, it was not  accepted  that  he  had  been
    arrested and detained in Sri Lanka in January 2014.   Forged  documents
    were easily obtained in Sri Lanka, and it was not  accepted  an  arrest
    warrant had been issued against him or that he  had  been  summoned  to
    attend court in Sri Lanka.  He provided three photographs depicting him
    at a protest in the UK in June 2014, and in the light of this  evidence
    it was accepted that he had attended a protest in the UK in  June  2014
    as claimed.  In support of his claim that his father was  a  provincial
    council member, he had provided several newspaper clippings in which he
    claimed his father had been quoted.  But he had not  provided  evidence
    to substantiate the claim that the man quoted in the newspaper articles
    was indeed his father.  On the topic of threats from BBS, it was  noted
    that he had made no  mention  of  such  threats  during  his  screening
    interview.  He had confirmed at the outset of his asylum interview that
    the screening interview record was accurate.  He claimed to be the main
    target of the BBS, but his own case was that his father had been openly
    campaigning against the BBS in the media.  Therefore it was  not  clear
    why he would be the main  target  of  these  threats,  given  that  his
    father's activities were of a higher profile than his.  It was noted he
    had not submitted the newspaper articles  which  allegedly  showed  his
    photograph appearing in local papers,  despite  being  able  to  submit
    newspaper articles regarding his father which were  published  in  2013
    and 2014.  It was not accepted that his family had been  threatened  by
    the BBS as he had claimed.  Section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 had been  considered.   He  had
    claimed asylum more than five months after he re-entered the  UK,  just
    five weeks before his leave as a highly  skilled  migrant  was  due  to
    expire.  He had thus lived in the UK for more than  five  months  after
    his claimed problems began, and it was considered he had failed to take
    advantage of a reasonable opportunity to claim asylum, and this damaged
    his credibility.

35. The psychiatric report from Dr Lawrence was noted.  Whilst the  medical
    report may or may not give an opinion on  his  psychological  condition
    being consistent  with  his  story,  it  could  not  be  considered  in
    isolation and could not normally be regarded as providing by  itself  a
    clear and independent corroboration of his account of the events  which
    had led to him being diagnosed with depression and PTSD.

36. On the topic of risk on return, even if it was to be accepted  that  he
    had been arrested by the authorities, which it was not,  it  was  noted
    that case law acknowledged that the Sri Lankan  authorities  were  only
    interested in those who had a significant role in  post-conflict  Tamil
    separatism.  The conflict with the LTTE ended in May 2009, and  he  had
    never supported or assisted the LTTE in any way.   So  the  authorities
    would not suspect him of having been involved with the LTTE  after  the
    end of the civil war.  He would not be on a stop list or  wanted  list,
    and he would be able to return to Sri Lanka safely.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

37. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Cheales sitting in the  First-
    tier Tribunal in Birmingham on 27  January  2015.   In  his  subsequent
    decision, Judge Cheales recorded that some documents were served on the
    morning of the hearing.  The appellant had apparently been  sent  these
    documents by way of an attachment to an email, but the  email  had  not
    been  produced.   The  documents  included  two   appointment   letters
    evidencing the appointment of the appellant's father as a  Minister  in
    2008 and 2012.   The  appellant  adopted  as  his  evidence-in-chief  a
    witness statement signed by him on 20 January  2015.   Because  of  his
    father's influence, he managed to escape from the country using his own
    passport.  He wished to amend his answers in the  interview  record  on
    the topic of an arrest warrant.  He had  not  provided  a  copy  of  an
    arrest warrant.  He had produced the original summons which was  issued
    against him by the court.  He had never mentioned  that  there  was  an
    arrest warrant.  He believed this was an interpreting mistake.  He  had
    decided to claim asylum because of the threats from the BBS, and  after
    his father's warning given to him  on  23  June  2014.   There  was  no
    Presenting  Officer  representing  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  the
    appellant was thus not cross-examined.

38. The judge's findings were set out in paragraphs  [20]  onwards.   There
    was evidence before him that the appellant's  father  was  a  prominent
    politician and that the appellant came from a wealthy family.  Most  of
    his siblings were studying or living at or near his home.  He  did  not
    find it credible that the  appellant  would  himself  be  targeted  for
    attack.  When the appellant went to Sri Lanka he was not threatened  by
    the BBS, and although his father  had  received  threats,  nothing  had
    happened to him or any other members of his family.  Nor did he  accept
    that the army would believe that the  appellant  had  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka to encourage and lend  support  to  the  LTTE.   The  appellant's
    explanation for his father not being attacked was  because  he  had  an
    armed guard and there would  be  an  international  outcry  if  he  was
    attacked.  But the appellant's father was not a member of the  national
    Parliament; he only held a provincial position.  It would be  perfectly
    possible for any armed group to target the appellant's  father  or  any
    other member of the family.  It could not be the case the appellant was
    targeted merely because he had friends who were Tamils.  He  took  into
    account the fact that the doctor did  not  believe  the  appellant  was
    simulating his symptoms.  However there might be many  causes  for  his
    depression.  He did not find credible the appellant's  explanation  for
    not claiming asylum earlier.  The judge  concluded  at  paragraph  [28]
    that, taking all the  evidence  into  the  account,  he  could  not  be
    satisfied that the account was  credible.   Although  he  accepted  the
    appellant came from a wealthy family and his  father  was  a  prominent
    politician, he could not accept that the  appellant  was  kidnapped  or
    that he  would  be  targeted  on  return.   As  the  appellant  had  no
    involvement with the LTTE nor had he himself been opposed to BBS, there
    would be no reason for the authorities  to  think  he  would  have  any
    involvement with any separatist or terrorist group.

The Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

39. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and a hearing to determine whether an error of law was  made  out  took
    place before a panel consisting of Lord  Matthews  and  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Smith at Field House on 30 July 2015.  In a decision  promulgated
    on 6 August 2015, UTJ Smith gave the panel's reasons for  finding  that
    an error of law was made out.  Paragraphs [9] to [19] of the  error  of
    law decision are set out below:

         "Submissions

         9.   In short summary, the  Appellant's  grounds  are  as  follows.
             Ground 1 concerns the failure to  consider  the  risk  to  the
             Appellant as a result of his father's enmity with BBS and  the
             personal threat to the Appellant contained in the BBS  letter.
             Ground 2 concerns failure to consider or make  findings  about
             the documents which are referred to at [7]  above.   Ground  3
             attacks the Judge's findings in  relation  to  the  events  in
             January 2014 on the basis that they are based on impermissible
             and unfounded  considerations  of  implausibility.   Ground  4
             attacks  the  Judge's  failure  to  consider  the   background
             objective evidence.  Ground 5 challenges the Judge's  findings
             in relation to the  summons  and  arrest  warrant  as  failing
             properly to consider the Appellant's evidence in that  regard.
             Ground  6  challenges  the  Judge's  findings  on  credibility
             relating to the Appellant's late claim for asylum.

         10.  Ms Dogra's very helpful submissions focussed  on  the  Judge's
             failure to consider documents although she made clear that she
             pursued all grounds.  In particular, she said, the  Judge  had
             failed to consider the documents before her as to  the  arrest
             in January 2014, particularly the summons, the threat  to  the
             Appellant arising from  the  BBS  letter  to  the  Appellant's
             father and the other  documents  listed  at  [7]  above.   For
             example, we were taken to what the Judge said at [23]  of  the
             Decision in relation to the BBS letter.  Having said that  the
             father had been sent a letter from BBS, from  which  we  infer
             that the Judge accepted that the letter was  sent,  the  Judge
             went on to say that it was not  credible  that  the  Appellant
             would be targeted without  saying  why  that  was,  given  the
             contents of the letter.  We were  also  shown  what  was  said
             about the summons and we drew attention to the fact  that  the
             Judge, for some reason, seems to have assumed at [28] that the
             summons was a 'witness summons' when  it  was  patently  clear
             from the document that it is a Summons directed to an  accused
             person (assuming it is genuine).  There is no reference to the
             letters to which we refer at [7] above although, as we pointed
             out to Ms Dogra, those are of limited  assistance  in  judging
             the Appellant's credibility since one emanates from his father
             and the rest appear to be based on what his  father  has  told
             others.  There is, therefore, only one source of corroboration
             and that is the Appellant's own father, who might be  expected
             to support the Appellant's version of events.

         11.  Ms Dogra made brief submissions in reply on the other grounds.
              As Ms Dogra pointed out, whilst  it  was  accepted  that  the
             Appellant had no LTTE profile or involvement, the  risk  arose
             from imputed opinion based on the fact of  attendance  at  the
             demonstration.  She submitted that it was this and  the  BBS's
             interest in the Appellant arising from that  attendance  which
             put  the  Appellant  at  risk  on  return.   In  relation   to
             background evidence, we  pointed  out  that  this  could  only
             become relevant if the threat from BBS was believed and so was
             linked with Ground 1.  We were not impressed  with  Ground  6,
             and Ms Dogra rightly accepted that this was not her  strongest
             ground.  It was obviously open to the Judge to take account of
             the lateness of the claim for asylum, particularly  since  the
             Appellant relied on events in January 2014 but did  not  claim
             asylum immediately on return.  His  attempt  to  explain  this
             away was not accepted by the Judge  at  [27]  and  that  is  a
             sufficient finding.  It was  not  the  central  focus  of  the
             Judge's findings on credibility.

         12.  Mr Clarke submitted that the BBS letter was dealt with at [21]
             and [23] of the Decision.  He was not able, though, to  answer
             our question whether the comments at [23] were  an  acceptance
             by the Judge that the letter had been sent and, if so, why  it
             was not accepted as credible that the Appellant  was  targeted
             by BBS.  He submitted that the Appellant has no  LTTE  profile
             or involvement against BBS, he is in the UK and claimed asylum
             late.  In the circumstances,  it  was  unsurprising  that  the
             Judge found his claim to be at  risk  to  be  incredible.   He
             conceded that the documents we refer to at [7] above were  not
             mentioned with the exception of the summons  and  he  accepted
             that the Judge had erred in referring  to  the  summons  as  a
             'witness summons'  but  pointed  out  that  elsewhere  in  the
             Decision, the Judge had referred to it only as a summons.   He
             submitted though that the case must have been put on the basis
             that it was a witness summons for the Judge to have made  that
             reference.  The other documents take the Appellant no  further
             as the Appellant's father simply mirrors the Appellant's  case
             and the other documents simply repeat that.  In any event, the
             Judge at  [20]  refers  to  'all  the  evidence'  having  been
             considered.

         13.  In relation to Ground 3, Mr Clarke submitted  that  the  Judge
             was entitled to say what she did, bearing in mind the lack  of
             any LTTE profile, that his family were in Sri  Lanka  but  had
             not been targeted, that he had attended only one  protest  and
             that he had made his asylum claim late.  The  reason  for  the
             arrest in January 2014 was based on  what  the  Appellant  had
             said about this, namely that he had been asked about his  four
             Tamil friends.  The BBS threat was not raised at the interview
             and in any event sufficiency of protection  may  be  an  issue
             even if the Appellant is at risk from them.  He accepted  that
             the background evidence may  then  be  relevant.   The  issue,
             though, would be whether  the  BBS  has  the  willingness  and
             capability to target the Appellant.  He pointed  out  that  in
             spite of the father's enmity with BBS, he  has  not  been  the
             target of any attack.  Mr Clarke submitted in any  event  that
             the Judge had made findings with reasons at [20] to  [28]  and
             had explained why he had concluded that  the  Appellant  would
             not be at risk from  the  authorities  or  BBS.   That  was  a
             logical conclusion.  The Judge was entitled  to  rely  on  the
             late claim for asylum  and  to  findings  of  fact  that  this
             damaged his credibility, particularly since he claimed to fear
             the authorities as a result of an event in January 2014 and it
             was  not  credible  that  he  would  not  then  claim   asylum
             immediately on return.

         Error of Law Decision and reasons

         14.   After  consideration  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  oral
             submissions,  we  indicated  at  the  hearing  that  we   were
             satisfied that the Decision involved the making of an error of
             law and that we would provide brief reasons in writing,  which
             we now do.

         15.  The Judge failed to engage with the documents.  She  did  have
             regard to the summons but, as we note above, for  some  reason
             indicated in her findings that this was a witness summons when
             it was clear on its face that is was a summons to  an  accused
             person.  If that document were found to be genuine, then  that
             would clearly indicate an interest in  the  Appellant  by  the
             authorities.  If the Judge accepted that the letter  from  BBS
             was genuine, as she may have done at [23] (as we  note  above)
             then it is difficult to see  why  she  would  not  have  found
             credible the Appellant's risk from BBS and potentially a  risk
             from  the  authorities  on  that  account  (as  to  which  the
             background evidence may well be relevant).  We  do  not  think
             that the other  documents  at  [7]  add  much  weight  to  the
             Appellant's case but they should at least have been considered
             and the Judge should have said what she made of them.

         16.  As indicated above, we were not impressed by Ground 6 but,  of
             course, if the Appellant is found credible as to risk then the
             fact that he did not claim asylum until late in the day  would
             not  be  sufficient  to  find  him  not  credible   generally,
             particularly if he offers a reasonable  explanation  for  that
             failure.

         17.  In the circumstances, we are  persuaded  that  the  Judge  has
             erred in her consideration of the Appellant's case and we find
             that the case will need to be re-heard afresh with no findings
             preserved.  We note that there is no challenge in the  grounds
             to the findings on the medical evidence at [26]  and  we  note
             also that the medical documentation in the bundle  since  that
             report appears to suggest that the  Appellant's  symptoms  may
             have subsided but we do not preclude argument on that issue if
             it has any continued relevance at the hearing.

         18.  We invited submissions from the parties on  the  re-making  of
             the decision.  We were persuaded that the matter could  remain
             in this Tribunal notwithstanding the need for  the  re-hearing
             of evidence.  We make directions below for the re-hearing.

         DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

         19.  The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of  an
             error on a point of law in relation to the failure to consider
             the documents  produced  by  the  Appellant  and  thereby  the
             failure properly to consider the claimed risk to  him  by  the
             authorities in Sri Lanka and from the BBS. "

The Resumed Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

40. At the resumed hearing before me to re-make the decision, the appellant
    gave  oral  evidence  through  a  Tamil  interpreter  whom  he  clearly
    understood.  He adopted  as  his  evidence-in-chief  the  same  witness
    statement as he had adopted before the First-tier Tribunal.  There were
    three documents loose in my file which I arranged to  have  copied  and
    about which, at my invitation,  the  appellant  was  questioned  by  Ms
    Dogra.   The  appellant  identified  two  of  them  as   being   colour
    photocopies of his father's appointments to  his  Ministerial  post  in
    2008 and 2012 respectively. On each occasion he was appointed  by  Rear
    Admiral Mohan Wijewickrama, the  Governor  of  Eastern  Province.   The
    third document was identified by the appellant as being a photograph of
    him and the rest of his family.  I infer  that  it  was  taken  at  the
    wedding of his older brother.

41. In cross-examination he was asked who abducted him on 14 January  2014.
    He said his father told him it was the army.  It was put  to  him  that
    his father was not there.  He answered they looked like security.   The
    question was repeated, and he said a friend of his father spoke  to  an
    army chief and got him released.  He had not gone to the  police  after
    his release as he was scared.  He delayed claiming asylum as his father
    had told him to lie low until his problems were resolved.  He was asked
    why he had therefore attended a demonstration in June 2014.  He said it
    was his right to participate in a demonstration  about  the  atrocities
    committed against Muslims.  He did not  realise  it  would  lead  to  a
    problem.  It was put to him that he had spent six  months  raising  his
    profile and obtaining false evidence to substantiate  a  future  asylum
    claim.  The appellant denied this.  Some of the documents  he  supplied
    were originals, including the summons.  After reviewing  the  documents
    which he had on file, Mr  Whitwell  confirmed  this  and  produced  the
    summons for my inspection.

42. In his closing submissions, Mr  Whitwell  invited  me  to  dismiss  the
    appeal for the reasons given in the reasons  for  refusal  letter.   In
    reply, Ms Dogra relied on the skeleton argument that  had  been  placed
    before the First-tier Tribunal by Amanda Walker of Counsel.   She  drew
    my attention in particular to page 29 of the skeleton, where Ms  Walker
    submitted that the  appellant  would  not  be  able  to  seek  adequate
    protection from the state, in response to threats made by the BBS.   As
    confirmed in the respondent's own  Operational  Guidance  Note  in  Sri
    Lanka issued July 2013, senior members of the government  were  closely
    affiliated with the BBS and as such  the  BBS  was  able  to  act  with
    impunity.

Discussion and Findings on Re-Making

43. There are two strands to the appellant's claim.  The first is  that  he
    has been persecuted in the past, and has a well-founded fear  of  being
    persecuted again on return, on account of being wrongly perceived as an
    LTTE terrorist - as a consequence of  which  there  is  an  outstanding
    warrant for his arrest due to his failure to answer a court summons  to
    attend court on suspicion of aiding and  abetting  terrorist  activity.
    The second strand of his claim, which was  only  introduced  after  his
    screening interview, is that the catalyst for his  claiming  asylum  in
    the summer of 2014 was the receipt  by  his  father  of  a  threatening
    letter from the BBS on 23 June 2014 which had been precipitated by  the
    appellant's attendance at a demonstration in London five days  earlier,
    protesting against the anti-Muslim violence in Sri Lanka which had been
    orchestrated by the BBS.

44. The fact that this second, and arguably  more  potent,  strand  of  the
    appellant's asylum  claim  was  only  introduced  after  the  screening
    interview is prima facie highly damaging  to  the  appellant's  general
    credibility.  For, on his own case, he had not been prompted  to  claim
    asylum by his alleged arrest and detention in January 2014, or  because
    of the subsequent court summons allegedly issued  to  him  in  February
    2014; but because his father had reported to him that the BBS had  made
    a credible threat on his life should he return to Sri Lanka.

45. It is not credible that the interpreter at the screening interview told
    him not to mention  the  BBS,  when  he  started  trying  to  tell  the
    interviewing officer about his fear of the BBS.  The appellant  saw  Dr
    Lawrence before the screening interview and told him that his  symptoms
    had been precipitated by a death threat made to  his  father  following
    his recent attendance at a protest. Given Dr  Lawrence's  diagnosis  of
    depression  and  PTSD,  it  is  necessary  to  consider   whether   the
    appellant's mental state might provide an explanation for the appellant
    making no mention at  the  screening  interview  of  the  death  threat
    allegedly made against him by the BBS.

46. Although Dr Lawrence's report has independent probative value, I do not
    consider that the diagnosis furnishes a credible  explanation  for  the
    appellant not mentioning the alleged threat posed to him by the BBS  in
    his screening interview as part of the reason, indeed the main  reason,
    as to why he feared returning to Sri Lanka.  It  is  apparent  from  Dr
    Lawrence's report that the appellant presented as a reliable  narrator,
    who was not suffering from any  cognitive  impairment  or  problems  in
    recollection.  If he was genuinely terrified of what the BBS  might  do
    to him on return to Sri Lanka, it is not credible  that  he  would  not
    have articulated this fear when asked to explain, albeit  briefly,  his
    reasons for not being able to return to Sri Lanka.

47. With regard to  the  first  strand  of  the  appellant's  claim  it  is
    convenient at this stage to refer to the country guidance given  in  GJ
    and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319.
    This country guidance replaces all existing  country  guidance  on  Sri
    Lanka, and it includes the following headline guidance:

         "(2) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed
             since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri  Lanka
             itself is a spent force  and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
             incidents since the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state .... Its focus
             is on preventing both (a) the resurgence of the  LTTE  or  any
             similar Tamil separatist organisation and (b) the  revival  of
             the civil war within Sri Lanka.

         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  Security  Services
             there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection.

         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
             government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils  are
             required to return to a named address  after  passing  through
             the airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
             whose names appear on a 'stop' list will be detained from  the
             airport.   Any  risk  for  those  in  whom  the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities  are  or  become  interested  exists  not  at  the
             airport, but after arrival in their  home  area,  where  their
             arrival will be verified by the CID or  police  within  a  few
             days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

             (b)  Journalists ...

             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes ....

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised 'stop' list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a 'stop'  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
             'watch' list.  A person whose name appears on a  'watch'  list
             is not reasonably likely to be detained  at  the  airport  but
             will be monitored by the security services after  his  or  her
             return.  If that monitoring does  not  indicate  that  such  a
             person is a Tamil activist working to destabilise the  unitary
             Sri Lankan state or revive the internal  armed  conflict,  the
             individual in question is not, in general,  reasonably  likely
             to be detained  by  the  security  forces.   That  will  be  a
             question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any  diaspora
             activities carried out by such an individual."

48. The appellant's account of being detained and ill-treated for suspected
    involvement in ongoing efforts to revive the LTTE runs counter  to  the
    country guidance  and,  aside  from  the  psychiatric  report,  is  not
    supported by medical evidence.  There is no documentary evidence of the
    appellant being treated by a doctor for the injuries which he allegedly
    sustained while in detention.  If his account were true, the  appellant
    could reasonably be expected to display the signs and symptoms of  PTSD
    when he arrived back from Sri Lanka in January 2014.   But  he  is  not
    recorded as having consulted a GP before the beginning  of  July  2014.
    He also resumed his previous employment  in  the  UK,  and  it  is  not
    suggested that he gave any indication to his employer or  to  his  work
    colleagues that he had suffered a traumatic  experience  in  Sri  Lanka
    over the  Christmas  holidays.   Indeed,  it  is  not  shown  that  the
    appellant did not return to the United Kingdom on  precisely  the  same
    day as he was always scheduled to return, once his three  week  holiday
    was over.

49. The appellant's account of being  arrested  by  the  army  runs  wholly
    counter to the country guidance in that the appellant clearly  did  not
    have a profile which would be reasonably likely to engender a suspicion
    that the purpose of his return visit to Sri Lanka  was  to  revive  the
    LTTE rather than to be with his family for the Christmas holidays.  The
    fact that the appellant claims to have been kidnapped on his own, while
    his Tamil friends were ignored by the  army,  only  serves  to  further
    undermine the credibility of this strand of the appellant's claim.

50.  But  even  if  credence  is  given  to  the  alleged  kidnapping   and
    interrogation, there are not substantial grounds for believing that the
    appellant's father would be able  to  secure  the  appellant's  release
    through payment of a bribe if the army continued to  suspect  that  the
    appellant was a terrorist.  Further,  it  is  not  credible  that,  his
    father having allegedly secured his release through intervention  at  a
    high level (securing his son's release with the agreement  of  an  army
    chief), the army would have been seeking  to  re-arrest  the  appellant
    within a matter of days of his release.

51. Although the appellant has produced what purports to be an original  of
    the court summons which he  says  was  served  in  February  2014,  the
    document lacks both internal and external  credibility.   The  document
    lacks internal credibility  as  the  appellant  was  not  detained  and
    questioned by the local police, and in any event the local  police  did
    not have any evidence (on his own  account)  that  he  was  aiding  and
    abetting terrorist activity.  Moreover, the summons  should  have  been
    accompanied by another document setting out the detailed  case  against
    the appellant, and the witnesses who were going to be  called  for  the
    prosecution.  But this accompanying document has not been produced.

52. The appellant's father claims to have made efforts  to  get  the  false
    allegations against his son set aside.  But he  has  not  produced  any
    documentary  evidence  of  this.  If  the  summons  were  genuine,  the
    overwhelming likelihood is that the father  would  have  instructed  an
    advocate to apply to the court to strike out the case against the  son,
    relying on exculpatory evidence from him in the form of  an  affidavit,
    or at least to make representations at the  hearing  scheduled  for  30
    April 2014 so as to prevent a warrant for the appellant's arrest  being
    issued for  what  would  otherwise  (absent  such  representations)  be
    perceived as a contumelious disobedience of a court summons.  There  is
    not even any correspondence showing that the court  was  informed  that
    the appellant could not attend the scheduled hearing as he was  outside
    the jurisdiction.

53. The document lacks external credibility for another  reason,  which  is
    that its genesis runs counter to the background  information  cited  by
    the respondent in the refusal letter from paragraphs 50  onwards.   The
    background information states that a suspect would be produced before a
    magistrate and a court summons issued after the suspect is released  on
    bail.  Given that the appellant  claims  to  have  been  released  from
    unofficial detention upon payment of a bribe, it is not  credible  that
    subsequently he would have been issued with a court summons out of  the
    blue.

54. On the topic of whether a court summons can be obtained fraudulently, a
    court official in Vavuniya said yes they could be, and the  Sri  Lankan
    police service information services room also said yes.   A  lawyer  in
    Colombo also said yes, but added it was a criminal offence and  he  did
    not see why someone would take such a risk.  But from  the  appellant's
    perspective, there would be no reason to believe that the deployment of
    false official documents in an asylum appeal would be likely to lead to
    him being prosecuted  in  Sri  Lanka,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the
    background  evidence  which  indicates  that  the  potential  risk   of
    prosecution is anything other  than  purely  theoretical  or  extremely
    remote.

55. On the question of how many summonses are issued before a  warrant  for
    arrest is issued, two of the three sources  consulted  by  the  British
    High Commission (the Sri Lankan police and a lawyer  in  Colombo)  told
    them that a warrant of arrest was issued if a person failed  to  appear
    after a summons had been  served  on  three  occasions.   So  if  court
    proceedings were genuinely being pursued against the appellant  in  Sri
    Lanka, it is reasonable to expect that two further summonses would have
    been issued for  him  to  attend  court.   The  fact  that  no  further
    summonses have been produced,  or  indeed  are  alleged  to  have  been
    issued, tends to support the respondent's claim that the summons  which
    has been produced is bogus. Their absence is also consistent  with  the
    proceedings having been discontinued.

56. An item on the BBS on the  trackingterrorism.org  website  (appellant's
    bundle pages 79 to 80) explains that BBS  translates  as  the  Buddhist
    powerfuls.  It is a radical Sinhalese Buddhist nationalist organisation
    based in Colombo that was formed during 2012.  It seeks the enforcement
    of Buddhist predominance  in  Sri  Lanka.   It  has  organised  various
    campaigns  against  the  country's  minority   Muslim   and   Christian
    communities which according to the organisation pose a  threat  to  Sri
    Lanka's Sinhalese-Buddhist identity.  The BBS engages  in  hate  speech
    and attacks against minority religions.  Allegations persist  that  the
    BBS enjoys a close relationship with the Sri Lankan government and  has
    been seemingly  immune  from  prosecution.   These  allegations  mainly
    relate to the Sri Lankan President's  brother  who  is  regarded  as  a
    patron of the BBS.  During March 2013 he officiated at the opening of a
    BBS cultural centre at the port city of  Galle,  currently  used  as  a
    training centre by the BBS.  The BBS's mission is to save  the  Sinhala
    race by means of non-violent and violent attacks on places of  worship.
    At rallies, monks claim Muslims are  out  to  recruit  children,  marry
    Buddhist women and divide the country.   Their  extremist  ideology  is
    seen in violent  attacks,  calls  for  the  boycotts  of  Muslim  owned
    businesses and properties, bans on head scarves  and  halal  foods  and
    derogatory language to describe Muslim imams.

57. On 27 June 2014  the  New  York  Times  reported  that  hate  mongering
    Buddhist extremists from Sri Lanka had set off the country's worst wave
    of anti-Muslim violence in years.  A bloody rampage on June 15  in  and
    near the southern city of Aluthgama left four Muslims dead, at least 78
    people injured, and  Muslims'  homes  and  businesses  destroyed.   The
    attacks followed an anti-Muslim rally organised by the BBS.  The author
    commented that the latest round of attacks against one of  Sri  Lanka's
    minorities communities underscored the urgent need  to  shed  a  bright
    light on the  relationship  between  the  hard  line  BBS,  Sri  Lankan
    security forces and the Rajapaksas.

58. Following global condemnation of his government's inability to rein  in
    the BBS and prevent the June 2014 attacks, President  Rajapaksa  toured
    the afflicted area, whilst his government promised the  United  Nations
    Human Rights Council it would conduct an investigation  and  bring  the
    perpetrators to justice.

59. The New York Times commented that the President had good reason  to  be
    concerned and to act.  Among other things, the violence threatened  Sri
    Lanka's recovering tourism industry and business  development  directly
    tied to members of his family.  The violence elicited rare criticism in
    Sri Lanka's press of the government's failure  to  protect  the  Muslim
    minority.

60. On 1 July 2014 the Colombo Page,  an  internet  newspaper,  quoted  the
    leader of the BBS as challenging the police to arrest him if he was  in
    the wrong, instead of arresting other "innocent" Sinhala  Buddhists  so
    as to appease the Muslims in the international community.  Addressing a
    media briefing called in Colombo to respond to the allegations  against
    him and his organisation by some government ministers,  the  hard  line
    monk warned both the government and the opposition  not  to  set  their
    hands on BBS.  He threatened  to  finish  the  political  life  of  the
    ministers who marched against Buddhist organisations.

61. On 10 July 2014 five Muslim ministers in the government signed a letter
    on behalf of the Muslim  community  refuting  claims  that  there  were
    terrorist and extremist groups  within  the  Muslim  community  of  Sri
    Lanka.

62. The appellant has brought forward credible evidence that his father  is
    a person of considerable wealth and influence who has been a member  of
    the provincial council of the Eastern Province in Sri Lanka since 2008.
     In addition, following elections in 2008 he was appointed a  Minister;
    and, following the elections in 2012, he was re-appointed as a Minister
    in the same post.  It is  credible  that  the  appellant's  father  has
    spoken out against the BBS as have more  prominent  Muslim  politicians
    who operate at a national level.

63. My attention has not  been  drawn  to  any  background  evidence  which
    indicates that Muslim politicians who speak out against  the  BBS  have
    been subjected to death threats from the BBS,  or  that  the  BBS  have
    openly made threats against members of their family.  Although there is
    a legitimate concern that police and security forces have acquiesced in
    the BBS's anti-Muslim activities, the  BBS  has  not  in  fact  enjoyed
    immunity as otherwise the  leader  of  the  BBS  would  not  have  been
    complaining about the police arresting "innocent"  followers.   (It  is
    not true that the OGN extract quoted in the skeleton argument  concedes
    that senior members of the government are affiliated with the BBS,  and
    so the BBS is able to operate with impunity. The OGN reports this as an
    allegation, not as an established fact.)  Moreover, it is apparent from
    the same public declaration that the leader of the BBS seeks to portray
    the BBS as operating within the law. In  short,  in  order  to  deflect
    growing criticism of its activities, it was important to the BBS in the
    summer of 2014 to present itself as a legitimate organisation  pursuing
    legitimate goals.

64. Against this background, the letter from the BBS  purportedly  received
    by the appellant's  father  on  23  June  2014  is  wholly  lacking  in
    credibility.  It is not credible that the BBS would make an open  death
    threat against a senior Muslim politician, who had held  a  Ministerial
    post in the Eastern Province since before the end of the civil war,  so
    as  to  invite  a  criminal  prosecution  as  well  as   national   and
    international obloquy. It is not credible that  the  BBS  would  openly
    boast of having governmental protection so as  to  be  able  to  commit
    murder with impunity, thereby  causing  immense  embarrassment  to  the
    government   both   internally   and   internationally,   and    hugely
    strengthening the case advanced by their detractors that the BBS should
    be investigated and prosecuted. In a climate where national politicians
    and government ministers were speaking out against the BBS,  and  where
    there  was  widespread  concern  about  the  legality  of   the   BBS's
    activities, the predictable course for the appellant's father to  take,
    partly for his own protection and that of  his  family  and  partly  to
    promote the cause of which he was a champion  (among  others),  was  to
    publicise the open threat of murder from the BBS as widely as  possible
    by, among other things, handing over a copy of the letter to a national
    newspaper for publication.    Equally,  having  allegedly  received  an
    unequivocal death threat on BBS headed notepaper, it  is  not  credible
    that the appellant's father, with his wealth and influence,  would  not
    have pursued a complaint against the BBS through the  courts.  It  runs
    counter to the background evidence  that  the  appellant's  father  was
    pressurised by top government officials to drop his complaint.  For, as
    previously noted, some "top government  officials"  were  speaking  out
    against the BBS; and in response  to  the  international  outcry  about
    events earlier in June 2014, the  authorities  were  starting  to  take
    action against BBS activists.

65. Another reason why the purported death threat letter from the BBS lacks
    credibility is that, on the face of it, the death threat was  triggered
    by the appellant's participation in an anti-BBS  rally  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and yet there is not a shred of evidence that  the  rally  was
    reported in the Sri Lankan media, still less  that  the  appellant  was
    identified in the Sri Lankan media as one of the  participants  in  the
    rally.  On the other hand, on the appellant's case his father had  been
    a regular and vociferous critic of the BBS in the local press,  and  at
    the date when the death threat letter was allegedly received, there was
    a storm of criticism of the BBS being carried by the Sri Lankan  media.
    As the appellant was merely an attendee at the  rally,  there  are  not
    substantial grounds for believing that his participation in  the  rally
    would have come to the adverse attention of  the  Sri  Lankan  security
    forces or the BBS.  But even if it had done, it  is  wholly  incredible
    that the appellant's mere attendance at the rally  would  have  been  a
    trigger for a death threat against him  and  his  father,  particularly
    when his father's more prominent and longstanding criticism of the  BBS
    had hitherto been ignored by the BBS.

66. In conclusion, the appellant has not discharged the burden  of  proving
    to the lower standard of proof that the core  of  his  claim  is  true.
    There are not substantial grounds for believing that, when he left  Sri
    Lanka in January 2014, he was of adverse interest to the  army  or  the
    police as someone who was suspected of attempting to revive  the  LTTE,
    or that in February 2014 he was issued with a summons to  attend  court
    in April 2014 in order to  answer  a  charge  of  aiding  and  abetting
    terrorism.  There are also not substantial grounds for  believing  that
    he was abducted, detained and tortured in  January  2014  by  the  army
    because of a false allegation made by one of his father's enemies  that
    he was an LTTE activist; or that the appellant's attendance at an anti-
    BBS rally on 18 June 2015 came to the attention of the BBS in Sri Lanka
    with the consequence that they sent a letter on BBS headed notepaper to
    his father making death threats.

67. On the issue of risk on return, there are not substantial  grounds  for
    believing that the appellant is on a stop list or wanted  list,  or  is
    otherwise of adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities or  to  the
    BBS.  By  the  same  token,  there  are  not  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that on return to Sri Lanka the appellant would face  a  real
    risk of ill-treatment of such severity as to  cross  the  threshold  of
    Article 3 ECHR either at the hands of the authorities or at  the  hands
    of the BBS.

68. The appellant does not pursue an Article 3 (suicide risk/mental health)
    claim or, with any vigour, a claim under  Article  8  ECHR.   Ms  Dogra
    accepted that the appellant did not have a viable  private  life  claim
    under the Rules, and she  did  not  seek  to  identify  any  compelling
    circumstances which justified the appellant  being  granted  Article  8
    relief outside the Rules.  She recognised that if the appellant  failed
    in his claim for international protection,  there  were  no  compelling
    circumstances justifying him being granted leave to remain on Article 8
    grounds.  I find that the  prospective  removal  of  the  appellant  is
    proportionate to the legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be  achieved,
    namely the maintenance of firm and effective immigration controls.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: this appeal on asylum and human rights grounds is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

